1. LETTER TO N. H. PURANDARE
January 13, 1933
MY DEAR PURANDARE,

I have your letter. I am sorry to have had it. I don’t like the
spirit underlying it. You have looked upon the whole thing as a
commercial transaction, whereas I have looked upon the whole thing
as a matter of selfless service. You left the question of remuneration
entirely in my hands, although I asked you to tell me what you would
charge for giving me a corrected collection of your speeches on
untouchability and for supervising the printing. But you would not
think of it, telling me that there was no mercenary motive behind it.
That being so, I had no hesitation in undertaking the delicate task, but
at the end of it, I shirked it, and I asked Haribhau to name the sum. He
named Rs. 125 and I straightaway accepted. Believe me, so far as I am
concerned, I did not think of the Arya Bhushan bill in connection
with fixing up your fee, remuneration or honorarium, whatever it may
be called. Nor did I then know nor do I now know that the Arya
Bhushan bill is exorbitant. My understanding is that they should not
make anything but nominal profits. You are thinking of anything
between Rs. 500 to 3,000. I can only meet your proposal with a
reasonable offer. You can take over the book yourself by simply
paying the printing charges and sell the book on your own account
and make whatever profit you can, only you should not increase the
published price, for any increase in the price would be unjust to the
public.
I have already asked Haribhau to pay you Rs. 125 if you would
accept the amount in full payment and not feel any dissatisfaction.
For I would be deeply hurt if, after having left the thing in my hands,
you were dissatisfied with the amount declared by me.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. N. H. P URANDARE
604 SADASHIV P ETH
P OONA 2
From a microfilm: S.N., 18915

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

1

2. LETTER TO DHANNU LALL SHARMA
January 13, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I will not refer you to any of my statements this time, but I will
ask you to re-read your own letter1. I suggest to you that that letter is
libellous, insulting and unworthy of one who holds the position of
General Secretary of a Sanatan Dharma Sabha.
If you will re-read your letter calmly and dispassionately, you
will at once apologize to the pandits whom you have libelled, and, in
any event, till you apologize, your letters will neither be read nor
replied to. I am sorry for it.
Your sincere friend,

S JT. D HANNU LALL S HARMA
GENERAL S ECRETARY
S HREE S ANATAN DHARMA S ABHA
220 HARRISON R OAD
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 18917

3. LETTER TO SATYANANDA BOSE
January 13, 1933
DEAR SATYANANDA BABOO,

You are always so good and always think of me whenever there
is anything to say to me.
I think that this is hardly the time to consider improvements in
Dr. Subbaroyan’s Bill. The first thing is to get the Viceregal sanction.
When that is had, many improvements may be possible. I am not
therefore just now applying my mind to your suggestion 2. After the
principle of the Bill is once accepted, the Government themselves may
1

In which the addressee had referred to Gandhiji's “Appeal to Sanatanists”,
4-1-1933, and said that the pandits had deceived not only him but the whole world;
vide “Appeal to Sanatanists”, 4-1-1933
2
That the Bill be confined to giving authority to the trustee of a temple to
allow the untouchables to enter it and worship as the caste Hindus do (S.N. 18893)

2

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

take it up or may advise amendments so far as that may be necessary
to free the Bill from any possible political mischief. So far as I am
concerned, my one thought in connection with the temple-entry is the
purification of caste Hindus. But of course I shall bear your
suggestions in mind whenever the occasion arises for their use.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S ATYANANDA BOSE
4 NUNDY S T.
BALLY GUNGE
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 18918

4.. LETTER TO S. T. RAMANUJA IYENGAR
January 13, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter together with your article1. I am sorry indeed
that there should have been any molestation of you by the audience. I
have, as you must be aware, repeatedly written against intolerance, and
I shall gladly re-emphasize my warning when the time comes.
As for your article, we must agree to differ.2 Our conception of
sanatana dharma is different. In your impatience you have not even
cared to understand my fundamental position. I can only say, ‘Read
all my statements with a fresh mind, then if you have still doubts,
discuss them with Sjt. Rajagopalachariar and if you are not still
convinced and would care to do so, come down to Yeravda and I shall
gladly give you one hour and try to convince you that the position I
take up and the means I adopt to vindicate are both perfectly
defensible.’
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. T. R AMANUJA IYENGAR
4 VARADARAJA P ERUMAL C OIL ST .
TRICHINOPOLY
From a microfilm: S.N. 18919
1

“The Drive against Untouchability”
The addressee had written in his article: “He [Gandhiji] has given up his creed
of non-co-operation with Government so far as untouchability is concerned by
accepting special Government favours, and is actively blessing legislative efforts,
once taboo, to facilitate removal of untouchability. . . .”
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

3

5. LETTER TO S. NAGASUNDARAM
January 13, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I have read the texts quoted by you. So far as
I can make them out, they have no application to the present-day
conditions. Those who are regarded as untouchables today cannot be
classified as Chandalas at all.
Inter-dining is no part of the campaign against untouchabillty
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. N AGASUNDARAM
NEAR KING ’S C IRCLE
MATUNGA
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 18921

6. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
January 13, 1933
MY DEAR C.R.,

Vallabhbhai had a battle royal with me last night on your
behalf. If a person, an utter stranger to him, had chance to be there,
from the vehemence of Vallabhbhai’s language, he would have
concluded that we must be most quarrelsome persons.
He thought that I was doing violent injustice to you, inasmuch
as, without consultation with you, I made proposals that might prove
to be utterly embarrassing, as had happened on two occasions.
The cause of our quarrel was my compromise proposal1. He
thought that I had no right to publish it without consultation with you,
and he was quite sure that though you were too good to mention it to
me, you had felt very much embarrassed by it, if not also irritated. I
told him that you were too good to conceal your embarrassment from
me, if you were really embarrassed, and that would be quite unlike
you. I even added that in this particular instance you happened even
to like my proposal and that even if it was discovered that you did not
1

4

For a discussion, vide “Talk with Sadashivrao and Shinde”, 13-1-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

like it and that you were really embarrassed, it was impossible for me
every time to consult you, or such other colleagues on such occasions.
I went further and argued that work on such lines would become
almost impossible. People act together when there is a general
agreement between them on fundamentals and [provided] that their
deductions from those fundamentals were, as a rule, identical, and that
if, at times, they came to different deductions, a timely confession of
error would keep their friendship in tact, as also the common cause.
Nothing that I could say, however, would conciliate Vallabhbhai. The
curfew bell, mutually agreed upon by us, came to the rescue, and put
an end to what promised to be an endless discussion. But I retired to
bed with a determination that I would refer the matter to you. Your
reply, one way or the other, would bring some consolation to your
counsel, and you know that it won’t make me disconsolate if you
agreed with your counsel on both his propositions, namely, that
before giving to the world the compromise proposal which I had
given to Pandit Panchanan Tarkaratna I should have consulted you,
and that it, as a matter of fact, did embarrass you. You would also add
to your opinion on these points, your opinion whether on merits you
consider my proposal to be sound or otherwise.
A perfect tragedy was enacted here yesterday. Five pandits and
their five advisers came to the jail gate yesterday an hour and a half
after the appointed time and took two hours and a half in exchanging
brief notes with me, the three notes 1 that they exchanged with me
taking all the two hours and a half. And, will you believe it, when I tell
you that they would not come in and carry on the discussion because
I would not remove one word I had added to their draft, the word
being an adjective added to the word ‘untouchables’. The adjective
applied was ‘as at present classified’. Of course it altered the whole
scope of their discussion. So they went away. Of course it is not our
position that there is no untouchability at all in the Shastras. Our
position is that there is no untouchability in the Shastras as we practise
it today. They were expected to prove that untouchability as at present
practised has sanction in the Shastras. It is an impossible task to
perform honestly. No text that has yet been cited on their behalf has
proved it. The Shastris on our behalf are really very learned men, and
also pious men. It is their honest conviction that there is no warrant
for the untouchability of the present day in the Shastras. The real
1

Vide “Fraagment of Letter to Lord Sankey”, 22-11-1932

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

5

untouchability will be there for all time. It is a sound hygienic rule
practised all over the world.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18922

7. LETTER TO GEORGE JOSEPH
January 13, 1933
MY DEAR JOSEPH,

You can better imagine than I can describe my joy at receiving
your letter, and especially your letter1 to Pyarelal. I shall try to have
your letter delivered to him. But let me say two things in connection
with that letter.
My fast2 was not a fast unto death in its literal sense. The Roman
Catholic priest, who is a visitor to this prison, knows me, and when I
was on the eve of taking that fast, he came over to me in his kindly
manner just to say one word, and he said how he drew the distinction
between a suicide and a sacrifice. A suicide carried with it a certainty
of destruction. A sacrifice meant risking life, the greater the risk, the
greater the sacrifice. But there should be nothing beyond risk. I had
no hesitation in agreeing with the distinction, and my fast being
conditional was not a fast amounting to suicide, but it was a fast
involving the greatest risk, but still a risk and no more.
You will be interested to know that some of my Roman Catholic
friends have detected no flaw in the fast. Of course, in Hinduism some
few extreme cases there are in which ending of life is peremptory, but
these I need not consider at present. There is general agreement
between Hinduism and other faiths that suicide is a sin.
Now, about the Inner Voice.3 Here again I can agree with you
whole-heartedly when you say that the voice of God can never
counsel or ountenance sin. Encouragement to sin can only come
from the devil. But the real difficulty comes in when the question of
1

In which the addressee had expressed his views on Pyarelal's book The Epic
Fast and stated: “The Inner Voice is either a hallucination or the voice of God. If it is
truly the voice of God, it cannot counsel self-destruction because the life that God
gives is for Him alone to put an end to . . .”
2
Vide
3
For a discussion, vide “Discussion with a Friend”, 13-1-1933

6

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

sin itself is debatable. Those who would consider a particular act to be
sinful will naturally reject the claim that it was prompted by God.
Hence it was that in answer to a question I said1 that whilst in
self-defence and for the sake of truth which I worship I was bound to
say what I believed, my claim was not to be accepted as part of
argument in determining relevant questions. The opponents were
bound to rule [out] that claim as wholly beside the point. Whether the
claim for the voice of God was well or ill-made in a particular case can
only be decided after the claimant’s death, and in some extraordinary
cases it may even then be difficult. Apart from the danger of
hypocrisy there is the still greater danger of self-deception to which
mankind is prone, and it is possible for self-deceived people to attain
great things and yet their claim that the voice of God was behind their
acts might be wholly wrong. These are final difficulties which will
remain to the end of time, but if the truth is to make any progress,
then self-deluded people must also be allowed full play.
Finally comes the question of confession. You may not know
that I have some very valued Roman Catholic friends also. I am in the
habit of picking up knowledge more from personal contact than from
printed texts. These friends have not yet been able to clearly define
the function of Confession and the Confessor. For instance, what is
one to confess who has no consciousness of guilt and when there is, I
can understand a Confessor granting absolution, but can he also guide
the future acts of the penitent? In the place of the Confessor Hinduism
has the Guru. I have all my life striven to find one, one to whom I can
shift all my burdens and roam about merely doing his will. But then
such implicit limitless obedience is not a mechanical act; and having
got the spirit of obedience instinctively within me I would be satisfied
by nothing less than tendering complete obedience. But it seems to
me that it is not given to all to find the true Guru in this short span of
life. But it is given to all to make that diligent search, and it may be
that that very search is its own reward, and that it keeps one in
possession of peace and joy everlasting. Anyway, you will accept my
testimony that ceaseless search has not only given me such joy and
peace, but has protected me from conscious error.
I thank you for copying for me that extract from Imitation of
1

Vide, passim

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

7

Christ. I read that book in one single sitting, I think, in the year 1905
or 1906, and a friend, only a few months ago, sent me another copy.
With our love to all of you,
Yours sincerely,

GEORGE JOSEPH, E SQ., M. A., B ARRISTER-AT -LAW
“HILL VIEW ”, M ADURA
From a microfilm: S.N. 18923

8. LETTER TO G. V. MAVALANKAR
January 13, 1933
BHAISHRI MAVALANKAR,

I got your letter. Vinabehn also told me about your illness.
Illness does not spare even a lawyer, nor the chairman of a
municipality! It is something to be thankful for that you will be able
to move about soon.
I read Keshavji’s questions. We should willingly endure a great
many things like this to atone for the sins of our ancestors and our
contemporaries. When to suspicion is added selfishness, you can
expect nothing better. But I suppose the skin of your back has
become sufficiently thick by now so that you feel such blows as light
as flowers.
Thakkar Bapa 1 suggests that I should write to Dada 2 for the
Harijan fund. Since when did you become Dada? It must have been
before I was born. May you live long and serve the Harijans. Bapa
suggests that you should use your influence with Vaishnavas like
Chimanbhai, Sakarbhai, etc. They may not permit Harijans to enter
temples for darshan, but they should liberally help with money for
activities other than the movement for temple-entry. But need one
commend the cause of the tongue to the teeth? If Bapa’s word does
not carry weight with Dada, how can Bapu of merely fifteen years,
standing hope that his will? I have only passed on to you the load put
on my head by Bapa. He has also ordered me to write to Kasturbhai3
and make a similar request to him. May I give you my power of
1

Amritlal V. Thakkar; “Bapa” means father.
“Grand-father” in Gujarati, but “elder brother” in Marathi. Addressee's mother
tongue was Marathi.
3
Kasturbhai Lalbhai, a mill-owner of Ahmedabad
2

8

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

attorney?
Since you have just risen from the sick-bed, I tried to lighten
business with a little humour and that has made the letter long. I,
therefore, leave it to you to speak to Kasturbhai. As for Chimanbhai, I
also will write to him.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1234

9. LETTER TO NANALAL K. JASANI
January 13, 1933
1

BHAI NANALAL ,

I got your postcard. I had a wire from Lilavati 2 too. She has
replied that she cannot say anything without consulting Padma. Let
me have all the information you possess regarding this marriage. Who
is the bridegroom and what kind of a man is he? What is his age?
What is his economic condition and what sort of health does he have?
What is his occupation? I suppose you know that Maganlal3 is against
the marriage.
You seem to be very busy with the marriage in your family. I
hope you have not been incurring unnecessary expenditure. Utilize
the occasion also to give as much money to worthy causes as you can.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9628

10. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 13, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

Dr. Kanuga writes and tells me that Radha 4 does suffer from
tuberculosis. She should be sent away to a place like Deolali. She will
be restored to health only if she takes complete rest there. You should
1

Business partner of the late Dr. Pranjivan Mehta
Lilavati Mehta, wife of Chhaganlal Mehta
3
Maganlal Mehta
4
Radha Gandhi, daughter of Maganlal Gandhi.
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

9

discuss this with Santoks and Radha1. This is a difficult problem, but
we must solve it.
Do you get any letter from Ramabehn2? Chhaganlal has
received no letter from her at all.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

11. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

January 13, 1933
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

I have your letter. Enclosed are the letters from Chamanbhai
and Sakarbhai. Show them to Bhai Mavalankar. If his health has
improved go with him to both of them. Or, you yourself do what you
can. If we fail today, we shall succeed tomorrow. Let us not give up
hope. My booklet for the Gujaratis will certainly materialize. It is
taking time but now it will soon be ready, provided nothing fresh
crops up to impede it.
You and Anasuyabehn must be in good health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32735

12. LETTER TO CHAMANLAL GIRDHARDAS PAREKH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

January 13, 1933
DEAR CHAMANBHAI,

Bhai Shankerlal and Thakkar Bapa write that apart from the
temple-entry, you are also declining to help to other activities of
Harijan service. I did not, and still do not, expect this of you. Others
may find fault with me as a Vaishnava, but surely you would not join
them. My ideas about Harijan service are not new. Some day, you will
1
2

10

Widow of Maganlal Gandhi
Ramabehn Joshi, wife of Chhaganlal Joshi
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

yourself admit that my ideas are in keeping with Vaishnava dharma.
However, I will let that pass for now. Do not bring into Gujarat the
conflict prevailing elsewhere. I am entitled to ask this much of you.
Bhai Mangaldas gave me this right and you acknowledge it.
Therefore, I urge you to contribute what you can to the Fund.1
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32752

13. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
January 14, 1933
MY DEAR MARGARETE,

I must continue to dictate. You are entitled to call yourself an
Indian since you have felt like one from your childhood, but that is
not a substitute for your German birth. The adoption should be an
addition both to your name and to your strength, and what can be
finer than that we should all add on the virtues of our own nations to
those of the others!
Why was there a struggle to choose between Gurudev and
myself? We are no competitors. Gurudev occupies a throne which
belongs to him by sheer merit. I have none of the gifts that he has,
and what is more, we dearly love each other, and as years roll on, our
love becomes stronger, and we understand also each other better and
better. I would have you therefore to say that you like us both equally
for whatever gifts God has bestowed upon us. No more therefore of
choice-making, if you would be a real daughter like Mira.
I hope you got my previous letter 2in which I acknowledged
your letter written from Aden. The registered packet addressed to
Mahadev was also duly received.
Love from us both.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1
2

Vide also “Letter to G.V. Mavalnkar”, 13-1-1933
Vide “Letter to Margarete Spiegel”, 12-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

11

14. LETTER TO M. THIAGARAJAN
January 14, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. The question is not so much what the Harijans
need, but how the caste Hindus should behave towards them. In my
opinion, it is the clear duty of caste Hindus to give to the Harijans the
same rights that they enjoy. The fact that evil has survived numberless
generations does not make it any the less an evil. Similarly, the fact
that untouchability has survived the great religious teachers whom you
name does not warrant the present generation in continuing it, if it can
be proved to be an evil. I am convinced it is.
A person who has heard the inner call should still be open to
reason and therefore conviction. That attitude enables him and others
to test the truth of his claim.
I do say with my conception of Hinduism that God denies
Himself what Harijans are denied, because they are called Harijans.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. M. T HIAGARAJAN
42 S INGARA TOPE
TRICHINOPOLY
From a microfilm: S.N. 18928

15. LETTER TO BHAGWANDAS
January 14, 1933
DEAR BABOO BHAGWANDAS,

I have your letter. I read an account of your meeting 1 in the
papers. We are bound at the present moment to find obstruction at our
meetings. I know that the Benares meeting was in the safest hands and
I knew how you took the wind out of the sail of the adversary by
always giving him the chance and even the first chance of speaking
and restraining the sympathizers from retaliating. I do hope that you
soon got out of the effect of the little fever. It does not do to take
unnecessary risks at our age. I suppose you are a few years older.
1

12

Held on January 8, 1933, which passed a resolution in favour of temple-entry
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I will send you the other essays as soon as I am ready, and I
shall thank you to ask someone to send me all the cuttings dealing
with untouchability from the Aaj and even other Hindi newspapers. I
am getting cuttings from Marathi and Gujarati but not from Hindi. I
have not forgotten the message for the Aaj, nor the book you kindly
left for me, the very first copy. I acknowledged it in a previous letter
which I hope you duly received. You will be pleased to know that I
have already made the commencement, but I have to confess that I am
going very slow and sometimes misreading it altogether.
Yours sincerely,

DR. B HAGWANDAS
S EVASHRAMA , S IGRA
BENARES (CANTT .)
From a microfilm: S.N. 18929

16. LETTER TO VERRIER ELWIN
January 14, 1933
I want to warn you against resisting nature beyond the saturation
point. In Biblical language, I should say: “Thou shalt not tempt the
Lord, thy God.” I would say without the slightest hesitation, if you
have another bad attack you should treat it as the clearest call from
God to return to England and render what service you can render
there. If God wants you here, the first thing He would give you is
health of body. If you have humbly to acknowledge defeat, you
should do so. Your defeat will be victory for God of truth. There is no
waste in God’s laboratory. The work begun there by you will not die.
I do not mind if one man who has good health and is beyond
reproach in character is there in sole charge. If there is no such
worker just now, let the whole thing be temporarily wound up. This is
no doleful picture. It is the real background for a Godly life. “Not
my will, but thine, of Truth.” I must not prolong this sermon. You
know what I mean. Where there is complete surrender, there is no
room for self-will.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

13

17. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 14, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. I don’t require any information about Liladhar
from you. Do you know if Shankarbhai neglects his father? I have
already written to Mahavir again. Vallabhbhai suggests Wadhwan for
Radha. I asked you to write to me about the Chharas 1. Their
harassment of us seems to have stopped. Does a bhajan party2 visit
their settlement? Has the Government posted police to keep watch on
hem?
Prema causes me some worry. Her conduct frightens me. If she
is silent because she has realized her error, I need not mind. If,
however, she is silent because she is angry, she has more serious defect
of character than I had thought. Try and discover, if you can, what is
in her heart.
If you have any news about Gangabehn, Kusum and Lilavati, let
me have it.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

1

An ex-criminal tribe of central Gujarat. Vide also “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”,
7-1-1933
2
Troupe of devotional singers

14

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Prema causes me some worry. Her conduct frightens me. If she
is silent because she has realized her error, I need not mind. If,
however, she is silent because she is angry, she has more serious defect
of character than I had thought. Try and discover, if you can, what is
in her heart.
If you have any news about Gangabehn, Kusum and Lilavati, let
me have it.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

18. LETTER TO KASHI GANDHI
YERAVDA ,

January 14, 1933
CHI. KASHI,

I have gone through your letter. I felt very unhappy that we
could not talk a little longer. If, however, we go a little deeper into the
matter, we might wonder what after all there was to talk about. Since
you will be reading my letter to Prabhudas, I will not say anything
more about the matter. I will write directly to you and you also should
send your letters directly to me. I had written to Keshu just a few days
before. There is much difference between Keshu’s nature and that of
Prabhudas’s. Prabhudas will open his mind to everyone, Keshu will
not do so to anyone. With Maganlal, too, he hardly ever talked.
However, it is certainly your duty to tell me if you know anything or
have seen anything about him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33075

19. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA ,

January 14, 1933
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

l received your letter. It seems to me improper that you should
have written directly to Nanabhai. Kakasaheb may write if he wishes
to. And it would be unreasonable for me to burden him with
responsibility. We may keep in mind the conditions you have
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

15

stipulated but we cannot put them down on paper. It would be
altogether unbecoming to do so. Discuss with Kakasaheb all that you
have written to me and do as he suggests. I can understand your
impatience. Once you have decided to marry, it is best that you should
do so as soon as possible. However, some time is bound to elapse. Or,
perhaps it may not be so.
Certainly the best course is that you yourself should look for a
girl concurrently with the work you are doing and Kakasaheb and
others also may be on the lookout at the same time. Do not worry
about what Vinoba will think. His blessings will always be with you.
You cannot have a girl from the Ashram, for it would be improper to
arouse the least traceof such a feeling in any girl in the Ashram. Even
indirectly, such a feeling should not be encouraged. Hence you
should also not think of selecting any of the girls who have newly
joined the Ashram.
What you say about Padma in your letter shows how dangerous
was the close association of you two. Both of you were forcing
yourselves to behave as brother and sister, while deep down in your
hearts you felt yourselves to be husband and wife. But that is an old
story now. Padma will of course know the fact when you get married,
but it is too much to expect her to find a girl for you. It is beyond her
capacity, but even if it was within her capacity, it would be undesirable
to do so. We just cannot burden her with such a responsibility. You
have no reason whatever to feel helpless. Write to me without
hesitation any foolish or silly idea that may occur to you. I will not
misunderstand what you say, for, I have faith in you and even blind
love for you. I believe that you will never deceive me. I am not in the
least unhappy at your simplicity of mind. If your simplicity is a cause
of fear for you, it also acts as a shield for me. You yourself may tell
G.V. Pant, Harivallabh or any other of your acquaintances in Almora
to guide and help you. Do not think of the high or low social status of
the girl concerned, consider only her character. Write to Devdas. He
may possibly have some girl in view. It would be good if you spend
about a month in Kosamba and learn the harmless method of
extracting honey. The whole course takes a month and a half to
complete. But really speaking, it should not require even that much
time. I am firmly of the view that for industrious people like us, a
week or fifteen days at the most are sufficient.
There is no need at all for you to go out of your way to see
16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Sarojinidevi, nor to satisfy her with an explanation. If she has
indulged in an exaggeration, it cannot be undone now. Our own way
of looking at things should be such that if we ourselves have
committed a little wrong, it should appear to us big as mountain, so
that if the world regards it as such, we are not shocked. The man who
looks upon his failings as if they were diamonds and pearls and
weighs their value as we do that of diamonds and pearls, is certain to
commit big sins and he who looks upon the smallest sin as if it was the
biggest, would certainly be saved from big sins. I would see nothing
wrong if you happen to meet Sarojinidevi by chance and the matter
comes up for discussion but there is no need at all to open the subject
intentionally.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32983

20. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 15, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

All your letters seem to have been delivered to me. For how
many days did Chimanlal 1 try the fenugreek seeds? Jamna 2 may try
them along with any other medicine which she is taking. But she
should take care that she does not get constipation.
About Mahavir, I can think of no other way. The whole family
must leave. I have given up the hope of their observing the rules. This
is my view. If, however, you wish to let them stay, I can have no
objection. But have no doubt that misplaced kindness is a form of
violence.
I also feel worried about Prema. I am pained and surprised
that she cannot see her weakness which everybody else can see.
I had hoped that I would be able to open her eyes. It seems I have
been wrong, for the present at any rate. But she is a thoughtful lady.
Hence I do not give up hope altogether. Her language was certainly
full of hatred, but she denies it. That means that she does not know
when one’s language may be described as full of hatred. She does not
1
2

One of the oldest inmates of the Ashram who was suffering from asthma
Jamnabehn Gandhi, addressee’s wife

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

17

even have faith in me to trust that, when my loving heart feels the
presence of hatred anywhere, it must be there. I am partial to her and
stress her virtues as outweighing her faults. If, then, I see a weakness in
her, instead of getting angry with me she should be humble and try to
understand her weakness. If I am committing an error, she should
point it out to me. This is how I feel. I may die any day. Ultimately
the burden will have to be shouldered by you. Therefore do what you
think best. If I am doing injustice to anybody in any matter, do not
hesitate to tell me so. And if you are convinced that my view is
correct, do not hesitate to tell her so emphatically. I certainly do not
wish to crush her individuality in any manner whatsoever. If the
individauality of any person in the Ashram is crushed, that would
harm the Ashram itself. But I think Prema misunderstands the
meaning of individuality. I understand her problem, but I feel helpless
before her obstinacy.
I understand what you say regarding Liladhar. Has he
abandoned his plan of going to Zanzibar? If you decide to take him
back, have a frank talk with him before doing so.
If the harassment by the Chharas has stopped, is it because our
people have started going in their midst or does it mean something
else?
I have discussed everything with Prabhudas1. Your letter did not
give the statistics of people’s weights.
BAPU

[PS.]
NARANDAS,

Durlabhji Sampat and Sitaram, two brothers, are prisoners in this
jail. Durlabhji is married. After he is released, he wishes to stay in the
Ashram for two months or so and have experience of the life there.
And so does Sitaram. I have told them that there will be no difficulty
in admitting them. They will write to you. If you can accommodate
them, admit them.
Did anything happen between Balwant, Prabhashankar’s2 son,
and you? How is Ratilal? I hope Totaramji 3 is completely all right
now. Read all my letters to the Giri family.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I.Also Bapuna
Patro–9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. II, pp. 14-6
1
2
3

18

Prabhudas Gandhi, son of Chhaganlal Gandhi
Father-in-law of Ratilal Mehta
Totaram Sanadhya, an Ashram inmate
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

21. LETTER TO RATILAL K. SHAH
January 15, 1933
BHAI RATILAL KUNVARJI,

I got your letter. You have given very important information.
But we find the same thing in regard to many temples. Hoping that
what happens occasionally will by and by happen every day, we
should go on trying.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 92

22. LETTER TO KRISHNADAS GANDHI
January 15, 1933
1

CHI. KRISHNADAS ,

I have read your letter to Prabhudas. It is ignorance, and
therefore an error, to go on working without regard to one’s health till
the body breaks down. You should take rest even for being able to
serve, as you wish to do. I hope that Prabhudas did not drag you as far
as Bombay. He could have easily gone there by himself and also seen
Vinoba. I will suggest this to him if it is not too late—let me know if it
is.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3084

23. LETTER TO KESHAV GANDHI
January 15, 1933
2

CHI. KESHU ,

If you take only as much milk and ghee as you can digest, I
don’t think you will experience any difficulty in observing
brahmacharya. Mutual service keeps love fresh.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3268

1
2

Son of Chhaganlal Gandhi
Son of Maganlal Gandhi

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

19

24. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
January 15, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

Your continued sulking shows that you have a good measure
of childishness in you. If you do not tolerate my criticizing you, you
are not at all likely to tolerate anybody else doing so. Instead of
thanking me for [telling you] the impression you produce on me, you
get angry with me. Your duty is to try to ask me again to explain my
charge against you, if you have not understood it. You may also
quarrel with me. But all your education and wisdom seem to have
disappeared on this occasion. You cannot even see that behind your
sulking lies your extreme pride. Let me tell you that this is not
freedom but self-will. I wish that you should open your eyes and
understand my love, and not falsify my estimate of you. It is not right
for you to sulk; on the contrary, you should feel sorry and weep for
having made me suffer. Why don’t you realize that, if I say anything
harsh to you, it is for your own good? If I am making any mistake in
doing so, it is your duty to point it out humbly to me. If you are sure
that you are innocent, you should be confident of being able to prove
it to me. Instead, you resent my criticism and sulk, and thereby seem
to aggravate your guilt. I had never expected this from you. Wake up
and express sorrow for nursing resentment against me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10322

25. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
January 15, 1933
CHI. JAMNA,

You seem to have lost confidence in me. It doesn’t matter. Go
and live somewhere for a year and then tell me. Will it give you
confidence if I suggest that Narandas may pay a short visit during the
last month or even earlier? It will not matter if you are not able to
return to the Ashram at all. Create the atmosphere of the Ashram
wherever you live. You need not then go to the Ashram. Will this
20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

satisfy you?
I feel much worried that Purushottam’s1 health does not
improve. I have been thinking what to do.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 870. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

26. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
January 15, 1933
CHI. PURUSHOTTAM,

It is not right that your constipation does not disappear
completely. It will certainly be cured if you go and live in Hajira. The
air and water of that place have that miraculous effect. Or you should
come to Poona and stay here for some time. I will have you treated by
a doctor here. The water of this place is believed to be good and life is
comparatively cheaper. This is the best season of the year. You will
certainly get some work here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 906. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

27. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
January 15, 1933
BHAISHRI MUNSHI,

I got your letter. I am writing this letter only to reassure you.
You need not reply to this. Poor Pradhan, he has a reason to describe
me as a young man. But should he do that before you? But apart
from that, would it be surprising if an old man of twenty should
regard you, a man of forty-five, as being ‘dateless’?
I don’t mind differences of opinion at all. Where the heart is
one, why should we mind such differences? I shall not be so foolish as
to lose you readily. We shall be like two beads in a necklace held on
1

Addressee’s son

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

21

the string of truth, no matter even if they are of rather strange colours.
Lilavati’s 1 boldness is beyond praise. She was always like that. Get all
right soon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7525. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

28. LETTER TO JIVRAM K. KOTHARI2
January 15, 1933
The words “twenty-four hours” you have taken rather literally.
You should have understood my intention in using them. For
twenty-four hours mean for as long as possible. When it is raining or
is very hot, when there is a strong wind or it is extremely cold, or when
for any other reason it is absolutely impossible or will be harmful to
remain or sleep or work in the open, one’s moral duty is to take
shelter under a shade or a roof or in a house with the doors and the
windows shut. All that you should have read in my words is that it is
desirable to spend as much time as possible in the open without
anything between oneself and the sky. Those who understand this will
spend the least possible time inside their houses and will also see that
there is adequate ventilation inside.
And now about knowing the time of the day. A village worker
does not require a clock or a watch. All his activities follow nature. His
clock also is nature’s. His manner of indicating time is different from
ours. He will not ask a person to come at four. He will say: ‘Come at
prayer time,, or ‘Come an hour or two before sunset’, or ‘Come at
daybreak’, or ‘Come when the birds start singing’, or ‘Come at
dinner time’, or ‘Come when I am weaving tape’, or ‘Come at
twilight’ or ‘at supper time’. One can thus use different descriptions
for different hours of the day. And the worker is so regular in his
tasks that he does not need to look at the sky to know the time of the
day. Every day he does the same job at the same hour and takes the
same time for doing it. Because of this exact regularity, when the work
is over he knows what time of day it is. Since he is not in the habit of
consulting a watch, he cannot say how many hours he would require
1
2

22

Addressee’s wife
The addressee was working in Orissa
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for a given job. But he says that he weaves a certain number of yards
of tape daily, and from that he and others can judge for how many
hours he must be working. It was because of this that in former days
time was not counted in hours but was measured by the amount of
work done. Even when the village worker travelled, he experienced no
difficulty, for he knew how many miles he could walk between sunrise
and sunset. Such a worker rests not according to the clock but only
when he feels tired. In short, one feels very little need for a clock in a
village; one may say that one feels no need at all. The village worker
measures his work by reference to the movements of the sun or the
other heavenly bodies. Clouds are no obstacles to this, because there
are very few days in the year when the sky is covered with clouds.
Even on such days, however, his work goes on as usual. Prayer time
also is observed without any conscious effort. If one’s hours of the
day are filled with work and succeed one another in the same order,
one will know without looking at the clock when it is time for prayer.
It will, then, rarely happen that one gets up late and has to worry about
how to make up for the lost time. It is not necessary to adjust the time
of evening prayer with the prayer hour in the Ashram. People living
in different parts of the world cannot do a particular thing at the same
hour. It will, therefore, be most convenient for you to start your
prayer when the sun sets in that part of the country. I think I have
answered all your doubts, big and small.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 55-7

29. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
January 15, 1933
CHI. SHARDA,

Your letter. You seem to be absorbed in work. That is very good
indeed. Is not writing to me part of your work? If not, why not?
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9961. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

23

30. A LETTER1
January 15, 1933
There are four remedies: First, Ramanama; second, pure air,
pranayama in open air, asanas and other exercises; third, wholesome
food, wheat, green vegetables and milk, exclusion of spices and sweets;
and fourth, keeping the body busy with work the whole day so that
one may get sound sleep at night.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 54

31. LETTER TO GOPALDAS DESAI
January 15, 1933
All four of us were at one in complimenting you for not
coming.2 Few people have observed such self-control. Compliments to
you once again.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 54

32. A LETTER
January 15, 1933
If it is true that my life is dedicated to the service of all creatures,
it is still more true that it is dedicated to God. How can I help when He
prompts me to undertake an indefinite fast?
I can show that the use of legislatures to secure freedom to the
Harijans to enter temples is not opposed to the principle of
non-co-operation. But I would be violating jail rules by doing so. If,
therefore, I get an opportunity later to explain that and if you are
present at that time, you may ask your question. My present activities
for the removal of untouchability may seem to do temporary harm,
but it is a fact of universal experience that work for a good cause
1

The correspondent had asked how he could cure wet dreams.
The addressee, who had recently been released from jail, had not gone to see
Gandhiji.
2

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ultimately does no harm, and I have no doubt in my mind that this is a
good cause.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 54-5

33. LETTER TO A YOUTH1
January 15, 1933
A great many such things are being written about me. The
article is such a palpable lie that I hope nobody will put his trust in it.
And if there are any people who put their trust in it, my reply to it will
have no effect on them.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 55

34. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
Y. M.,

January 15, 1933
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

Muldas’s account is excellent. I had learnt about it from
someone. Such tours may prove very effective. They are an objectlesson and real propaganda.
I saw your signature after many days. I do think of you
constantly of course. I am certainly hungry for silent devotion.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G. N. 11559

1

The addressee is described in the source as “a young man of Dar-es-Salaam”

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

25

35. A LETTER
January 15, 1933
1

The article you have sent me is full of poison from beginning
to end. I hope my life is living proof of its falsehood.
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 55

36. TELEGRAM TO HOME SECRETARY
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
January 16, 1933
S ECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HOME DEPARTMENT
NEW DELHI
REGARDING

MY

REQUEST

FOR

PERMITTING

CONSERVANCY

WORK

TO

BE DONE BY HIGH-CASTE PRISONERS WHO MAY VOLUNTEER TO DO SUCH
WORK

MAY

I

NOW

KNOW

GOVERNMENT

DECISION?

GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 3876. Also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800 (40)(6), p. 285

37. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
January 16, 1933
DEAR COL. DOYLE,

Sjt. Mathuradas, the only grandson of a deceased sister of mine,
was recently discharged from Belgaum Prison. He met me and told
me that my letters were delivered to him with passages cut out. Now
my letters never contain anything that might possibly be considered
of an obnoxious nature from the prison or any other standpoint. They
go from here duly censored. The Superintendents here have done me
the favour of drawing my attention to passages in my letters which
they may not like. But to cut out words or passages from a letter
1

26

By Vasantram Shastri
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

without reference to the writer may lead to dangerous interpretations
or interpretations not intended by the writer. In my opinion any letter
of which a passage is held objectionable should be referred to the
writer and option given to him either of withdrawing the passage or
the letter altogether. And I cannot understand the practice of double
censoring. My letters are all thought out and conceived as one piece.
They contain mostly ethical matters. The removal of a word may
change the meaning. I should not like my letters to be interfered with
without my knowledge. I may say that I often receive Maniben Patel’s
letters with large patches making the letters meaningless.
I wish you could grant relief in this matter by no means trivial to
me.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9

38. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
January 16, 1933
DEAR COL. DOYLE,

I hope that you have now overtaken the Christmas week arrears
and are comparatively free to devote a little attention to an important
matter which we have often talked about but never thoroughly
thrashed out. I refer to the question of handcarding and
hand-spinning in the prisons. I have told you that as early as 1922
these two things were first introduced at my request in this prison. At
first Sjt. Shankerlal Banker and I were permitted to do this work on
our own bows and wheels with our own cotton. Then cotton was
brought by Col. Dalziel from Dharwar. The result of our work was
liked by Major Jones who followed Col. Dalziel and he allowed all
Civil Disobedience prisoners who volunteered to do this work
regularly. I was permitted to regulate and examine the daily work and
issue the necessary instructions for improvement. A record was kept
of the work. Spinning-wheels and bows were manufac-tured in the
prison, spindles were made and the yarn was used as welt, and, if I am
not mistaken, also for tapes. I was allowed to train convict warders as
carders, and a considerable quantity of yarn was thus produced.
On the resumption of Civil Disobedience in 1930 the question
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

27

was raised by me and several prisoners and permission was granted in
some cases and not in others. There was no fixed policy evolved when
peace was declared and the C. D. prisoners were discharged.
The matter this time is also in the same uncertain state. In Dhulia
for instance Seth Jamnalal Bajaj tells me hand-spinning is universal
among the C. D. prisoners, so much so that much khadi has been
manufactured out of the yarn so spun. I know that in some other jails
too it is freely allowed. It is only here that almost complete
prohibition reigns except with me, my companions and certain other
prisoners and the female Civil Disobedience prisoners.
I have told you that many Civil Disobedience prisoners have
been under vows to spin regularly as a sacrifice. It is only after much
effort that I have succeeded generally in persuading the Civil Disobedience prisoners not to regard the vow as binding in prisons. They
know that I am trying to persuade you to give the permission to spin
to those who regard it as a sacred duty, either as part of their task or as
extra work to be kept by them for their use.
To carding and spinning by itself I am sure the Government can
have no objection. It has no connection with the Civil Disobedience
campaign. Spinning organizations have not been declared unlawful
nor spinning an unlawful activity. From the State point of view I can
demons-trate, as I did in 1922 by actual results, that it is a more
remunerative occupation than several others followed in the prisons.
Indeed I endeavoured to show to one of your predecessors, viz., Col.
Mel, that it was possible even to make prisons self-supporting by a
universal introduction of all cotton processes in the prisons. But whilst
I was carrying on these conversations, he retired. Inspectors-General
and Superintendents change rapidly and I was discharged all too
prematurely owing to the attack of appendicitis. If I can but get a little
encouragement from you, I have the same confidence as in 1922 and
could show you startling results.
But that may be a far cry. My present purpose is to ask you
please to regularize the practice, which is now followed haphazard, of
allowing volunteers to do hand-carding and hand-spinning with such
restrictions as may be considered necessary in the interest of the
administration.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I.G.P. File No. 9

28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

39. LETTER TO SANKARANARAYANA IYER
January 16, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. Had I the time, I would have
attempted a reply to it. But as most of the points raised by you have
been covered in my statements, you would not mind my referring you
to them.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S ANKARANARAYANA IYER
TIMBER MERCHANT
C OIMBATORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 18933

40. LETTER TO KPA RAMESWARAN NAMBOODIRI
January 16, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter and offer of the sacred oil. Believing
as I do firmly in true Shastras not only tolerating but permitting
Harijans of today to enter temples, I could not avail myself of the
offer you kindly made. If you will investigate the Shastras, you will
fail to discover a single text that would apply to those whose entry
today is debarred.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K. P ARAMESWARAN NAMBOODIRI
OTHIKKEN
C/ O TEMPLE S UPERINTENDENT
GURUVAYUR
From a microfilm: S.N. 18937

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

29

41. LETTER TO V. V. KETKAR
January 16, 1933
DEAR FRIEND ,

I have your letter. You are in a hurry. I am constitutionally
opposed to coercing anybody, whether he is in the majority or in the
minority, and essentially so in religious matters. Hence I would respect
the scruples of the minority in so far as it is possible to do so.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. V. V. KETKAR
S ADASHIVA LANE
BOMBAY 4
From a microfilm: S.N. 18938

42. LETTER TO BASANT KUMAR CHATTERJEE
January 16, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter by registered post. Of late I have missed the
balanced judgment which characterized all your letters which it was
my pleasure to receive. The latest one in front of me is full of hot
spices, reckless statements and innuendoes. If your letter had not
betrayed anger, I would have pleaded with you and shown you the
mis-statements and misrepresentations with which your letter bristles.
Some day, and I am sure that day is not very far, when passions have
subsided, you will admit, if you have patience enough to keep this
letter, that what I have said in it was all true.
Yours sincerely,

BASANT KUMAR C HATTERJEE
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 18939

30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

43. LETTER TO R. KAIMAL
January 16, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

The letters that come to me from Travancore, that is, from
Trivandrum, and all practically from M.A.s and B.A.s who are also
High Court vakils, are very remarkable for hard-heartedness and want
of susceptibility to the upward impulse of humaneness. The writers
seem to exhaust the whole of their effort in resorting to subtleties of
argument for defending the obviously indefensible. I was ill-prepared
for such an exhibition of ungenerous interpretation of Shastras from a
place of which I have such happy memories. It is to me a vast tragedy
that you, who have such a magnificent natural scenery about you,
expressive of bountiful Nature, should steel your hearts against your
own kith and kin and find it in you to make an appeal to me for
peace 1 when, un mindful of consequences, perhaps all unconsciously
to yourself, you are engaged in carrying on destruction. I would not
have written thus to you if I had not traced a ring of sincerity about
your letter.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R. K AIMAL , M. A.,
HIGH C OURT VAKIL
TRIVANDRUM

LL. B.

From a microfilm: S.N. 18940

44. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA BHAVE
January 16, 1933
According to me, the reasons why your body does not become
strong and healthy are these: though you eat, you do not have faith in
the food which you eat and feel aversion towards it, you waste your
mental energy too much and neglect your health out of ignorant
attachment to work. The remedy is indicated by the reasons
themselves. You should cure your lack of faith, look upon the food
which you eat as a sign of God’s kindness and pray, while eating it,
1

The addressee had pleaded: “Please drop temple-entry; vouch peace; destroy
not; but, fulfil.”
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

31

that it may give you strength. You should realize that it is necessary to
preserve the body in good health for the sake of the atman, regard it
as a trust and take the best care of it that you can. Anybody who
neglects a trust is guilty of a wrong.
I do not know when I first became aware of the existence of
God. Doing these things becomes so natural to me that I feel I have
always been doing them. Who can say that the leaves of a tree became
so big on such and such a day? All that I can say is that I have arrived
at the present stage at the age of sixty-four. But this means nothing.
When a person has attained the Brahmi state1, he does not suffer
at the sight of others’ sufferings because he does not rejoice at the
sight of their happiness. A carpenter does not feel either happy or
unhappy when repairing a ship; a Brahmin acts in the same manner. A
Brahmin is one who has attained the Brahmi state.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 58

45. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI 2
YERAVDA ,

January 16, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I shall expect you on Friday at noon. Bring along the Court
decision if you have no need of it. I am cognizant of all that you write
about Malabar; I have been there three or four times. The ground has
also been well prepared. Work has been going on since my visit in
1925 in connection with the Vykom [Satyagraha].3 Yet, much remains
to be done. But we will talk more about it when you come. Do bring
along Taramati and children.
If you have preserved my letters which you received in the jail
1

State of oneness with Brahman, the Absolute
An extract from this letter appears in “Letter to Mathurdas Trikumji”,
16-1-1933
3
Ibid.,
2

32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

bring along with you such of them as have passages scored out or
otherwise tempered with by the authorities.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. M ATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
21 M INT R OAD
F ORT, B OMBAY
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

46. LETTER TO BINDU DASTANE
January 16, 1933
1

Bangles and kumkum are the marks of a married woman or a
maiden eligible for marriage. Therefore one who desires marriage
may certainly adorn herself with both. You may, by all means, wear
the bangles and the kumkum if you are fond of them. Anyway, you
may wear them if Mother wants you to; you must not hurt her
feelings.
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 57

47. LETTER TO MRS. DASTANE
January 16, 1933
Read carefully my letter to Bindu. If you agree with what I have
said, do encourage the girls in giving up bangles, etc. But if you do
not approve of brahmacharya, you may ask them to wear bangles and
other things. In my view a mother’s duty is to encourage the spirit of
renunciation in the children. The mind is bound to run after
pleasures. Ultimately the girls are bound to use all those things if they
are interested in marriage, but we must not compel them.
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 57

1

Vermilion mark on the forehead of women

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

33

48. LETTER TO VATSALA V. DASTANE
January 16, 1933
By doing our best to remove suffering and by faithfully observing the rules of truth and so on we serve living beings. Those who
indulge in untruth, violence, hoarding, thieving and abrahmacharya1
hurt life itself. By observing truth and so on they alleviate suffering,
which amounts to serving.
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 57-8

49. A LETTER
January 16, 1933
If you are keen to stay, you should observe the rules, be sincere
and do the work.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 58

50. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
January 16, 1933
2

I am quite sure that Seth Chamanlal could not believe that
there was any likelihood of a civil war in the country. As I have said in
my appeal to sanatanists, such a thing I hold to be inconceivable. If
anybody knows the reformers, I should surely know them. War could
take place only if there are two parties to fight one another.
Self-styled sanatanists would be simply beating the air if they staged a
war. And why should there be a war? The Viceroy gives formal
sanction not to a Bill passed but to a Bill that has been introduced,
which even when passed ensures absolute freedom from fight.
The fight may come when the matter goes out of the reformers’
hands and disappointed and enraged Harijans take the matter in their
1

Violation of brahmacharya
Chamanlal Girdhardas Parekh, Chairman, Ahmedabad Mill-owners’
Association, was reported to have urged the Viceroy not to sanction the introduction
of the Temple-entry Bills, as it would lead to a religious civil war.
2

34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

own hands and fight for their rights against the whole host of caste
Hindus. But even that is a remote possibility, so long as reformers are
alive to vindicate the honour of sanatana dharma.
The Bill can only pass if it has solid Hindu opinion behind it
and not otherwise. I hope, therefore, that nobody will be scared by
thetelegram to which you have just drawn my attention.
The Bombay Chronicle, 17-1-1933

51. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
January 17, 1933
MY DEAR MARY,

I have your letter. Whatever you are, you are no guest.1 You are
a member of the ever-growing family. Whether you are daughter, or
sister or mother, matters little. In this strange family, each one makes
his or her own choice of the position he or she would occupy.
Therefore you understand you will be no guest to me wherever we
meet.
My conception of idol-worship is wholly different from that of
the learned men. I know from the experience of many people that
idol-worship has given them spiritualism of the highest type and that a
philosophic conception of God has made such philosophers grossly
material.
As I have told you, whilst the form may be different, mankind
are idol-worshippers by their very nature. It is true that not all are
uplifted by such worship, but that can be said of every form of
worship. Those who look down upon idol-worship with philosophic
contempt are not idol-worshippers but probably the worst form of
idolaters, for they are worshippers of self.
Ba is in the Ashram. She left here some time ago. Mira writes to
me every week and I to her and I often mention you to her.
I have not yet got the Little Plays of St. Francis. Tell me when
you sent the book. Did you register it?
Love from us all.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5988. Also C.W. 3345. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr
1
The addressee, after three visits to Gandhiji in jail in January, had remarked
jokingly in a letter that although they were prisoners, she felt as if she had been
entertained by them as their “guest”.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

35

52. LETTER TO DEYASA BOYS’ UNION
January 17, 1933
DEAR YOUNG FRIENDS,

I have your letter. I am delighted that you are serving Harijan
children in the only way open to you. God will bless you for this real
service of His most needy children. This is my advice. Treat these
children as your own blood brothers and blood sisters. Teach them
good manners by having good manners yourselves. Teach them
cleanliness. If they come in a dirty condition to the school, wash them.
See that their eyes, ears, nose and hair are quite clean. Let there be no
dirt in their nails. If their clothes are rags, you should beg some
khaddar and get a volunteer tailor or your own mothers to make nice
little vests and chaddis1 for them. You should take them for walks to
see interesting sights. Tell them stories from Ramayana,
Mahabharata, etc., and by being truthful and kind under every
circumstance, teach them to be likewise; and to all this you may add
booklearning including simple arithmetic. You will now tell me how
much of this advice you have digested.
Yours sincerely,

DEYASA BOYS’ UNION
C/ O R AKHAHARI C HAKRAVARTY
DEYASA VILLAGE
DIGNAGAR P. O.
(BURDWAN DT.)
From a microfilm: S.N. 18941

53. LETTER TO A. SUBBIAH
January 17, 1933
MY DEAR SUBBIAH,

Never apologize for your letters, rather apologize when you
keep me without any. You know how I want letters from those who are
near me.
The fast about Appasaheb Patwardhan was a necessity. He had
1

36

Shorts
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

obtained my permission during the truce period for doing what he
did. When, therefore, I came to know of it, I was bound to stand up for
him, especially because it was pure untouchability work. Whether I
fast often or rarely, know that it could be only in obedience to the
peremptory dictates of the Inner Voice.
The news you have given me about the Madras referendum 1 is
very good. Tell me if you know what was the total strength of the
eligible voters. Did the voters include those Hindus who are not
entitled to temple-entry?
I hope you are now better. Lalita 2 should write to me
occasionally if she continues her Hindi study.
Though my elbows are not yet in good condition, I am keeping
quite healthy.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. A. S UBBIAH
GANDHI ASHRAM, K HADI BHANDAR
BLACKBURN LIGHT
MADURA
From a microfilm: S.N. 18942

54. LETTER TO ARUN CHANDRA DUTT
January 17, 1933
MY DEAR ARUN,

I was delighted to have your letter containing a good account of
the celebration3 and I am glad that you are able to get Satyanand
Baboo to preside4. The resolution, too, is quite good. Now we have to
continue to do the work quietly and resolutely, unmindful of all that
may be said against us. Truth is bound to win in the end.
Yes, Pandit Panchanan Tarkaratna was here. He was able to
1

In Madura, where members to the Sri Meenakshi Devasthanam Committee
were elected. The addressee had written to Gandhiji: “The results are entirely in favour
of temple-entry. . . . out of 1887 votes (valid) polled, 1498 voted for candidates who
stood for temple-entry. . . .” (S.N. 18898).
2
Addressee’s wife
3
Of the 50th birth anniversary of Motilal Roy of the Prabartak Sangh
4
At a public meeting at Chandernagore, held on January 8, 1933, which passed
a resolution for allowing all classes of Hindus the right of entry to Hindu temples
(S.N. 18889)
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

37

make no headway in Guruvayur. I do not know that he tried much
either. The impression that he has left on my mind is that he is
convinced that our case is unassailable, but he has not the courage to
come out boldly for the purification of Hinduism. Of course this is
not for publication, but if Moti Baboo sees him, I do not mind his
showing this letter to him. I do not want to say of him what I am not
prepared to say in front of him. He promised to send his son or some
other representative to me who was to engage in a quiet discussion
with me on the meaning of the Shastras for a number of days. I
thought the son or another Shastri was to come soon after he reached
Bombay. I observed that the son was one of the Shastris who were to
hold the discussion on the 12th, a discussion which unfor-tunately
never came off. It is a painful episode1, not worth describing. A great
deal of misrepresentation is now going on in the local Press. If it goes
further, I might have to publish the whole correspondence.
I shall await Moti Baboo’s letter, but there is no hurry, if he has
not written already. Let him take his own time.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. A RUN C HANDRA DUTT
P RABARTAK S ANGHA
C HANDERNAGORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 18943

55. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
January 17, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter of the 10th instant from Gwalior. I am
meeting Sjts. Deodhar2 and Vaze 3 tomorrow (Wednesday) about the
English edition of Harijan Sevak. I have already had a preliminary
conversation with Vaze since the receipt of your letter. It seems there
will be no difficulty about publishing the paper here. But I shall do
nothing in a hurry. I will send you the fullest information before
actually embarking on the enterprise.
1

Vide “Note to Deonayakacharya”, 12-1-1933
Rajagopalchari”, 13-1-1933
2.
G. K. Devdhar
3
S. G. Vaze, Editor of Servant of India

38

and “Letter to C.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

What is this opposition in Bengal against the Yeravda Pact? I am
writing also to Dr. Bidhan enquiring about it.1
I note what you say about the effect of prunes. Have you tried
them at all?
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a copy: C.W. 7920. Courtesy: G. D. Birla. Also S.N. 18944

56. LETTER TO RASIK LAL BISWAS
January 17, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. I am forwarding it to Dr. Bidhan
and I would suggest your meeting him if you have not done so
already. All the advice that I would give you just now is that you
should be patient and watch the progress of the campaign against
untouchability, giving the reformers all the help they may need, and
you can anticipate their need by carrying on social reformation of a
concentrated character amongst the Harijans and preparing a
statement giving accurately a list of all the social and other disabilities
that they may be suffering from. I would like such a statement myself
and also like you to prepare an accurate census of all the Harijans
according to the sub-divisions . It will be of great help to me in
guiding you in so far as you may need my guidance.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R ASIK LAL BISWAS, B. A., B. L.
S ECRETARY
ALL-INDIA DEPRESSED C LASSES F EDERATION
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 18946

1

Vide “Letter to Dr. B. C. Roy”, 17-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

39

57. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
January 17, 1933
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,

I enclose herewith a letter from Sjt. Rasik Lal Biswas. I have
advised him to see you. Do please invite him to see you.
What is this agitation against the Yeravda Pact? I would like you
to give me the inwardness of the opposition. How can there be any
injustice in the Pact, simply because of reservation of more seats for
Harijans than had been provided in the British Government decision?
Are they not also Hindus? Was there not always the cry on our part
that the Harijans could take as many seats as they liked, even cent per
cent? This opposition, if it is popular, is likely to estrange Harijans and
to justify the fears often expressed on their behalf as to the attitude of
caste Hindus. But you know the local situation infinitely better than I
do. You will correct me if I have erred in putting the argument. I have
given no public reply, because I felt that any reply from me at the
present stage might increase the resentment of the Harijans. In any
case, I did not want to say anything without first understanding the
situation through you. Please guide me.
I hope Kamala and Dr. Alam are making steady progress.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18948

58. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 17, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

Some of the developments there are such as cause me worry,
and so these days I wait for a letter from you almost every day. This
does not mean of course that you should write daily. When there is no
letter from you, I must assume, and I shall, that you had nothing to
write about. I have only explained the state of my mind.
You will have to take the necessary step about the Giri family
even at the risk of appearing cruel. I feel all the time that it is against
their interests and those of the Ashram to let them remain. We must
realize that Mahavir is supported in his behaviour by all of them.
40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Chimanlal has won the confidence of Krishnamaiyadevi1 in some
measure. After he has had a talk with her, call a meeting of the
committee which you have appointed there and let it decide finally.
Since the question is a serious one, it is desirable that you alone
should not take the responsibility. If you have not already written to
the people from whom Mahavir has borrowed, do so immediately and
ascertain the facts.
Sitla Sahai 2 may have been arrested. Write to Sarojinidevi3
occasionally. Inquire what happened about Padma4. Keep an eye on
her monthly expenses.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also Bapuna Patro-9: Shri
Narandas Gandhine, Pt. II, pp. 16-7

59. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 17, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

These days I write to you almost daily. I got today both your
weekly mail and the letters despatched on the 15th. I don’t remember
what I wrote to Madhavlal. It did not seem necessary to me to consult
you about the matter. If you wish, however, you may write to him and
tell him that, instead of asking me for an explanation, he should write
to you directly.
What do you mean when you say that the mill will start working
soon? Do you mean the ordinary hand-mill of stone? If you have
decided to revive it, I assume that you must have taken all the factors
into consideration. I hope you did not think from any of my letters
that I wished it to be done. Personally I believe that we shall not be
able to revive it now. We do not even get good hand-mills now. It is
easy and cheap to get grain ground in flour-mills. I think it will be
difficult to give up the practice. But we can grind small quantities of
grain in the Ashram with our own mills or with American hand-mills.
If such a mill is of a good quality, it never gives trouble. When any of
1
2
3
4

Widow of Dalbahadur Giri
A khadi worker from U.P.
Wife of Sitla Sahai
Daughter of Sitla Sahai

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

41

its parts get worn out, they can be replaced.
Generally I take two pounds of milk daily. I have to reduce it to
one pound once every week.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also Bapuna Patro-9: Shri
Narandas Gandhine, Pt. II, p. 17

60. LETTER TO RUKMINIDEVI BAZAJ
January 17, 1933
CHI. RUKMINI1 ,

Your letters are becoming increasingly dull. I would not be
surprised if in time you begin to write as Chhotelalji does. Sometimes
his letters come to me in this form:
“ BAPU,
Regards from

C HHOTELAL”

Probably I should fill in whatever I wish and I need not (so that
I may not have to) take the trouble of reading it at all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9644. Courtesy: Benarsilal Bazaj

61. LETTER TO A COLLEGE STUDENT
January 17, 1933
It is not correct to say that I am a champion of mixed marriages.
It can be said that I do not oppose such marriages. There is a
difference between the two statements. The statement that I am a
champion of mixed marriages or even that I am not opposed to them
is likely to give rise to some misunderstanding in so far as your idea
of a mixed marriage is different from mine. Today we hardly come
across any true Brahmins or true Shudras. Therefore what you do not
regard as a mixed marriage is likely to be one and what, if I accepted
the popular parlance, would be a mixed marriage may not actually be
such. For instance, if a so-called Shudra girl possessing the qualities of
a Brahmin girl marries a real Brahmin I would not call it a mixed
1

42

Daughter of Maganlal Gandhi and wife of Benarsilal Bazaj
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

marriage, whereas you would regard it as such. On the other hand, if a
so-called Brahmin boy with the qualities of a Shudra marries a
so-called Shudra girl with Brahmin-like qualities it would be a mixed
marriage in my view. You would also regard it as one. Both of us will,
however, do it for different reasons.
You should understand from this that I never reject a scientific
truth that has been established. But you should also note that in [the
realm of] science what has come to be accepted as truth today is not
unlikely to be proved as untruth tomorrow. Sciences founded on
deduction are always bound to suffer this basic imperfection. We
cannot therefore regard it as an absolute truth. I think I understand
and also believe in varnashrama-dharma. But you and I seem to
understand the purport of varnashrama-dharma in different ways.1
In spite of saying all this I ought to caution you that if you
propose to consider the question of untouchability in a scientific way
you should understand that interdining and mixed marriage have
nothing to do with the question, and you should act accordingly. As
for me today I am living, but tomorrow I may not be there, but this
problem is certainly going to be there even after me. At the moment I
am not at all canvassing for interdining and mixed marriage. We shall
see about it when I start advocating them. It is neither scientific nor
moral to condemn, because of faults you find in me, the noble work
that I happen to be doing.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 61

62. LETTER TO INDRA VIDYALANKAR
January 17, 1933
CHI. INDRA,

I have your letter. I can never suggest from here that Ganeshilal
or anyone else may be admitted into the Sangh. I have no
acquaintance with him. I am aware of the distressing fact that there are
five or six divisions among the Harijans. This is a reflection of our
own deeds. Has anyone anywhere published a list of the temples and
wells that have been thrown open to Harijans?
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 7205. Also C.W. 4863. Courtesy:
Chandragupta Vidyalankar
1

For discussion, vide “Discussion with Dharmadev”, 17-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

43

63. LETTER TO CHAND TYAGI
January 17, 1933
BHAI CHAND TYAGI,

I have your letter. I spend almost the whole day under the sky
and in the sun. The finger is all right. My diet consists of milk, dates,
oranges and, when available, papaya. Mirabehn is in the Bombay jail.
The observance of physical as well as mental brahmacharya is made
possible by keeping both body and mind under control.
Chhaganlal Joshi too is with me. We are all doing well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3261

64. A NOTE ON THE THE PROPOSED INTRODUCTION OF
HAND-SPINNING IN YERAVDA CENTRAL PRISON1
January 18, 1933
1 lb. Of carded cotton yields 840 yards of yarn of 1 count, i.e., 8400
yards of yarn of 10 counts.
An average good spinner spins at least 150 yards per hour of 10
counts. Therefore in 6 working hours he will spin 900 yards—4.14
tolas. Therefore 9 such men will spin 1 lb. of yarn per day.
At the rate of 3 as. per lb. of 10 [count] yarn as the ordinary
wage of a spinner, 9 men will earn 3 as. a day, i.e., 1/3 of an anna
each. At the present moment at least. 1000 C. D. prisoners in this jail
are not producing even half of this small amount of wealth. In other
words there is a dead waste of at least Rs. 10 per day in the Yeravda
Central Prison.
The outlay required for producing the yarn is 120 lb. of cotton
per day. It is likely that it will not be necessary to supply
spinning-wheels to all these spinners. I am unable to say off-hand how
many will have their own spinning-wheels. But that will need to be
ascertained.
NOTE. I have given the lowest possible estimates so as to err on
1

44

Vide also “Letter to E. E. Doyle, 16-1-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the safest side. It may also be stated that it is possible to do the
spinning through the takli, the easiest and the cheapest method, but
the output would be 1/3 compared to the wheel. I suggest that the
beginning should be made at once with those who volunteer to do the
spinning and who can produce their own spinning-wheels .
There remains now the question as to what to do with the yarn.
Yarn of 10 counts can be utilized to weave coarse cloth or the yarn as
it is produced can be sold without the slightest difficulty. I have made
no reference in this note to carding. The usual estimate is that one
carding-bow can supply ten spinners with carded cotton. The
processes to be gone through before spinning is begun are carding
and sliver-making in which last is the simplest.
If further particulars are required I will gladly supply them.
I have here confined myself only to the commercial aspect and
made no reference to those with whom spinning is a part of daily
sacrifice. I think that for such the permission should be granted at
once, in view of the fact that it is being done in several prisons.
M. K. GANDH I
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I. G. P. File No. 10

65. TELEGRAM TO “THE HINDU”
January 18, 1933
WHAT

PURPORTS

TO

CORRESPONDENT

AND

SIXTEENTH

GROSS

I

HAD

PUBLISHING.
ANYTHING

IS

BE

I

INTERVIEW
IN

DISTORTION

SPECIALLY
FOR

AN

PUBLISHED
WARNED

TOLD

HIM

I

PRESS

CORRESPONDENTS

FIRST

SHOWING

ME

NOT

THE

THE
OF

WAS
I
TO

TEXT

WITH

DAK
A

YOUR

PUBLICATION.

1

YOUR

EDITION

CONVERSATION

CORRESPONDENT

UNPREPARED
HAVE
PUBLISH

POONA
OF

ALSO

TO

WHICH
AGAINST

GIVE

WARNED

ANYTHING

THE

HIM
ALL

WITHOUT

THEREOF.2

The Hindu, 19-1-1933

1

It appeared in The Hindu, 16-1-1933; vide “Interview to “The Hindu”
Crrespondent”, 14-1-1933
2
In reply, the Editor of The Hindu apologized as follows: “We gladly publish
Mahatmaji’s contradiction and deeply regret that an unauthorized and incorrect. report
of a talk with him should have obtained publication”.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

45

66. TELEGRAM TO S. SALIVATI
January 18, 1933
YOUR

REPORT

PAINED
ALREADY

AT

OF

BREACH

INTERVIEW
OF

TRUST

BADLY
IN

DISTORTED.

PUBLISHING

IT.

GREATLY
DAMAGE

DONE.

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 68-9

67. LETTER TO R. P. AGNIHOTRI
January 18, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter enclosing a copy of your letter to the
Municipal Committee of Jubbulpore. Without knowing the condition
of the Harijans it is impossible for me from here to say whether the
suggestions made therein are proper and feasible. Workers should
generally take care that in advising Harijans they do not raise false or
impossible hopes. Anti-untouchability workers are expected more to
do some tangible service themselves rather than promote petitions, etc.
In the first instance, local bodies are to be expected to do their duty
and when they manifestly fail to do so, public agitation undoubtedly
becomes a necessity.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R. P. A GNIHOTRI
S ECRETARY, A NTI -UNTOUCHABILITY LEAGUE
JUBBULPORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 18962

68. LETTER TO C. NARAYANA MENON
January 18, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

Do you mean to suggest that in Malabar the public temples do
not belong to the Hindus who have the right of worship there? Will
you contend that even when the temple was first built, it was not the
property of Hindus although Hindus subscribed to the cost of
46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

building it? And if that was so, then the trustees would not be trustees,
but they would be absolute owners. There are thousands of such
temples owned by private persons. A public temple is so called only
because it is public property; that is to say, the property of those
members of the public at whose instance and with whose money and
on whose behalf the temple was built. Do you think that the multitude
of people who give donations daily have no right whatsoever to the
temple to which they give donations? Of course you may say that the
right does not include authority to change the character or quality of
those who are entitled to offer worship. If you do so, you will simply
beg the question. For the contention of the reformers is that the
so-called Harijans are only so called, and that they should never have
been excluded from rights enjoyed by any other members of the
Hindu family, provided that they conform to the regulations as to
cleanliness and the like.
The purity of the temples themselves is irrelevant to the present
discussion. You don’t want to say that if a temple has dancing girls
and swindling Brahmins, it should be opened to Harijans, and not if
the Brahmins cease to swindle and the girls cease to dance in those
temples?
Do indeed see Malaviyaji, if he can give you a few moments,
and Dr. Bhagwandas. He certainly has more leisure than Malaviyaji.
About my fast you need have no fear.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. C. N ARAYANA MENON, M. A.,
BENARES HINDU UNIVERSITY
BENARES

PH. D.

From a microfilm: S.N. 18963

69. LETTER TO HRIDAY NATH KUNZRU
January 18, 1933
MY DEAR HARIJI,

Here is a letter for you to read and deal with. I have simply
asked the writer to see you. Is there any truth in the charge that all the
Harijan candidates were unsuccessful at the municipal election?
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18964

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

47

70. LETTER TO G. B. NIRANTAR
January 18, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. You and your pupils, 15 in all, can come on
23rd instant, at 2 p.m.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. G. B. NIRANTAR
TEACHER
S EVA S ADAN HIGH S CHOOL
P OONA C ITY
From a microfilm: S.N. 18965

71. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
January 18, 1933
MY DEAR AMTUSSALAAM,

I must hurry on to write to you. Therefore this English letter. I
would like you to make up your mind quickly as to the treatment to
be followed. My advice is, if you get a doctor there who would take
real interest in you, you should give him the fullest chance by
obeying all his instructions and doing as he bids. That is to say, you
should do as Veenabehn advises you. There should be no time wasted
in simply making a decision. You should be in the hospital and take
what medicine or injection is given to you and undergo the operation
that may be needed. Do not think of the removal of the womb unless
the doctor says so. Never mind the letter written to Dr. Sharma. You
yourself say that he cannot cure piles. After you are well you shall
come and see me.
Love. God may keep you well.1
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 272

1

48

This sentence is in Urdu.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

72. LETTER TO N. 1
January 18, 1933
MY DEAR N.,

I have your two interesting and instructive letters. It is very great
work you are doing, and if the young men who have responded to
your call remain steadfast and do not give in after the first flush of
enthusiasm is exhausted, the street-cleaning you are doing must prove
infectious and it would be a great advance towards the removal of
untouchability. I am therefore surprised that anybody should cavil at
the work itself or take exception to the fact that you, who have
become an Indian by adoption and by right of love, should have
taken the lead, and if anybody thinks that I would not have advised
such work if I was out, he is wholly mistaken. I have personally
undertaken such work before now, both publicly and privately, and
the cleaning of Harijan quarters that was done all over India on the
18th ultimo was due to the suggestion made by me and heartily taken
up by the Servants of Untouchables Society. You are at liberty to
make public use of this letter.
I did think from the language of your previous letter that you
had fasted all the days that I was fasting. I am glad therefore of the
correction you have made.
As you know, I am deeply interested in the question of
scientific or (which is the same thing) hygienic and spiritual dietary.
Tell me therefore more about your diet. Give me the actual things you
take and the quantities, and how far you have been on this diet. As
you seem to have read practically everything I have ever written,
perhaps you are aware that I have lived on fruits and nuts for over six
years, that I have gone without milk for over nine years, and it has
been the most disappointing thing for me to have been obliged to take
even goat’s milk. I know of no one of my acquaintance who has been
able to do hard physical work as also hard mental work, as you seem
to be doing, merely on fruits and vegetables, that means, no protein,
no starch and no fat of any kind. The two letters before me whet my
appetite for seeing you face to face and understanding you more than
1

An American woman who later stayed at the Sabarmati Ashram for some time;
the name in this and the subsequent items, however, has been omitted.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

49

I do. I confess that I am very stupid and I don’t and I can’t
understand people merely through their correspondence. To know
them I need to look at them and talk to them, and you have written so
much to me about yourself that I do want to know you if I can. But at
the same time I don’t want you to come here at the sacrifice of the
great work you are doing there. You should come only when you can
be spared for a few days from your work.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 18966

73. LETTER TO BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
January 18, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 12th instant. I shall thank you
if you will enlighten me about the facts and conditions prevailing in
the Province of Bengal which require a re-consideration of the
Yeravda Pact.1
Yours sincerely’

THE JOINT HONY . S ECRETARY
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
18 BRITISH INDIAN S T.
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 18967

74. LETTER TO FULCHAND SHAH
January 18, 1933
2

You are carrying on spinning whereas we are arguing with the
Shastris, some of whom are being sulky. They have been pouring
abuses on me. They discover weaknesses in me of which till now I was
unaware. My words are interpreted in strange ways and by such means
the victory of sanatana dharma is declared with beat of drums. We
laugh at all this, knowing that there is no real strength behind it. If
there were real strength behind it, and also public opinion, then it
would be not an occasion for laughter, but one for weeping; then one
1
2

50

Vide also “Letter to Ramananda Chatterjee”, 20-1-1933
In Visapur Jail
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

could not help but weep. This movement of the so-called sanatanists
suggests that the foundation of untouchability is tottering and the
structure will shortly tumble down.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 69

75. LETTER TO VAMANBUWA BRAHMACHARI
January 18, 1933
SHRI BRAHMACHARIJI,

Your letter. I can see you on the 25th instant at 2 o’clock and
shall reserve one hour for you. I shall not give this time to anyone
else. But according to my vow I regard it a duty to answer your
doubts.
(1) 1 I agree with all that you say in the first question but there is
the difference of interpretation which is almost impossible to explain
through correspondence. All human beings are like blind men but all
the devotees of truth are partially right in the same way that the seven
blind men were right on their part in giving varying descriptions of
the elephant on each touching different parts of its anatomy,
(2) Untouchability as practised today is found nowhere in the
Shastras. This is the impression I have gathered on hearing what many
Shastris say.
(3) Everything can be found in the Gita. According to the
change of place, time and circumstances, conduct as prescribed by the
principle can change but never the principle itself.
(4) This too is a fact that we have degenerated and continue to
do so because of failure in observing dharma.
(5) What you say is not true.2
(6) In no way do I regard myself as more learned and wiser than
anyone else.
(7) I have never taken such a vow3 as you think I have.
1
The addressee had asked whether Gandhiji had faith in the Vedas, whether he
accepted their traditional interpretation or he had his own original interpretation.
2
The addressee had stated that the Government was creating internal disunity
in the country by allowing Gandhiji, even while in jail, to work for the removal of
untouchability.
3
Of winning swaraj within a year or removing untouchability within six
months

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

51

(8) I do not appreciate the extreme rules of purification and so
on.
(9) The observation that things follow their natural bent should
be regarded as quite correct.
(10) Intermarriage and interdining have no connection with
untouchability. They are totally different; read what I have said on
this subject. Certain people, because of their hostile attitude, grossly
misinterpret it.
(11) The idea of founding a new religion has never occurred to
me even in a dream.
(12) It is perfectly right that the politics which does not serve to
protect dharma deserves to be wholly disregarded.
(13) I cannot either give up or take up fasting.
(14) What you say is almost correct.1
(15) I have firm faith in the worthiness of the object for which I
am thinking of a ‘referendum’.
(16) I hold courteous dialogue with whosoever wants to talk to
me, whether he is small or big. What more can I do?
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Hindi: S.N. 18956

76. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
January 18, 1933
When his attention was drawn to the report of an interview2 between him and
its correspondent appearing in a Madras paper Gandhiji said:

I had decided not to express any opinion on the proposal that
a committee should be appointed to gauge opinion in respect of
temple-entry, because I did not attach any importance to the proposal.
But now that mention has been made, I can unhesitatingly say that the
appointment of such a committee would be a most unfortunate thing.
1

The addressee had referred to the dehumanizing effects of the Western
industrial civilization.
2
Vide “Interview to “The Hindu” Correspondent”, 14-1-1933. For Gandhiji’s
contradiction, vide “Telegram to The Hindu”, 18-1-1933

52

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I do not believe that the Government can ever endorse such a
proposal.
The report stated that Mr. Gandhi said that he had decided to express his views
on the proposal and that if the Viceroy refused sanction to the introduction of Dr.
Subbaroyan’s Bill, he (Mr. Gandhi) would resist it with his life. While characterizing
the report as a misrepresentation of a conversation never intended for publication,
Mr. Gandhi said that he never told the correspondent that he had decided to express
his views on. the proposal for a committee. On the contrary, he had decided not to do
so.
Explaining why the appointment of a committee would be most unfortunate,
Mr. Gandhi said that Dr. Subbaroyan’s Bill was thoroughly inoffensive. It not only
did not seek interference with religion, but was intended to sound the religious
feelings of the people concerned. There was no question of sanctioning any law; the
only thing the Viceroy was requested to do was to give his formal consent to the
introduction of the Bill, which was the result of the unanimous vote of the Madras
Council.
Mr. Gandhi expressed surprise regarding the second part of the interview
attributed to him, and said that he had no recollection whatsoever of having said that
if the Viceroy refused to sanction, he would resist it with his life. He had no such
settled plan before him, and if he had, he was not in the habit of making premature
announcements to the public and that, even before bringing such an important
decision to the notice of the authorities concerned. Indeed, he could say emphatically
that he himself did not know what he would do if permission was withheld.

But I know it to be a terrific ordeal for me, if the progress of
reform was interfered with by the refusal of sanction to the
introduction of a measure indispensable for the growth of religious
freedom.
The Hindu, 19-1-1933

77. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 19, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

This is just after the morning prayer Thursday. Vallabhbhai and
I are waiting for the hot water for honey.
I have your letter before me. Of course I wrote last week as
usual on Thursday after the morning prayer. If the letter was for any
reason detained by the Superintendent there, he would have at least
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

53

informed you of the fact so as to spare you the anxiety of imagining
all sorts of evil. I brought the matter to the notice of Major Bhandari
and he promised to inquire. The letter was duly posted at this end. It
may be, however, that the letter was withheld because, for the first time
so far as I can recall, I sent you with my letter, letters of welfare from
Madeleine Rolland, Andrews and copy of my letter to Madame
Rolland. I sent also a very beautiful picture-card containing the Virgin
and the divine babe. I should be surprised if the letter was withheld for
that reason and even then why the letter itself. I therefore imagine that
it has been waylaid during transit. Anyway I am inquiring at this end
and you may at yours. For me that card was the greatest treasure with
Aristarchi’s inscription at the back.
And from this incident learn the lesson that even if such a
mishap occurs again feel assured that I have written as usual even
though I may not have got your weekly message and that the mishap
must be due to causes beyond my control. If I got ill and could not
write or if I was prevented for any other cause, you should be duly
informed that no letter was sent during that week. In other words do
not imagine causes but wait patiently for the knowledge if it is to
come and in any case never imagine the worst. Since God is a God of
mercy, if we must imagine, it is best to imagine the best. Of course, a
votary of the Gita never imagines anything. Good and bad are after
all relative terms. He takes note of things as they happen and reacts
naturally to them, fulfilling his part as if propelled by the Great
Mechanic, even as a piece of machine in good order responds
automatically to the call of the machinist. It is the most difficult thing
for an intelligent being to be like a machine. And yet, if one is to
become a zero, that is precisely what one desiring perfection has to
become. The vital difference between the machine and the man is that
the machine is inert, the man is all life and consciously becomes like a
machine in the hands of the Master Mechanic. Krishna says in so
many words that God moves all beings as if they were parts of a
machine.1
You see I have written this with the right hand. I notice that the
left too requires rest from even the little writing it does. It is probable
that the pain in the elbows has something to do with outward fatigue
caused by writing or spinning or both. It has certainly not yielded to
the saltless, and how should it if the cause is not organic? It produces
1

54

Vide Bhagavad Gita, XVIII. 61,
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

immediate effect in you, because with you the cause is organic. I have
no rheumatism. If there was any, I should not fail to know it. Anyway
the saltless diet still continues. And I showed yesterday an increase of
one lb. It is therefore now 104 lb.
You should, if you can, discover the cause of your giddiness.
Have you discussed it with the medical officer there? You ought not
[to] feel giddy at the end of your walk. You should feel refreshed. It
is often a good thing to dash cold water on the face and even the head
before starting the walk and sip cold water during the walk on the
slightest warning of approaching giddiness. Even stopping for a
moment to take deep breath avoids it. These are all bits out of my own
experience.
I note what you say about your reading. The Mahabharat is a
good programme. You ought to be a good Hindi scholar when you
have finished reading the unabridged Hindi translation without
missing the meaning of a single word. That means a great feat. But I
know there is nothing that can defeat love.
If you are allowed to drop a postcard to acknowledge this and if
it is delivered on receipt, drop me a postcard.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6259. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9725

78. LETTER TO KALISHANKAR CHAKRAVARTI
January 19, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have gone through your printed letter very carefully. You
don’t expect me to argue out my position. My argument is to be
found in my writings. Therefore, to you I can only say I have been
endeavouring to follow the light that God gives me, and whatever I
have written at any time, I have believed and have meant fully. Where
you find contradictions in my writings, I find nothing but a due
fulfilment or elaboration of a previous position. But I am not so much
concerned with showing consistency in my writings as with stating that
I have given to the readers the truth as I have known it at the time of
writing. I however heartily endorse your fear that whatever I have said
believing it to be true may after all be found to have been a vast error.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

55

But I take comfort (very poor, you may say) in the thought that it is a
possibility common, without exception, to the whole of mankind. But
you will perhaps agree that so long as I do not see the error of my
ways myself I would be cowardly and disloyal to the truth I worship if
I fail to act up to my conviction.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K ALISHANKAR C HAKRAVARTI
JYOTI
C HITTAGONG
From a microfilm: S.N. 18971

79. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
January 19, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter of 14th instant. I had a prolonged
conversation with Syts. Deodhar and Vaze yesterday regarding the
English edition, and as a result 1 I have telegraphed to Amritlal
Thakkar to send Shastri2 at once if he could be spared. Vaze tells me
that Shastri is the fittest man for doing the editorial work. He himself
will help but cannot be completely identified with the paper. I can
appreciate his reason. But both told me that though Shastri had
applied to the Society for admission as a probationer, the Society
would have no objection to Shastri taking up the editorial
responsibility. Of course, so long as Mahadev and I have the time, the
columns will be filled by us, and Shastri will carry out instructions,
and in time to come write original articles himself.
I wonder when the Hindi edition will be out.3
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a copy: C.W. 7921. Courtesy: G. D. Birla. Also S.N. 18970

1
2
3

56

Harijan
R. V. Shastri
The first issue of Harijan Sevak appeared on February 23, 1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

80. LETTER TO AMULYA DHAN RAY
January 19, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I have read as you have about the movement
in Bengal for the revision of the Yeravda Pact. I can assure you that I
have found no reason whatsoever to revise my own attitude. You need
not be anxious, for I am convinced that that Pact cannot be revised
without the unanimous consent of all the parties concerned.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. AMULYA DHAN R AY ,

M. L. C.

JESSORE TOWN
BENGAL
From a microfilm: S.N. 18972

81. LETTER TO NARASIMHAN1
January 19, 1933
Oh yes, it is necessary for you to write to me, although P and L2
write to me. They cannot tell me what you can if you choose to write.
There is always an individuality about letters when they are written
with a will. You know or ought to know that letter writing is an art. It
can come to everyone who writes naturally and to the point. You
should try to acquire this art.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

82. LETTER TO KIKABHAI WAGHELA
January 19, 1933
BHAI KIKABHAI,

I got your letter. Please do not be impatient. I will do the best I
can. I did not wish to deceive people by using the word ‘Harijan,.
Since the word Dhed and others like that in common use are not
proper, I accepted the word ‘Harijan’ at the request of one or two
1
2

Son of C. Rajagopalachari
Papa and Lakshmi, daughters of C. Rajagopalachari

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

57

Antyaja friends. You may rest assured that I am ready to lay down my
life in order to wipe out this blot. Though the Harijans are despised
today, they will soon become respected.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 87

83. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
January 19, 1933
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,

Read the accompanying cutting carefully and then write to me
giving me your views. If we have made a mistake anywhere, we will
admit it. If the fast resulted in coercion on anybody but secured
justice, we need not think about the matter. But we should certainly
think if it has resulted in injustice. The article has had no effect on
me. Is this mere agitation or is there anything serious behind it? If it is
only agitation, what is the motive?
BAPU

[PS.]
I have just received your wire regarding Shastri. I shall await
your letter. I had sent the wire yesterday in the presence of Deodhar
and Vaze. The latter had offered volunteers on the understanding that
they would not participate directly.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1104

84. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
January 19, 1933
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,

After I had written a letter to you [today], I got your letter of the
16th. Hence this second letter.
I have already written to you regarding Ahmedabad. Our letters
crossed each other.
Karsandas had written to me about Gokhale’s death anniversary.
I do not at all wish to cheapen Gokhale’s name. The country is not
58

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ready yet to celebrate the 19th 1 in a manner befitting his greatness.
History will appreciate the purity of his character and the greatness of
his services. I don’t think they will be appreciated in our lifetime. I
don’t mind “Anti-untouchability Days’, being celebrated independently. This is my firm view. Don’t you think it is based on very good
reasons?
The Sangh has not yet reached its destination. On the contrary,
several swords are hanging over it. Rajaji, of course, is holding an
umbrella over it, but it is the Sangh’s lot to pass through an ordeal just
now. So what can an umbrella avail? However, you may consult
Harijan and other principal fighters. If they agree, you may proceed
further, otherwise bury Rajaji’s letter deep under the ground. I had
passed on to Ghanshyamdas the letter which I had received from him.
He is not particular about the name. If I wish, he would agree to
change it. Personally I do wish [that it should be]. But time is
all-powerful. He swallows our desires alive, like a snake and makes
even a Mahatma like me look an alpatma2. Hence I have held my
tongue. You have strong shoulders. If you wish, you may take up the
responsibility. As for the name the saying is, “With great love, we
name the child Hari, and it dies in infancy.” The Sangh will not
succeed or fail because of its name. It will be judged by its work. If it
works in the manner of the Yamaraj 3, I have no doubt that it will
swallow the demon of untouchability alive.
You are wrong. You yourself should have humorously
advertised the Holloway ointment. There are persons who will bear
witness to its efficacy. If you do not like doing it or have no time,
forget about it.
I have got some free time and so could indulge in this bit of
light talk.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1105

1
2
3

Gokhale died on February 19, 1915
Literally, ‘a little soul’
Lord of Death

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

59

85. LETTER TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
January 20, 1933
I have seen your statement convening a Conference of
sanatanists 1. I had purposely refrained from worrying you over the
question of temple-entry. Much as I stood in need of your invaluable
assistance, I knew that you were preoccupied with matters of the
highest moment, and I felt that the least I could do, as also the most
that was possible, was deliberately to forgo that assistance. Friends in
Kerala pressed me to ask you to go to their rescue. I refused to do so,
and I warned them against troubling you. But now I see that you have
yourself taken the initiative and a tremendous responsibility. I hope
and pray that great good will come out of the Conference.
I wish that it had been possible for us to meet before the
Conference, or that we had exchanged ideas before you propounded
your suggestions about temple-entry. I feel, however, that I should
submit to you my own position.
If the Bombay Meeting, during and immediately after the fast
week2, that passed the resolution was representative of Hindu India, it
is up to every Hindu to make good that resolution in its fulness. That
resolution, as you know, has definite reference to temple-entry. It
prescribes no conditions. The whole trend of the resolution is that
temple-entry and the use of public institutions by Harijans on the
same terms as the other Hindus is a debt long overdue by caste
Hindus. I feel that it would be wrong, if not a manifest breach of faith,
to import any conditions specially applicable to Harijans. Naturally,
Harijans would be expected to conform to the conditions that are
implied in Hinduism and have to be observed by everyone who enters
temples. But that is a different thing from laying down special
conditions to be observed by Harijans by way of penance. Most of the
things that are included in your suggestions can be enunciated in a
different and perfectly harmless manner, that is to say, by saying that
it is the right of Harijans to enter all public temples under the same
conditions that are applicable to all Hindus, irrespective of their caste
or status, that is to say, (here may be described these general
1
At Ahmedabad on January 25. For Madan Mohan Malaviya’s statement, Did;
“Statement by Madan Mohan Malaviya”, 19-1-1933
2
From September 20 to 26, 1932

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

conditions, such as, daily bath, recitation of Dwadash1 or other
mantras, abstention from carrion or beef, intoxicating drinks, if the
latter abstention is enjoined in any of the current Smritis and Puranas).
From all the discussions that I had with the Shastris who favour
the present movement and who are hostile to it, I have gathered that
there is no warrant whatsoever for untouchability as we now know it.
There is perfect confusion as to whom, of all the people classified as
untouchables in the census books, the verses oft-quoted apply.
Untouchability by birth seems to be utterly non-existent. There is no
proof whatsoever to show that any single one of the untouchables so
classed is the progeny of a Brahmin woman through a Shudra man or
that he is a descendant of such a union. I would, therefore, beg of you
not to surrender on the matter of principle. I would far rather that the
reformers were left to plough the lonely furrow than that they should
be called upon to lend themselves to an unworthy surrender. The
surrender, in my opinion, of the highest type I have suggested in my
compromise proposal, where the most delicate susceptibilities of a
minority, however small it may be, have been taken into consideration.
Even that has cost me much criticism, but I am unaffected by it,
because, in my opinion, it is perfectly honourable and satisfies all
sincere and religious-minded reformers and dissenters.
If I am obscure, you will, I know and hope, use the wire freely.
I am most anxious that God may make you the instrument of
purifying Hinduism and keeping faith with the Harijans.
Harijan, 18-2-1933 Also C.W. 7922a. Courtesy: G. D. Birla.

86. LETTER TO S. SALIVATI
January 20, 1933
MY DEAR SALIVATI,

I had your telegram and your letter2, for which I thank you.
I think that your letter seems completely exonerative. But I
would have preferred to have seen the copy of your original despatch.
In any case, I never questioned the goodness of your motive.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18978
1
2

Dated January 18, explaining how his original despatch was mutilated in
transmission
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

61

87. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
January 20, 1933
DEAR SATISBABOO,

Have you at all interested yourself in the opposition that is being
raised in Bengal against the Yeravda Pact, and can you tell me what is
at the back of it?
I hope you received my previous letter and that you are keeping
well.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18980

88. LETTER TO S. G. VAZE
January 20, 1933
MY DEAR VAZE,

I have a telegram from Sjt. Thakkar telling me that Shastri is not
available yet for two weeks. He is following up his wire with a letter
which will give me more information.
I have the estimate for which many thanks.
Tell me, if you can, what preliminaries have to be gone through
before the paper can be brought out, and what notice will the Arya
Bhushan Press require to bring out the first issue. Could you let me
have a copy of the latest Press Act? Do you get the permission at once
and for the asking for the publication of a non-political paper? Is the
filing of a security a sine qua non? If it is, what form does the security
take? Besides the names of the printer and the publisher, is it
necessary to announce the name of the editor, and if it is, is he to file a
declaration?
In the estimate before me, the cost of wrappers has not been
given. Is the Reay Paper Mill situated in Poona? Is this Padamjee’s
Mill? Padamjee has always supplied me with paper for Young India
and Navajivan. Has the Arya Bhushan Press Gujarati type?
Will you also prepare for me an estimate giving me the cost of
the staff and other incidental expenses?
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18981

62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

89. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
January 20, 1933
DEAR MOTI BABOO,

I have your telegram about Malaviyaji’s Conference. I am not
so enthusiastic as you are. Let’s however wait, watch and pray.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18982

90. LETTER TO RAMANANDA CHATTERJEE
January 20, 1933
DEAR RAMANAND BABOO1 ,

This letter is not for publication.
This sudden opposition in Bengal against the Yeravda Pact
comes upon me as a painful surprise. The Secretary of the British
Indian Association has sent me the text of the Resolution in which,
among other things, an appeal is made to me to assist in revising the
Pact in so far as Bengal is concerned.2 I have refrained from taking
any part in the public discussion of the question, because I do not
want to make confusion worse confounded, or to give an opinion on a
matter on which I am not sufficiently informed. I therefore seek your
assistance and guidance in enabling me to form a judgement. Two
Harijan friends from Bengal, dreading that I might weaken, have
asked me what I think about the opposition, and I have told them that
I have not altered my opinion and that the Pact could not be changed
without the unanimous consent of all the parties concerned.
My own position is that Harijans cannot be given too much by
caste Hindus. It is my confirmed opinion that if all the seats available
to Hindus were taken by Harijans and other depressed classes, the
so-called superior castes will not only lose nothing, but will gain by
the sacrifice, if such it may be called.
Taking this into consideration, please tell me whether you share
the views of the opposition, and if you do, on what grounds, and why
1
2

Editor, Modern Review
Vide “Letter to British Indian Association”, 18-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

63

those grounds were not at least urged at the Conference in Bombay by
any one of the Bengal representatives.
You hardly need my assurance that I would be grateful to you
for your frank opinion, even though it may be against the Pact. I
have no other end in life to serve but that of truth. It is therefore never
too late for me to mend an error, of which the conviction has gone
home to me.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18983

91. LETTER TO V. M. NAWLE
January 20, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of 17th instant. I never had your letter
regarding Sjt. Vaidya’s letter nor Mr. Seymer Stone’s. If you have
kept a copy, please let me have it, as also your explanation about Sjt.
Vaidya.
It is a most difficult thing for me to spare you one hour just
now. You should first reduce to writing exactly what your formula1 is.
It does not matter whether your English is good or bad. You may
even write to me in Marathi. I shall have no difficulty in following it,
if the writing is legible.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18983a

92. LETTER TO L. R. PANGARKAR
January 20, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. You have started with an error and
ended with an error. I have gathered round me no one but God. I
would like you to name those whom you have in mind. Who do you
think could be with me fifty years ago, when the truth first dawned on
me that untouchability as practised today is a sin, and do you know
1

A proposal, described by the addressee as “new and unique path,, to
temple-entry; vide also “Letter to V. M. Nawle”, 12-1-1933

64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that at that age I was forlorn unlike all the other school boys?
What authority have you to say that 90% caste Hindus are
against temple-entry, and supposing that they are, and supposing
further that they are actually in error, why should it be suicidal for me
to fight that error even though I was alone?
The untouchability question was taken up by the Congress in
1920 as an integral part of its programme. I have no knowledge that
from that day onward the Congress began to dwindle down in popular
favour.
I claim to know something of the saints of Maharashtra whom
you have named. They have taught me a lesson quite different from
the one you have learnt. This is no new experience. People learn from
the Gods not what the latter would teach them but what they want to
learn. If you are really an admirer of my work, you will at least do me
the favour of studying what I am doing before judging me, and if you
will do so, you will soon discover that I am out not to destroy
varnashramadharma, but to destroy the excess of it which is the
present-day untouchability, so that varnashramadharma may be
revived in all its purity.
Yours sincerely,

SJT. L. R. PANGARKAR
NASIK CITY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20061

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

65

93. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
January 20, 1933
DEAR MR. JAYAKAR,

From all the accounts that I have received, I understand that you
have returned this time with very great benefit to your health. I hope
that the news I have received is quite correct.
The purpose, however, of writing to you is to ask you to guide
me in the matter of the all-India Bill about untouchability. I hope you
have read my statement on it. I would appreciate your opinion about
it. What I would like you specially to apply your mind to are the
following points:
1. Is the Bill itself good for the purpose intended?
2. Is my argument about it correct?
3. What are the prospects of its passing?
4. Supposing that the opinion outside the Assembly is
overwhelmingly in its favour, what should be done to ensure its safe
passage through the Assembly?
If in this matter you think that you should discuss the whole
question with me before you can usefully guide me, and if you can
spare the time, do please come. You perhaps know that in this matter
you do not need to ask for any permission.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20106

94. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
January 20, 1933
CHI. KAKA,

I got your two letters. I had been waiting to hear from you.
Complete the dental treatment. I am glad that you try to reassure me
regarding Prabhudas. In fact I do wish my mind to be at rest in the
matter. What is the doctor’s explanation about the regular bleeding
from the gums? or is it that a dentist cannot know that? Ask Talwalkar
or Kanuga if they can explain. I saw Rohit. He must have reached
Bombay now and will be under Dr. Deshmukh’s treatment. See him.
66

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I know Rajbhoj very little and have not been able to form any
opinion about him. We should ask some Maharashtrian friend who
knows him.
Now about the problem of freedom for Harijans to enter
temples. We had a full discussion on the subject of cooked food and I
had expressed my firm opinion that this was not at all a suitable time
to raise the issue. Nobody has so far considered it to be a
stumbling-block nor is there any proposal that Harijans should make
food offerings at all in the temples. Your suggestions can be
implemented when the issue is raised.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9491. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

95. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI A. MEHTA
January 20, 1933
BHAI BHAGWANJI,

You are a pessimist and an atheist. I am a great optimist and a
devotee of God. I, therefore, see no possibility of our agreeing about
anything. Both of us, therefore, should go our different ways and
learn in the school of experience. He who survives will know the truth
a little.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N, 5817

96. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
January 20, 1933
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

You must have got the wire I sent about you. I sent a letter1 too.
Your mind must not waver. Call it my order or my wish, doing or not
doing what I have said is totally in your hands. You will give up all
worry if you follow what I say. May God grant you recovery and
peace.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 273
1

Vide “Letter to aAmtussalaam”, 18-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

67

97. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 20, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

How do you find Kanhaiyalal? Has he acquired sufficient
proficiency in khadi work? Is he hard-working? Is he careful in his
work? If he has the necessary qualities, it should not be difficult to
find suitable work for him.
I hope you remember about the leather for repairing soles of
sandals. . I don’t need it immediately, of course. Send it with
somebody who may be coming this way.
I suppose you have ascertained Radha’s wish. Is Prema calm?
Does she do her work? Does she take care of her health? Sitla Sahai
wrote to me saying that he had requested you to send Rs. 30 or 35 to
enable him to take Sarojinidevi and Padma to Dehradun. I have not
replied to him. You may do what seems proper to you.
BAPU

[PS.]
You will find with this letters for Keshu, Amtussalaam,
Kanhaiyalal and Santok. Read all the letters except the one to
Amtussalaam.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also Bapuna Patro-9: Shri
Narandas Gandhine, Pt. II, p. 18

98. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
January 21, 1933
MY DEAR MARY,

I have got the Little Plays at last. Alas! What shall I do with all
the literature that is pouring in on me? There are many books I would
love to read. But where is the time?
Love.
BAPU
MISS MARY BARR
C|O MISS MINNS
MEDICAL SCHOOL HOSPITAL
VELLORE
From a photostat: G.N. 5990. Also C.W. 3315. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

68

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

99. LETTER TO A. RANGASWAMI IYENGAR
January 21, 1933
MY DEAR RANGASWAMI,

I have your letter. You have made all the amends that it was
possible for you to make.1 From Salivati’s letter of yesterday received
by me I thought that he had done likewise, but now I see that the fault
seems to have been entirely his. His motives was no doubt good, but
his judgement wholly bad, but before I can give my final opinion, I
would like you to send me his despatch as it was received by you. In
his letter of yesterday, which I enclose herewith, as you can see he
protests innocence and if his despatch was as he describes it to be, I
fancy that he stands exonerated. So far as my own memory is
concerned, it is not at all at fault, and Mahadev, who is ever vigilant,
and aspires to be another Boswell, has notes of my conversation2 with
Salivati which confirm me and in no way support him if he reported
me as he appears to have done according to The Hindu of the 16th.
The unfortunate report came at such an awkward time when the
slightest error on my part could have undone a structure that is being
built up with patient toil and most delicate care. Happily, the A. P.
interview3 I really gave most reluctantly, both out of my regard for
you and solicitude for Salivati, and your prompt publication of my
telegram averted what might have proved a dangerous situation. The
only reason now for my pursuing the subject is in order that no
injustice may be done to Salivati.4
Yours sincerely,

SJT. A. RANGASWAMI IYENGAR
EDITOR, “THE HINDU”
MADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 18987
1

Vide “Telegram to “The Hindu”, 18-1-1933
In his Diary Mahadev Desai recorded Gandhiji having said: “They know my
views. They will not do anything without full deliberation. And as for the future I am
simply jealous of my power, and will not fritter it away. There are so many things
which are likely to happen in which I am interested. But why should I anticipate? God
will give me the strength to deal with them as they arise.” (Mahadevbhaini Diary,)
3
Vide “Interview to Associated Press”, 18-1-1933
4
The addressee in his reply stated: “It was a painful shock to me to receive your
message regarding Salivati’s message which we edited and published in our issue on
Monday. I may inform you at once that the message itself was carefully edited in the
office and there is no question of any mutilation or error in transmission. I do not
know what to conclude of the action of Salivati in putting through a message of this
character in spite of your specific instructions and which, as you say, so grossly
misrepresents whatever you may have said in private conversation . . .”
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

69

100. LETTER TO K. V. SESHA AIYANGAR
January 21, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have been glancing through the numbers of the Bharat
Dharma and the pamphlets you have kindly sent. The precedents of
prayopavesan1 you have collected have proved useful to me.2
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K. V. S ESHA AIYANGAR
23 NADU S TREET
MYLAPORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 18988

101. LETTER TO BHAGWANDAS
January 21, 1933
DEAR BABOO BHAGWANDAS,

I enclose herewith a Hindi translation of Sjt. C. V. Vaidya’s
contribution, which is in Marathi, and a copy of Shridhar Shastri
Pathak’s which is in Hindi.
Both the translations are likely to contain grammatical errors,
which you will please have corrected.
The translation of Sjt. C. V. Vaidya’s contribution was done by
Sjt. Mahadev.
When these are published, will you kindly send me ten copies of
that supplement and ten of the first supplement?
Please tell Sri Prakasa to write to me.
Here are the promised lines for the Aaj.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18990

1
2

70

Fasting
Vide also ‘‘Letter to C. Y. Chintamani”, 11-1-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

102. LETTER TO KARNAD SADASHIVA RAO
January 21, 1933
MY DEAR SADASHIVA RAO,

I have your letter of 13th instant written on the train. Untruthful
propaganda and abuse are the lot generally of all reformers. Why
should we be any exception to the general rule? Those who can stand
such abuse and will not retaliate by matching two untruths against one
have not only nothing to fear but will actually gain in strength
through such unscrupulous opposition. Therefore, so long as
consciousness of the correctness of the campaign and the purity of the
means employed in conducting it continue, we may not become
agitated in any shape or form over such opposition. But we may be
sure of thriving on it. And when we have positive consciousness of the
truth in us and the strength derived from it, we need never be afraid of
being charged with weakness. He who for fear of appearing weak
hesitates to say or do the right thing becomes untruthful in the very
act, and therefore it may be said of him that he never had
consciousness of the truth in him.
I read through the questions you left with me. I have not dealt
with them because you will find that every one of the points is amply
covered in the statements already made by me. I wonder if you have
seen my letter1 to the Editor of the Justice published on the day of its
expiry.
There now remains your question about the conduct of
Congressmen in connection with the provincial and district branches
of the Servants of Untouchables Society. They should be identified
with activities of these organizations only in so far as their services are
wanted and no further, even though the work may appear to them to
be languishing. In a service that may take in the activity of as many
true servants who will offer their services, one need not belong to or
work through an organization. Even a cup of water lovingly handed
to a Harijan, giving or procuring medical aid for an ailing Harijan,
giving shelter to a shelterless Harijan, and innumerable such individual
1

Vide “Letter to T. A. V. Nathan”, 11-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

71

acts are a solid contribution to the removal of untouchability.
Therefore the embarrassing position that you picture need never arise.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18989

103. LETTER TO K. RANGACHARYULU
January 21, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. When there is opposition of the kind you
mention, workers should abstain.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K. R ANGACHARYULU
TUNI
From a microfilm: S.N. 18992

104. LETTER TO A. D. APPADURAI
January 21, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. In my opinion, khaddar has virtues which
nothing else has. Khaddar means help to the most needy, and amongst
them are to be counted thousands of Harijans, for their women eke
out a living by spinning and several thousands of Harijans are weavers
of nothing but khaddar.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. A. D. APPADURAI
S T. J OHN ’S C OLLEGE
P ALAMCOTTAH
(TINNEVELLY DIST.)
From a microfilm: S.N. 18993

72

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

105. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
January 21, 1933
MY DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

Your letter of the 18th instant surprises me. I never asked the
Bombay Board1 to make an advance payment of Rs. 500 on account
of the Central Board, but I asked them, if they would, to pay Rs. 500
to Poona on account of the expenses that Poona had to incur because
of my activities being directed from Poona. If I had intended the
Central Board to pay, I would have approached the Central Board
myself without the slightest hesitation. I asked the Bombay Board
because of its being well able to bear these expenses, Poona being
next door to it. You need not therefore refund the amount asked of
you, but refer them to me.
As for the 5000 copies of my statements 2, I am not aware that
I asked them to print them. There certainly was some conversation
about a reprint of my statements in pamphlet form, but I cannot now
recall whether I talked about it to Seth Mathuradass, or Sjt. J. K.
Mehta, or Pyarelal or Chandrashankar. As a matter of fact, I warned
them against incurring the expense, as I had the impression that the
Ajmer people were reprinting them and therefore asked them to
enquire before embarking upon this expense. But there never was the
slightest intention on my part that the Central Board should be called
upon to bear these expenses, and my own opinion is, as it always has
been, that propaganda work should be more or less self-supporting.
Therefore, I should consider it bad management if the sale of 5000
copies of my statements did not cover even the printing expenses. You
should refer the Bombay Board to me about this item also.
Sjt. G. K. Devdhar’s letter to you is quite in order. When
Haribhau asked me about the matter I agreed with him and he was the
bearer of G. K. Devdhar’s message that they should have Rs. 500 over
and above the grant they would receive from the C:entral Board, and I
told him to tell Devdhar that I would endeavour to secure that amount
either from the Central Board or the Bombay Board. But I first chose
to write to the Bombay Board for the reason I have already stated, and
1
2

Of the All-India Harijan Sevak Sangh
On the question of untouchability

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

73

I was glad that promptly and without demur they sent a cheque for
Rs. 500. Had they told me that it was on account of the Central Board,
I would have asked Haribhau to return the cheque.
I am sending a copy of this letter to the Bombay Board for their
information.
I am sending you a copy of my letter to the Bombay Board.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18994

106. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL K. MEHTA
January 21, 1933
MY DEAR JAISUKHLAL,

I enclose herewith a copy of my letter 1 to Thakkar Bapa which
speaks for itself.
How did you gain the impression that I had authorized
you to debit the Central Board with the two items referred to
in my letter? If I had so intended, according to my wont, I would have
made it quite clear to you. Indeed, I would have approached the
Central Board myself for sanction, as I have done about various
matters.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18995

107. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
January 21, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter. I do not want you to come out with any
public statement on the Bengal question, as you have noticed I am not
making any public statement myself, and I have anticipated you by
copying you, that is, writing to Dr. Bidhan and Ramanand Baboo. I
am not writing to Sjt. J. C. Gupta, nor is it necessary for me to do so. I
might have met him, but I cannot say that I am even acquainted with
him.
Please do not wait for the revision of the pamphlet till the
1

74

Vide the preceding item
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

present copies are exhausted. You can do one or the other thing,
either issue a revised pamphlet suppressing the old copies, or paste the
full resolution onto the imperfect resolution in the existing copies, and
send a public circular to the effect that by an oversight an incomplete
resolution was printed in the pamphlet, giving the corrected full text.
I quite understand that you have to look after your own business
also, with more concentration today than before.
What is the hitch in getting Harijan Sevak out?
The news about your health is disturbing. Why not have the
necessary operation, if a reliable doctor advises it? I have learnt by
experience that even dietetics and fasts have their limitations. They do
not always answer. And whatever rest is necessary, you ought to
impose on yourself. Dilatoriness in these matters should be regarded
as sinful.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a copy: C.W. 7922. Courtesy: G. D. Birla. Also S.N. 18991

108. LETTER TO RUKMINIDEVI AND BENARSILAL
BAZAJ
January 21, 1933
CHI. RUKMINI,

I got your letter. Your handwriting seems to be getting worse
and worse. That will never do. Even from her sick-bed, whenever
Radha writes a letter she writes it in beautiful handwriting which looks
like printed type. Surely you are not incapable of writing like that?
As for the contents of the letter, though none of us could observe it
Chhaganlal discovered that you had tried this time to introduce some
colour in it, but the colour was so faint that six out of eight eyes could
not observe it. As he is taking down this letter, Mahadev tells me that
he also had observed it. You may get out of this what comfort you
wish to. You should know from this with what attention even a letter of
ten lines from you is being read here.
CHI. BENARSILAL,

I will not forget now. You are certainly a ‘lal’1.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9152
1

Literally, ‘precious stone’

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

75

109. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 21, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I send with this a letter addressed to Liladhar. It seems to have
been sent to me through mistake. Or is it possible that Liladhar sent it
for me to read? Ask him. If he accepts the letter, give it to him, or do
what seems best to you.
The other letter is from Ramji. It is rather long. I have
received many other letters like this, but I felt like sending this
to you. Are his present earnings only as much as he mentions?
Calm him down a little if you can. I can’t believe that Mathuradas
would tell a lie. We ought not to get angry with him for writing what
he has done, but should learn from it whatever may be worth learning.
A letter for Ramji is enclosed. Give it to him after reading it. I
hope you got the letters posted yesterday.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

110. LETTER TO VITHAL L. PHADKE
January 21, 1933
CHI. MAMA,

Narandas informs me that the yarn spun in Visapur has been
woven into cloth. The khadi will soon be in my hands. I have received
plenty of other khadi like that. The friends in Dum Dum Jail have
been released today. They also have sent a dhoti which they had got
woven in the jail itself [from yarn spun by themselves]. When all this
stock of khadi is exhausted, I will ask you to send the khadi woven
from your yarn. Write to me sometimes.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9645

76

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

111. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

January 21, 1933
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

Your letter has reached me.
If you have found out how those signatures were taken and who
is behind it, write to me. This thing does not frighten me. In my view,
all the dirt is coming to the surface. Ultimately, they themselves will
regret it. It is surprising that persons like Girijashanker have joined
hands with them.
I have been able to complete today the article I had to write.
Now I shall write for Harijan. Now that I have started it, it will
continue. If you do not like this article, reject it and put it aside.
Should it not be published by the Gujarat Mandal? Anyway, consider
and do what is proper.
If you would want me to write on some other subsidiary
question let me know.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Let me know the date of receipt of this letter.
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32732

112. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
January 21, 1933
Referring to the Delhi message published this morning, in which probable
difficulties in the way of the Government according sanction to the Temple-entry
Bills were anticipated, Gandhiji observed:

If the report is an intelligent anticipation of the forthcoming
Viceregal decision I can only say it will be a tragedy. I emphatically
repudiate the suggestion that there is any political objective behind
these measures. If court decisions had not hardened a doubtful
custom into law, no legislation would probably be required. I would
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

77

myself regard State interference in religious matters as an intolerable
nuisance. But, here, legislation becomes an imperative necessity in
order to remove the legal obstruction and, based as it will be on
popular will so far as I can see, there can be no question of a clash
between parties representing rival opinions.
It has been suggested that one of the reasons for withholding
sanction is likely to be that there has been no demand on the part of
Harijans for legislation to remove their social disabilities. But, I do
know that Dr. Ambedkar’s memorandum bristles with suggestions for
legislation regarding all sorts of social disabilities. Yet, I hope nobody
wants a hurricane agitation on behalf of Harijans before the social and
religious yoke is removed from off their necks. Furthermore, I make
bold to claim, if there has not been a loud demand by Harijans for
temple-entry, I am responsible for it, because I have been advising
them not to enter the agitation on a large scale, whilst caste Hindus are
themselves making Herculean efforts to implement the Bombay
Resolution of September last, which pledges caste Hindus to opening
public temples, among other things, to Harijans.
In conclusion, I would only repeat that the refusal to sanction
the introduction of a measure demanded by caste Hindu opinion
would obstruct the progress of reform, whose advisability no lover of
religious freedom has questioned.
Mr. Gandhi has declined to comment on the suggestion that the Government
might decide in favour of a single Central legislation, saying that he would like to
have more details regarding this proposal.

The Hindu, 23-1-1933

113. LETTER TO RATILAL SHETH
January 22, 1933
1

BHAI RATUBHAI ,

I hope you got my letter. Please try to do your best to keep the
Doctor’s2 nest intact. At present things seem to be out of control.
When somebody goes back on his word, I feel helpless.
1

Father-in-law of Chhaganlal Mehta, Dr. Pranjivan Mehta’s eldest son
Dr. Pranjivan Mehta, who died in Rangoon on August 3, 1932. As there was
dispute between his sons on the question of property, Gandhiji was keen that the
matter should be settled amicably. Vide
2

78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As if this worry were not enough, I got a wire from Chhaganlal
regarding Padma1. And now I have received one from Lilavati2. They
ask for my blessings. How can I give them when I have never seen or
known Padma or the bridegroom? I understand that you also wish that
this marriage should take place soon. Please help me. Leave me out of
this, and do what you think is for their good. If you had not asked me
about the matter and if Maganlal 3 had not written to me about it I
would have had no occasion at all to give advice. What right had I to
give any? When all of you seek my advice, looking upon me as your
well-wisher, I think it my duty to give whatever advice may seem right
to me. I know the limits of one’s relations with persons with whom
one has no blood relation.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7171

114. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI N. PATEL
January 22, 1933
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

I got your letter of the 20th. You may fix the day with me in
advance and come, with or without Lalita 4. You can write to me
anything you wish to in this matter. I did not get your previous letters.
If I had received them, I would not have left them unanswered.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8998

115. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 22, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I can’t understand how you received on the same day the letters
handed over by me on different days. I will inquire of the authorities.
Henceforth, whenever you receive a letter from me mention in your
1
2
3
4

Dr. Mehta’s grand-daughter
Wife of Chhaganlal Mehta
Dr. Mehta’s youngest son who was studying in England
Addressee’s sister

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

79

next letter the date on which it was posted, the date on the letter itself
and the date on which you received it. If you let me know every time
these dates as you have done this time, I can ask the authorities here to
be more alert.
I got [today] the letters posted by you on the 20th. The letters
posted on the 19th were received yesterday.
I am convinced that we shall gain nothing from Krishnamaiyadevi’s connection with the Ashram. If it seems proper to you, you
may fix a monthly allowance to be paid to her for some time. During
that period, Mahavir should secure a job. The mother and the
daughters also should work. I would have no objection to their being
paid Rs. 50 a month for four months plus railway fare from
Ahmedabad to the place where they decide to go and live. These are
my personal views. If, however, all of you there have discussed the
matter and come to some other decision, you should abide by it and
implement it. I still advise you to write to the persons who have lent
them money. We shall thereby know, we ought to know, what the facts
are.
You may derive what consolation you can from the fact that
. . .1 has harassed me more than he has done you. And he has crossed
all bounds in his behaviour to me this time. All the same, we should
go on doing our duty by him. I may even have made a mistake in
permitting him to join the Ashram. I also doubt whether he really
suffers from tuberculosis. However, I never regret such mistakes.
Anybody who tries to follow ahimsa is bound to commit them. How
can we judge a man’s worth? Does he live in the Ashram now?
I hope Indira has recovered. How does Ramnik behave?
If Bhikhabhai lives in the Ashram, does he take his meals at
home or in the Ashram kitchen?
As for the land cess to be paid by the Ashram, you may do what
you think right. I am writing to Mama about khadi.2 I have more of it
here than I need.
There is no harm in Amtussalaam going to Delhi. She has faith
in Dr. Sharma and the latter is confident. Just now the weather in
Delhi will also be lovely. She seems to be very eager to come and see
me. Do what you think right about that.
1
2

80

The name has been omitted.
Vide “Letter to Vithal L. Phadke”, 21-1-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I got Prema’s letter. I, therefore, don’t write about the matter
here. You may know my views from the letter which I will write to her.
BAPU

[PS.]
In all there are 24 letters, stitched together.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

116. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
January 22, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

I was relieved to get your letter. Even worry is a child of
imagination. Why should I worry if I do not get a letter from you, and
why should I feel relieved on getting one? If you ask me this question,
I would not be able to reply to it, or would only say: ‘‘This is what
ignorant attachment means.”
A foolish letter from you would not upset me. If, however, I see
your error or shortcoming and do not point it out to you, I would not
be doing my duty as your well-wisher, co-worker, friend or father.
What I find strange is that you should get angry with me and sulk for
telling you something with a sincere motive, instead of thanking me
for it. Should we not thank a person for telling us frankly what he
feels? I learnt this in my very childhood. I do want you to learn it
from me. If my understanding of a situation is wrong, I deserve to be
pitied, and, if it is correct, I would be doing you good. In either case,
you gain something, in that you come to know better the person with
whom you have thrown in your lot. I want that all of you should know
my shortcomings and deficiencies and it is always my effort to show
them myself. I don’t wish to hide even my thoughts. I would even
write them down if I had the necessary gift. But I know I cannot do
that. I don’t think there can be any power in the world which can
penetrate all the secrets of thought. Probably we shall be able to know
them if somebody invents a machine to reveal them. Even while I was
writing these few sentences, my imagination traversed the universe
many times over.
You will admit that everybody cannot understand whether or not
he has the poison in his heart. Because one does not consciously wish
to nurse hatred, it does not mean that there is no hatred in one’s heart.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

81

It takes hold of us against our will. You will probably not admit that
anybody whose heart is full of anger is also full of hatred. If you do
not, then the word ‘‘poison” does not have the same meaning for
you and me. I remember that Ba often charged me with having poison
in my heart. How can I deny that charge? I may not have believed that
there was any poison in my words. But that is beside the point. What
should matter to me is that she felt the poison. Words which are
perfectly truthful and spoken with perfect love will never hurt
anybody. They may sometimes hurt one in the beginning, but such a
person himself will afterwards admit their beneficial effect on him.
I should like you not to be your own judge in all matters. It is
possible that others judge you better than you do yourself. I will now
end this tale of “poison”.
The question of your leaving the Ashram does not arise just
now. It will arise only after I am released and return to the Ashram to
stay there. That is how I read your letter. Morally speaking, it can
arise only then, if at all, for, so long as I cannot return to the Ashram
to stay in it, in the eyes of the inmates of the Ashram I will remain a
prisoner. All of you who decided to stay on when I bade good-bye to
the Ashram bound yourselves thereby to remain there till I returned.
If I am right in believing this, it is a waste of time and energy to think
now what should be done when I return to stay there.
The news you have given about happenings in the Ashram is
very useful to me. You should discuss the problem of Lakshmi with
Narandas, and if both of you decide that she should be married, it
should be done soon. Her restlessness also is likely to be the result of
an unconscious desire to get married. She is now of marriageable age,
and she does intend to marry. The desire to wait till I am released
should be regarded as nothing but ignorant attachment to me. You
should try and understand her heart properly, and not wait for her
emphatic consent. It seems to me desirable to take the advice of
Lakshmibehn and Durgabehn in this matter. They would understand
the problem better than you can. I understand from what you yourself
have said that you have no experience of how a girl feels when she
desires to marry. In other words, you have never felt the desire to
marry. I also know some other unmarried women who have never felt
it. Some other women remain unmarried with an effort of will. They
know what marriage means.
What advice should I give you about your health? Ghee seems
82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to be absolutely necessary for it. Whenever you leave the Ashram,
your weight increases, and as soon as you return to the Ashram you
lose the weight you had gained. You must get over this weakness. How
it can be done, you alone know. I hope you experience no difficulty
now in speaking.
I don’t wish to catch anybody in my snare. What would be my
plight if all people became my slaves? And, moreover, I am sure that
any such effort would be doomed to failure. Even if it is true that I try
to catch people in my snare, why should you lose confidence in
yourself for that reason? Your letters are sufficient evidence that you
are vigilant and not likely to succumb. It does seem, however, that you
are perpetually afraid that you will let yourself be caught. That is a
bad sign. Having resolved that you will not let yourself be caught, why
should you feel afraid? But may it also not be possible that you and I
do not mean the same thing by ‘‘getting caught”?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10323

117. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
January 22, 1933
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

Chit and chitta are two different words, but the latter is derived
from the former. Chit means consciousness, or it can be interpreted to
mean that which can have consciousness, namely, the atman. To say
that the chitta of one who has overcome attachment is always serene
and contented means that his atman is so. Chitta may also mean the
mind. The word should be interpreted according to the context in the
sentence or the verse in which it occurs. In trying to explain the
meaning of dhyanayoga, one frequently has to use the word yoga. It
should be remembered when doing so that yoga means skill in work
or action done without attachment.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 350a. Courtesy: Bhagwanji P. Pandya

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

83

118. LETTER TO NARMADABEHN RANA
January 22, 1933
CHI. NARMADA,

I got your letter. Slowly you will progress. Why should we feel
hurt if somebody speaks ill of us? Learn from someone the bhajan
“My detractor is my benefactor.” Its central idea is that anybody
who speaks ill of us serves us by doing so. Continue to write to me.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original; C.W. 2772. Courtesy: Ramnarayan N. Pathak

119. LETTER TO VIMALCHANDRA V. DESAI
January 22, 1933
CHI. NANU,

Since you have written your letter on khadi paper with red ink
and in your most careful handwriting, shouldn’t I also write the reply
on beautiful paper? How do you like this paper? And this
handwriting? Do you take plenty of exercise?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5762. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

120. LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
January 22, 1933
CHI. VALJI,

There is no harm in your having published Ishucharita1. The
people will certainly like it very much. The verse from Kabir also is
appropriate. Still, there is some incompleteness in your evaluation, but
it is not a serious defect. Only, one would expect more from you. I
have no doubt that you have given what you could. But I have no
doubt, either, that you can do better. We need not, however, worry
about that. I would be happy if I could give you more marks every
1

“Life of Jesus”. For Gandhiji’s criticism of the booklet, vide “Letter to Valji
G. Desai”, 19-10-1932

84

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

time. If your health improves, all your capacity will blossom forth.
For the present, let this remain my wish and hope. Send a few copies
to me—twenty-five. Don’t leave that place till you are quite well
again.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7446. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

121. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
January 22, 1933
BOYS AND GIRLS,

Just now please do not expect to get long letters from me.
Who cooked at Pujya Anasuyabehn’s? Did you behave politely
and courteously there? Did you keep on asking for food very often?
Did you clean the utensils yourselves? There is nothing to worry
about your eating bhajias1. But henceforward right at the beginning,
whenever you have to go anywhere, tell them clearly: ‘‘Please give us
this only and do not make that for us.”
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

122. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
January 22, 1933
CHI. SHARDA,

When a person wears khadi with an enlightened mind, he does it
for the sake of its simplicity, for the help it brings to the starving
people, for the purity it embodies. This knowledge calms down our
passions. Hence, I would say that khadi, when worn with such
awareness, helps brahmacharya. Do you get the point?
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9962. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

1

A fried and heavily spiced delicacy made of gram flour

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

85

123. LETTER TO GULAM RASUL QURESHI
January 22, 1933
CHI. QURESHI,

I hope you and the children are fully recovered now.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 10817. Courtesy: Gulam Rasul Qureshi

124. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
January 22, 1933
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

I have your letter. It would be a crime not to send you to
Delhi even after receiving Dr. Sharma’s letter. So you may
proceed direct for Delhi but see me on the way to the Ashram on your
return. You must learn to some extent the value of remaining quiet.
And remember that we profess to be poor. The poor remain content
by meeting their companions and relatives in the spirit only. Who
would provide them railway fare? Anyway, go to Delhi immediately,
get well and visit me on return. God will keep you safe. Keep writing
to me. Do not be anxious about the Harijan children;1 after all
everybody is in the care of God alone.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 274

1

The addressee was doing social work among Harijans at Vadaj, near Sabarmati
Ashram.

86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

125. DRAFT TELEGRAM TO R. V. SHASTRI
[On or after January 22, 1933]
LETTER1 .

YOUR
END

CERTAINLY

PROCEED

MADRAS

REACHING

HERE

MONTH .

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 19241

126. LETTER TO PUNJAB PROVINCIAL
STUDENTS’ UNION
January 23, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter enclosing a copy of the resolution of
your Union. I note what the resolution says about a distinct name. A
name is inevitable till there is a complete fusion. The only question
therefore is what name to distinguish the so-called untouchables by;
and ‘Harijans’ was the name suggested by some of them, and as it was
a name that exactly fitted the condition, I adopted it; for, those who
are forsaken by mankind become the chosen of God, and ‘Harijan’
literally means that.
I hope that this resolution by your Union is not the end of the
service to the cause, but merely a beginning and an earnest of solid
and constructive service yet to come.
Yours sincerely,

THE VICE-PRESIDENT
PUNJAB PROVINCIAL STUDENTS’ UNION
LAHORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 18996

1

Received on January 22, 1933. The addressee had consented to work for the
English edition of Harijan Sevak and sought Gandhiji’s permission to shift his
family to Madras before joining A. V. Thakkar at Delhi.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

87

127. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
January 23, 1933
SUJNA BHAI,

You have returned at the right time. I hope you have come back
with improved health. May I hope that your contribution to the
Harijan cause will surpass that of anybody else? You may make it in
your way, but that way should be such that the progress made by
others will seem insignificant in comparison. If you decide, I am sure
you will be able to do much. Do try. Pay immediate attention to the
problem of bham 1. It is necessary to introduce a great change in this
practice if we wish to make the Dheds and Chamars give up eating
carrion. All of us are well.
Vendemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5923

128. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
January 23, 1933
CHI. MANUDI,

I got your letter. You should not write in too small a hand, nor
should you write too fast. Each letter in a word should be distinct.
It is Ba’s love which makes her write that she would like you to
stay with her. But you may continue to live there and be happy. If
you keep good health and your mind is at peace, I shall be satisfied.
Write to Ba from time to time.
Serve your aunts.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 1519. Courtesy: Manubehn Mashruwala

1

Payment exacted from Harijans for the hide, flesh, etc., of the dead cattle
which they were obliged to remove

88

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

129. LETTER TO BALIBEHN M. ADALAJA
January 23, 1933
CHI. BALI,

Kamu1 writes and tells me that you had no time and that is why
you have not written to me. I don’t believe this. How can I believe that
you do not get time just to write one letter?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1520. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala

130. LETTER TO RANCHHODDAS PATWARI
January 23, 1933
RESPECTED RANCHHODBHAI,

I will not let you off easily now. You have said that you accept
everything else except opening of temples to Harijans. You may leave
me to strive for the cause of temple-entry, but the other things you
must do as a sacred duty. If you help, we can soon make the Harijans
give up eating carrion. All schools, hospitals, wells, and so on should
be thrown open completely. You yourself have said that if the
Harijans pray, bathe regularly and keep themselves clean, they will be
as good as we are. You should help in making them do all that. You
will then be welcome to abuse me as much as you wish to. Only help
me in my work. I hope you got my answers2 to your questions.
Pranams from

MOHANDAS
From Gujarati: C.W. 9222. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi

1
2

Kumibehn T. Maniar, addressee’s sister
Vide “Letter to Ranchhoddas Patwari”, 11-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

89

131. LETTER TO GORADIA
January 23, 1933
BHAI GORADIA,

Do Thakoresaheb1 and you contribute anything to Harijan
service? Perhaps you are afraid that the local subjects may be
offended if the temple is thrown open, but what about the bham?
What are the arrangements for the disposal of carcasses? Do
you charge the Dheds for clearing them? If you wish to stop them
from partaking of carrion, you ought to pay them for their services
and supervise the processing of carcasses. This would involve some
labour no doubt, but no loss. How are they treated in courts, and in
hospitals? Will you please give me an account of this?
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 81-2

132. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

January 23, 1933
CHI. SUMANGAL,

I have your letter after many weeks, nay, months.
It is only proper to utilize some time for improving your health.
I keep getting news of Kanta. Saroop gives me news of her, as
does Prabhavati. I have no doubt she has been putting her time to
good use.
If one gets food from outside after securing permission, for the
sake of one’s health, one is doing nothing wrong. But it is
praiseworthy if one is content with whatever food one gets inside and
refrains from asking for more. But he who cannot maintain his health
on the food he gets in prison, and has secured permission to obtain it
from outside and can easily have it, yet does not do so and so spoils
his health, is obstinate. Perhaps he could be considered a literalist.
1

90

Title of the head of a small principality
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I certainly do not think there is any harm in having a shikha1. It
is a time-honoured custom which the reformer may not try to change
and so run into trouble. You may not find a strong reason in support
of every custom, yet if it is popular and there is nothing morally
wrong in it, is deserves to be followed.2
The statement that “a few medicines are found to be effective
but they are well known” is not happily phrased. The meaning can be
made more explicit. Although one may not repose one’s faith in
allopathy, some allopathic medicines can certainly be used. One does
not have to go out and look for them. They are well-known
household remedies such as castor-oil, quinine, kariata, sonamukhi.
I have not come to any harm from fasting. Fasting may be
resorted to in old age. Then, a fast undertaken from spiritual motives
is not difficult to go through. Of course one does become emaciated
because there is not enough fat in the body.
You write in haste and therefore your letters are difficult to
decipher. If you write a little slowly they will be easier to read.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

133. LETTER TO PARAMANAND KAPADIA
January 23, 1933
BHAI PARAMANAND,

Bring along your friend and his wife on Saturday.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI P ARAMANAND KUNVERJI
164 M UMBADEVI
BOMBAY
From the Gujarati original: G. N. 11582
1
2

Tuft of hair on the crown of the head
This and the previous paragraph appear under “A Letter”, 23-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

91

134. A LETTER
January 23, 1933
If one gets food from outside after securing permission, for the
sake of one’s health, one is doing nothing wrong. But it is
praiseworthy if one is content with whatever food one gets inside and
refrains from asking for more. But he who cannot maintain his health
with the food he gets in prison, and has secured permission to obtain it
from outside and can easily have it, yet does not do so and so spoils
his health is obstinate. Perhaps he could be considered pedantic.
I certainly do not think there is any harm in wearing a shikha1.
It is a time-honoured custom which the reformer may not try to
change and so run into trouble. You may not find a strong reason in
support of every custom, yet if it is popular and there is nothing
morally wrong in it, it deserves to be followed.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 83

135. A LETTER
January 23, 1933
In order to control our passions we should turn our thoughts
inward. The basic formula for spiritual progress is self-surrender.
Spiritual progress is nothing but knowledge of the atman.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 82

136. A LETTER
January 23, 1933
The fast has in no way harmed my health. Even in old age a fast
can be undertaken and completed without any ill effects. Moreover a
fast undertaken with a spiritual motive is not difficult to go through.
The body will of course grow weak as it has less fat [in old age].
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 83
1

92

The tuft of hair on one’s head
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

137. LETTER TO S. J. SOMAVANSHI
January 23, 1933
BHAI SOMAVANSHI,

I read your loving letter from beginning to end. I have received
the books1 also. I also listened to the life story of the Maharaj. I have
read almost all the marked portions of the book. Both failed to
impress me. Chiefly because we find no basis for regarding the
so-called untouchables as untouchables; nor for the treatment meted
out to them.
How am I at fault? I have been saying for the last 45
years the very thing about the eradication of untouchability that
I say now. My views have been well known in India for more than
25 years. Now and then some opposition was certainly heard but I
incurred no one’s wrath. Now that I am ready to do penance for it I
am blamed. But the Shastras and the saints have preached the
necessity of tapascharya2 whenever dharma dwindles and this is what I
am attempting to do. There is no headstrongness about it. How can
that man be headstrong who is ever prepared to correct his errors?
By pointing out the omission on the part of saints to lay stress
on this particular problem you are doing them and me an injustice.
The saints do not try to remove all the evils, nor can they do so. They
simply disseminate dharma and in the process try to remove some
evil. Even the avatars are unable to destroy all evil; they perform their
deeds concentrating on the chief evil of their times.
An important feature of the non-violent spirit is that it always
keeps the popular will in view. The anti-untouchability movement
may also be taken as basically meant to test public will. The highest
religion is useless for those who are not prepared to live by it.
Compulsion has absolutely no place in the spirit of non-violence.
You are correct in suggesting that I should offer daily prayers to
God to show me the right path. I not only constantly do that but
believe that I take no action without His command; you may rest
assured on this.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a microfilm of the Hindi: S.N. 18997
1
2

Biographies of a Marathi saint
Self-suffering as moral discipline

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

93

138. A LETTER
January 23, 1933
Observing silence implies abstaining from talking, gestures, food
and drink, and closing one’s eyes and ears, i.e., remaining in seclusion
and losing oneself in thought. On the day of silence, one should
remember God. The purpose of silence is meditation.
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 82

139. LETTER TO BEGUM MOHAMMAD ALAM
January 23, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I got your letter. How great is God’s grace that Doctor Saheb
should recover so soon and the operation become unnecessary! I hope
that he will take complete rest for the present. Keep writing to me. Tell
Doctor Saheb that we all remember him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 27

140. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
January 23, 1933
DEAR DAUGHTER RAIHANA,

I have your letter. The meaning of tuk as given by you seems
correct. If I wait till I can write a good hand and commit not a single
error, I shall never be able to write in Urdu. If you send me by post
some extra time along with the Urdu lessons, you will find no
mistakes. My respects to Father and Mother. May I send a kiss for
you? But only on one condition; that you drive away the fever. Why
don’t you become perfectly well by taking a little more rest? There
are enough duties for you if you remain well. There is no lack of jobs
for those keen to serve.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: S.N. 9661

94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

141. STATEMENT ON VICEROY’S DECISION
January 24, 1933
Having read the Government decision on the two Bills1
about untouchability now before the country, I cannot help
expressing my regret on general grounds that the Government could
not see their way to allow both the Bills to be discussed by the
respective Legislatures and the country.
Dr. Subbaroyan’s Bill restricts itself to one particular issue of
temple-entry and that too in the Madras Presidency, and the opening
of each temple depends on the will of the majority of those entitled to
temple-entry. It therefore reduces the possibility of a clash between
one party and another party to a minimum and to a zero if the
reformers play the game, i.e., allow for the religious scruples even of a
microscopic minority as my compromise proposal does. But this was
not to be. From a strict sanatanist point, the Madras Bill was perhaps
the lesser of the two evils as they would put it. It was easier for a
reformer to cope with, and for me personally too as a fasting hostage,
for Viceregal sanction would have in all probability successfully
prevented a fast over Guruvayur. But the Government of India had
willed otherwise. I must try to trace the hand of God in it. He wants to
try me through and through. If He does, He will have to give me
adequate strength as He has always vouchsafed those who would
surrender themselves wholly to Him.
The all-India Bill is short and sweet, being of negative character
in one way. It gives no direct aid to the reformer. It merely refuses aid
to any and every individual sanatanist who would come to seek
assistance in the secular courts to impose his will on the whole Hindu
society and to enforce a custom which the latter may consider to be
repugnant to Hindu Shastras and the innate moral sense of man. It
abolishes legal untouchability, leaving the social and religious to its
fate. The sanction given to this Bill is an unintentional challenge to
Hinduism and the reformer. Hinduism will take care of itself if the
reformer will be true to himself. Thus considered, the Government of
India’s decision must be regarded as a godsend. It clears the issue. It
1

Vide footnote 3, “Letter to Ranchhoddas Patwari”, 11-1-1933. For Gandhiji’s
reaction to the announcement, vide “Talk witha M. G. Bhandari”a, 24-1-1933
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

95

makes it easy for India and the world to understand the tremendous
importance of the moral struggle now going on in India. It takes it at
one sweep to its natural platform to which it was timidly advancing.
As a life-long reformer and fighter, I must take up the challenge
in all humility, and so must every Hindu who was directly or indirectly
a party to the resolution1 adopted under the chairmanship of the
revered Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya. The resolution bears
repetition:
This Conference resolves that henceforth, amongst Hindus, no one
shall be regarded as ‘untouchable’ by reason of his birth, and that those who
have been so regarded hitherto will have the same rights as other Hindus in
regard to the use of public wells, public schools, public roads and all other
public institutions. These rights shall have statutory recognition at the first
opportunity, and shall be one of the earliest Acts of the swaraj Parliament, if it
shall not have received such recognition before that time.
It is further agreed that it shall be the duty of all Hindu leaders to secure,
by every legitimate and peaceful means, the early removal of all social
disabilities now imposed by custom upon the so-called untouchable classes
including the bar in respect of admission into temples.

Let the reader carefully note the words printed in italics. The
resolution contemplates, if at all possible, the removal of legal
untouchability even before the establishment of a swaraj Parliament.
The opportunity has now offered itself. No Hindu who is jealous of
the honour of Hinduism or the word given to Harijans dare let the
opportunity slip. Even the sanatanist, if he will read the all-India Bill,
as I do, may not resist it. For, has he not said to me, has he not said it
even in his writings, that he has no quarrel with political and civic
rights being given to Harijans on the same terms as caste Hindus? In
other words, he has no objection to Harijans being treated as equals
with the rest in the eye of the law. If he is not, in the eye of religion,
that is a matter for the sanatanist and his conscience. The law’s
assistance must not be summoned to aid him to enforce his conscience
against a fellow-being.
The sanatanist Shastris whom I had the pleasure of meeting had
been able only to cite me verses to the effect that if anyone is polluted
by the touch of an untouchable he has either to take a sip of water or
1

On September 25, 1932; vide also “Resolution ata the Hindu Leaders’
aConference, Bombay”, 25-9-1932

96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have a bath. There seems to be nowhere mention of punishment for
an untouchable entering a public place including a temple. And, in no
case, should the aid of secular law be summoned to punish an
untouchable guilty of mere infringement of a sacerdotal rule. The
present Bill rightly renders such an interference by law impossible.
The opening of temples to Harijans would, under the Bill, be
regulated by mutual adjustment. Where the opinion of the templegoing population is not ripe for reform, naturally the Harijans cannot
enter the temples. Where the opinion is ripe, the law cannot be
invoked by individuals to thwart the will of the majority. But whatever
the sanatanists may decide, the movement for temple-entry now
broadens from Guruvayur in the extreme south to Hardwar in the
north, and my fast, though it remains further postponed, depends not,
now, upon Guruvayur only but extends automatically to temples in
general. That is to say, the fast becomes dependent upon the actions
of reformers not regarding the Madras Bill which was to cover
Guruvayur only, but regarding the all-India Bill which covers all
temples including Guruvayur.
And so it has been throughout my life. One step has naturally
led me on to another, even despite myself. I was confining my
attention to the Madras Bill. It was enough for me. Even on Saturday
last, that is, the 21st January, when the Associated Press correspondent
asked my opinion of the Associated Press Delhi correspondent’s
forecast, I declined to commit myself to any opinion on the all-India
Bill as compared to the Madras Bill. 1 I was not prepared to face a
bigger and graver contingency. But now that it comes upon me as an
accomplished fact, I dare not flinch.
The Government pronouncement would have one to think that
the Bill will be one long-drawn-out agony, and may never become the
law of the land. They are right, from their standpoint, in being
over-cautious. But if Hindu conscience is really roused against
untouchability, as the latter is practised today, the Bill can become law
in no time. The Government cannot resist the unequivocal expression
of Hindu opinion in favour of it. Despite sanatanist opposition, my
belief is that a vast mass of Hindu opinion is against untouchability,
though it may not take energetic steps to remove it. It is that faith
which sustains me. No further ordinary propaganda will convince the
1

Vide “Interview to Associated Press”, 21-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

97

Hindu mind of the sense of wrong of untouchability if it is not
already convinced by years of work in that behalf. It requires then, as
it has done before now, the extraordinary propaganda of penance. It
may be that it needs the stimulus of a fast on the part of one who has
made his life one with them. If so, they shall have it. They must either
remove untouchability or remove me from their midst.
Let me proclaim it, for the thousandth time, that for me, as with
my co-workers, the removal of untouchability is an indispensable
religious need and the opening of temples to Harijans, being a pure
spiritual act, is an indispensable test of that removal. It is the one thing
that alone can give new life and new hope to Harijans, as no mere
economic uplift can do. Economic and all other uplift will follow
temple-entry as light follows dawn. The one single act of opening
temples to Harijans will purify Hinduism, and will open the hearts of
both caste Hindus and Harijans to receive new light.
The message of the temples will penetrate every Harijan hut; the
message of economic and educational uplift will touch only those to
whom it is personally brought. This proposition of mine can easily be
understood by those who, like me, believe in temples as an integral
part of Hinduism, as churches and mosques are of Christianity and
Islam. It is not necessary that every Harijan should at once enter the
temples. It is enough and necessary if he knows that he has acquired
that right. And in this religious conception of Hinduism fasts and the
like take their natural and necessary place. They are then, no more
coercion than any bona-fide cry of love of the Divine is.
The Hindu, 25-1-1933

98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

142. LETTER TO G. M. THENGE
January 24, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter.1 My statement2 has not the meaning that you
have assigned to it, as would be quite clear to you if you will read it as
a whole. I have considered myself to be incapable of coming to a
judgement one way or the other, if only because I have not all the data
for coming to a judgement. I have therefore stated in unequivocal
language that every Congressman has to decide for himself or herself,
taking stock of the circumstances over which they alone have control
and I have none, as also of their own individual obligations of which
they alone can have knowledge and I can have none.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. G. M. T HENGE
P AREKH STREET, G IRGAUM
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 18986

143. LETTER TO SUBRAHMANIA SHASTRI
January 24, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter enclosing your reply to Acharya
Dhruva’s opinion in Sanskrit about untouchability.
I do not remember having said whichever side stops
correspondence is to be considered to have accepted the other’s
position. In my opinion such a thing should not be regarded as
conclusive, because each party may exhaust all points of difference
1
The addressee had written: ‘‘In answer to those Congressmen who wish to
know whether they should prosecute the civil disobedience campaign or should take
an active interest in the campaign against untouchability, you have reminded them of
the celebrated English proverb: ‘Much wants more and loses all.’ I presume that you
intend thereby to convey that we have had enough of the civil disobedience
movement in the past and that we do not want it any longer, lest we stand to lose all
that we aspire for. . . .”
2
Dated January 7, 1933; vide “Statement to the Press”, 7-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

99

and may still maintain their respective positions. However, you will not
find me suddenly stopping the correspondence, because I want to get
all the wisdom and all the information that I can from everyone.
Coming to your reply or rejoinder as you call it, I shall leave
Acharya Dhruva to answer for himself, but you do not carry
conviction even to a layman like myself. You say that the word api 1
only denotes the unfitness of the Chandala and the height of the path
of devotion. Do you not see the inconsistency of your statement? If
the Chandala is unfit, there is no height (I suppose you mean
‘greatness’) about the path of devotion. The path of devotion is truly
great, because it brings peace and joy and salvation even to the
Chandala. Instances of the use of api by way of emphasis can surely
be multiplied.
In your second paragraph, emphasis is not on the fact that here
the Chandala was pious but that it was the Chandala who was
speaking. Most of the sanatanists who oppose temple-entry by
Harijans contend that no piety on the part of a Chandala would cure
him of his disability.
In the third clause, your admission that all life as atman is one
rules out the impassable barrier between touchables and untouchables.
The verse in question itself notes the differentiation between persons
and bodies and yet insists on equality of treatment.
I need not labour the rest of your replies except to say
that they are unconvincing to me. However, without my comments
on your reply, I am forwarding it to Acharya Dhruva, for his own
independent reply which I shall gladly send to you when it comes to
me.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 18999

1

100

“Also”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

144. LETTER TO G. RAMACHANDRA RAO
January 24, 1933
MY DEAR RAMACHANDRA RAO,

I have your postcard. I shall await further information from
you.
Yes, I am applying ghee religiously every day. I am sorry to
report to you that as yet there is no relief whatsoever. There is no
doubt about the ghee being cow’s milk ghee.
The addition of ‘if’ was intended for the sake of preserving
truth. However close I may be to a friend, in speaking to him I would
have to say to him not ‘‘since you are so and so”, but “if you are so
and so, you have no cause to be anxious”.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. G. RAMACHANDRA R AO
C/ O S ERVANTS OF INDIA S OCIETY
R OYAPETTAH, M ADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 19000

145. LETTER TO T. K. S. RAJAN
January 24, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. I do hope that students
will not be satisfied with merely having passed a resolution but that
they will engage in some concrete service of Harijans.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. T. K. S. R AJAN
51, I, AGRAHARAM
S ALEM
From a microfilm: S.N. 19001

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

101

146. LETTER TO P. V. SUNDARAVARADULU
January 24, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. You have given me interesting information.1
Can you supplement it by giving me the exact figures of those who
kill cows and buffaloes for sacrifice? What is their caste name? Are
there any touchable castes that eat beef? I understand that there are
numberless caste men in Andhradesh who eat pork.
I cannot think of any special message to be given to the ryots of
Andhra villages. The statements that I issue from time to time are as
much addressed to them as to the rest of the Hindus all over the
country.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P. V. S UNDARAVARADULU
S ECRETARY
ANDHRA P ROVINCIAL R YOTS’ ASSOCIATION
KILPAUK , M ADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 19002

147. LETTER TO D. G. VELANKAR
January 24, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. You can come and bring your two or three
friends at 2 p.m. on 27th instant. I hope 30 minutes will be enough
for you.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. D. G. VELANKAR
866 S ADASHIV P ETH
P OONA C ITY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20083
1

The addressee had written: ‘‘Their [ryots’] contention is that the Harijans eat
cow, mutton, and are most indecent in their habits. . . . They [Harijans] sacrifice cows
and buffaloes to their goddesses in public and offer toddy on such occasions. . . I
therefore request you to turn your attention to . . . purifying the Harijans” (S.N.
18984).

102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

148. LETTER TO R. N. BHIDE
January 24, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your pathetic letter. Do not mix up two questions, the fast
and temple-entry. Dismiss the fast from your mind, because it is a
personal matter and it may or may not come. Temple-entry is the
question. The economic and the educational questions are what the
adjectives imply. Temple-entry is a spiritual act, transforming the
whole society by one single act of admission. It will electrify into a
new life the whole of the Harijan population, and it will purify
Hinduism as no single act that I can think of can do. If you have the
Hindu religious instinct in you, you will not find it difficult to follow
my argument. If you do not possess a living faith in Hinduism or do
not consider temples an integral part of it, I have no effective
argument to meet your difficulty. On the contrary, I must then accept
a defeat.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R. N. BHIDE
D. B. H OSTEL
P ORT P UTTUR (S. K ANARA DT.)
From a microfilm: S.N. 20088

149. LETTER TO M. M. ANANTA RAU
January 24, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for all your letters and the great pains you have
been taking to instruct me and to supply me with the information I
have wanted. When I have studied all your letters I shall write to you if
necessary at length.
Though you have not replied to my criticism about your
letter-paper, you seem to have done better by acting upon a part
of my suggestion, namely, removing the portrait and the
surrounding letter-press; if the removal is an acknowledgement
of the correctness of my criticism, you will note that my criticism was
directed also against the ornamental border. Letter-paper, especially
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

103

for a religious agency, should, in my opinion, be free from all
ornamentation and contain only in just readable plain type the name
and address. The beautiful verse at the top and the “Om” can stand. I
have made bold to offer what may appear to be gratuitous criticism,
because you have been so prompt and diligent in your
correspondence. Though we may not agree finally in our conclusions,
I cannot fail to appreciate your courtesy and promptness.
Yours sincerely,

M. K.

GANDHI

S JT. M. M. A NANTA R AU
S ANATANA DHARMA KARYALAYA
40 ISWARDAS LALA S TREET
TRIPLICANE, M ADRAS
From a copy: C.W. 9571. Courtesy: Government of Mysore

150. LETTER TO DR. HIRALAL SHARMA
January 24, 1933
MY DEAR SHARMA,

Amtussalaam has forwarded your letter1 of the 15th instant to
me and I was glad to receive it. You have indeed fulfilled your
self-imposed vow, for the letter you have written to me is not for
yourself. I have already advised Amtussalaam to proceed to Delhi and
I hope that she will leave the Ashram at once, stay there till you can
discharge her fully cured and then return to the Ashram. I quite
appreciate your desire to fulfil your present obligations before you
come down to the Ashram.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. H. L. S HARMA
S UNRAY HOSPITAL
KAROLBAGH , D ELHI
Bapaki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh, p. 16

1

The addressee had stated that, leaving his in-door patients at Delhi, he did not
go out of station for any patient for more than a week.

104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

151. LETTER TO RADHAKRISHNA BAJAJ
January 24, 1933
CHI. RADHAKRISHNA,

I have read your letter to Jamnalalji. The Ashram cannot run
under its auspices the proposed Mahila Ashram or Mahila Vidyalaya
or Vanita Ashram or Vanita Vidyalaya, because such an institution
would not be prepared to accept Harijan girls at present. It would not
be possible to burden the institution with both the tasks. It should be
considered enough for it to admit Harijan girls as day scholars. The
Ashram cannot even lend the support of its name to suck an
institution. I agree with Vinobaji’s view and also feel that such a
restriction on the scope of the Mahila Vidyalaya is inevitable.
Tell Janakibehn that I see no need at present to get Jamnalalji
examined by Dr. Modi. He is physically well enough. The ear gives
no trouble. He can digest food fairly well and his weight has gone up.
There is no cause for worry at all. Nor do I feel that Dr. Modi can say
or do anything just now. There would be no difficulty and no delay in
making the necessary arrangements as soon as the slightest need is
felt, or if Jamnalalji himself wishes to be examined by him. I don’t
think it advisable that he should be taken to Bombay just now. Since
the climate here has agreed with him, why make a change for a few
days?
I got the two lengths of cloth woven from yarn spun by
Grandmother. I shall gladly wear them as a loving gift from her.
Kamalnayan was here, but went away without seeing me. He
should have seen me, and he would have been permitted to do so. Tell
him to see me when he comes next. What progress has he made in his
studies? Why does he not write to me now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9118

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

105

152. LETTER TO G. V. GURJALE1
January 25, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your very long letter. I am afraid that I cannot guide you
definitely. There is much to be said in favour of your method and as
much to be said in favour of the method of living in the midst of the
Harijans. Therefore you alone can be the final judge. You should
serve in the manner that appeals most to you, after consultation with
those who know you well and know the local circumstances.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. G. V. GURJALE
KRIPA ASRAM
TIRUVENNAINALLUR (S. I NDIA)
From a photostat: G.N. 1398. Also S.N. 20092

153. LETTER TO HRIDAY NATH KUNZRU
January 25, 1933
MY DEAR HARIJI,

I thank you for your letter of 19th instant with enclosures. I do
hope that you will succeed in your effort at raising funds.
Since you have mentioned the fact of your having sought
financial assistance from the Government, I would like to say,
altogether apart from my views on non-co-operation, that if I could
have prevailed with you or with your Board, I would have prevented
you from seeking such assistance. I think in purely religious matters
Government aid should not be sought. Anti-untouchability work is
essentially for Hindus to do. It is a huge religious reform, and I
should be chary of seeking financial assistance even if we had a
purely national government, or if financial assistance is given, it will
have to be under a scheme of just distribution to all the different
1
The addressee, known as Bhikshu Nirmalanand, had been serving the Harijans
in the village Tiruvennainallur since 1929 and had asked Gandhiji whether he should
go back to the city and serve the Harijans from there.

106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

religious denominations.
I hope you see my point, though you may not agree with it.
I am glad that Sarup1 has offered her services to you.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20097

154. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
January 25, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

Here is the estimate for the proposed English edition of Harijan
Sevak. As you can see, it is a very moderate sum. There will still be
some overhead charges on clerical assistance, and whatever remuneration that might have to be paid to Shastri who has agreed to edit the
paper.
I propose to bring out, to start with, 10,000 copies. Then if there
is not that demand, we might slow down. My policy, as you know, is
that I shall not handle the paper except to make it self-supporting. If it
does not become self-supporting, I should conclude that there is
inefficient management or editing, or that there is no public demand
for such a paper. In any one of these cases, if the defect cannot be
mended, the paper must be ended. I should give the paper a trial for
three months, within which time it must become self-supporting.
I would therefore like you, after consultation with Thakkar Bapa
and such others as you need to consult, to telegraph your sanction of
the expenditure, such as it may be, up to the final limit to be fixed by
you. I suggest an addition of Rs. 200 per month at the outside to the
figures as per estimate, excluding the postal and telegraphic charges. I
should be able to give you more definite figures after I have seen
Shastri. If you can pass the budget, should I proceed with the paper
whether you have brought out the Hindi edition or not? I understand
that there is not likely to be any difficulty at this end about bringing
out the paper.
I have your telegram from Gwalior about the Government
decision on the untouchability Bills. I hope you received my reply. I
hope, too, that you have read my very exhaustive statement 2 to the
1
2

Vijayalakshmi Pandit
Vide “Statement on Viceroy’s Decision”, 24-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

107

Press. I do not need, therefore, to add anything to the Press statement,
for I have nothing more to add.
I am sending you a copy of my letter 1 to Hariji about the
Society receiving or seeking financial assistance from the
Government. Here again I do not need to add to it. It speaks for itself.
I hope you are better. I would like you to treat your health as much of
a business concern as any other, and thus not a thing to be neglected
or wasted.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 20096. Also C.W. 7923. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

155. LETTER TO VIRIYALA VENKATA RAO
January 25, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Here are my answers:
The opening of temples to Harijans is to be an act of penance
on the part of caste Hindus or rather an act of payment of an
obligation due to them.2 That one act will elevate them. Throwingopen
of temples to them is the foundation for their elevation and not a
reward for good behaviour. They will only be liable to the same
conditions as caste Hindus are as to daily bath, etc. But just as we do
not ask every caste Hindu who enters a temple whether he has
conformed to the conditions or not, unless he bears the mark of
non-performance on his own person at the time of entry, even so we
may not cross-question a Harijan in appearance showing no disregard
of conditions whether he has fulfilled other conditions or not. Please
remember that abstention from flesh and drink is not an indispensable
condition of entry for caste Hindus in all sects of Hinduism.
Personally, I would like such abstention to be a condition, but it
cannot be imposed upon Harijans, if it is not imposed upon all
Hindus.
If three or four orthodox Brahmins cause obstruction, miscalled
satyagraha, by stretching themselves in front of the temple, they can
be easily dodged. Temple-entry is not complete until Harijans are
1
2

108

Vide the preceding item.
For a discussion, vide “Talk with Duncan Greenless”, 25-1-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

allowed to enter on the same terms and up to the same part as caste
Hindus are allowed. There is no question of Harijans entering the
sanctuary if caste Hindus do not enter the sanctuary and only those
who perform the ceremonial are allowed to enter.
I think this answers all your questions.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. V IRIYALA VENKATA RAO
ANTI -UNTOUCHABILITY LEAGUE
ELLORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 19003

156. LETTER TO VAKAYIL ACHUTHAN NAIR
January 25, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I must thank you for your having taken such trouble to furnish
me with the papers in connection with the Guruvayur case. I have had
them looked up. I now return them to you by registered post. You
need not now trouble to discover the missing papers. I see, that the
information contained in the papers you were good enough to send
me is all that I wanted to get.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. V AKAYIL ACHUTHAN NAIR
GURUVAYUR
From a microfilm: S.N. 19005

157. LETTER TO SURENDRA MOHAN BHATTACHARYA
January 25, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. If the sanatanists do not ill-treat—not hate as
you have said—untouchables, then, why is it that they cannot get
water, medical aid, decent accommodation, equal travelling facilities,
equal educational facilities for their children, equal use of public
places?
Educated Indians cannot be responsible for these causes; they
are a microscopic minority. Will you give me instances of educated
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

109

persons having ill-treated Harijans, as you say they have? I would also
like you please to furnish me with instances within your knowledge of
sanatanists having done anything to help these brethren of ours to
lighten their burden.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S URENDRA MOHAN BHATTACHARYA
VEDANTA S HASTRI
S ECRETARY, E AST BENGAL BRAHMIN S ABHA BRANCH
VILLAGE ALGI, P. O. M ADHABDI
DT. D ACCA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20095

158. LETTER TO N. H. PURANDARE
January 25, 1933
MY DEAR PURANDARE,

I have your postcard. I do not know how to console you and
how to deal with you. I am sorry I find it so difficult to please you
and I must not betray the trust imposed upon me even in order to
please you. Therefore please regard what I have offered as final.1
Yours sincerely,

P ROF. N. H. P URANDARE
604 S ADASHIV P ETH
P OONA 2
From a microfilm: S.N. 20098

159. LETTER TO K. KELAPPAN
January 25, 1933
MY DEAR KELAPPAN,

I have a bitter complaint that Mathrubhumi2 contains articles
abusing Brahmins. If that is so, you will see that the abuse is stopped.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20099

1
2

110

Vide “Letter to N. H. Purandare”, 13-1-1933
A Malayalam daily
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

160. LETTER TO T. KRISHNA MENON
January 25, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I would like you to give me translations of relevant parts of
Mathrubhumi.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. T. KRISHNA MENON
C/ O C HAMPAKLAL DEVIDAS , E SQ.
36 DALAL S TREET, F ORT
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20100

161. LETTER TO DR. PARASHURAM SHARMA
January 25, 1933
DEAR DR. PARASHURAM,

Thank you for your letter and the news that Mathuradas Jain
broke his fast on receipt of my telegram. 1 We are all keeping quite
well.
Yours sincerely’
From a microfilm: S.N. 20101

162. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
January 25, 1933
MY DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

I have your three letters, one only requires an answer. If. it
could be decently done I would certainly like the name of the Society2
to be more in keeping with the object we have in view. I should
incur the risk of the ridicule of the unthinking if all those who
compose the Society agree that Rajaji’s suggestion3 be adopted and if
1

Vide “Letter to Mathuradas Jain”, 8-2-1933.
Servants of Untouchables Society
3
C. Rajagopalachari had suggested: “I do not quite like the change of name
you have agreed to for the League. ‘Servants of Untouchables Society’ is good in
itself, but it means a continued recognition of untouchables as such. . . . I would have
liked ‘Untouchability Abolition League’ or Society.”
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

111

it is not against the constitution to do so. But if the change is adopted,
let it not be adopted in a hurry.
I have the articles for the English weekly1.
I had a telegram from Shastri accepting the offer.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20102

163. LETTER TO RATILAL SHETH
January 25, 1933
BHAI RATUBHAI,

I got your letter. I too had a wire from Lilavati. I sent a wire
asking not to commit me in advance. They should allow me to see
Padma. I would like to see the boy too. Jekibehn came to see me
yesterday and she told me: ‘‘Padma is yet only 14 years old and the
boy is immoral.” What can I say if the parents are willing? But if I do
not approve of the match, they should not ask me to say I do. What is
your opinion about this marriage? Even you should keep me out of it.
I can only interfere wherever you all wish me to. I cannot at all insist
on anything.
I want to write to Chhaganlal and Lilavati too about the firm. I
have written to them to come and see me. Come and see me when
Maganlal arrives. Keep on writing to Chhaganlal and Lilavati.
There is no doubt that Khimchand’s company is undesirable. I
have written strongly to Khimchand also.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7172

1

112

Harijan
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

164. LETTER TO CHHOTALAL
January 25, 1933
BHAI CHHOTALAL,

I got your letter. There is a great difference between varna and
caste. There are innumerable castes, but only four varnas. Varna refers
to a person’s qualities of character and occupation. Caste is based at
best on convenience. Caste deserves to be abolished, whereas varna
should be reformed. There is a confusion of varnas at present, but it is
possible and necessary to reform the system. There may perhaps be
no harm in serving one’s own community, but the best service which
one can do to it is to cultivate relations with members of other
communities. One should not be attached to one’s own caste and be
proud of it.
Though interdining and intermarriage will be restricted to
groups of similar temperament and occupation, that is, within the
limits of the same varna, this was not an essential feature of the system
in former times.
With regards from,
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8034

165. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 25, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I get your letters. If occasionally you cannot write for want of
time, I will know that that was the reason and also that there was
nothing urgent to write about.
It seems you note the weights of only the boys and girls.
Since we wish to know the effect of the new regimen, it would be
better if you note the weights of all the inmates. You may do so
every fortnight. The weights should be recorded on fixed dates in a
separate register kept for the purpose. Have you shown
in the record of weights sent to me the weekly increases? In
every case in which there is loss in weight, the reason, if it can be
ascertained, should be noted. What effect did the change have on the
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

113

incidence of constipation? Can we say by how much the consumption
of rice has decreased? I should like a record maintained of the
quantity of each kind of grain consumed and the number of persons
among whom consumed and the record sent to me. What vegetables
do you serve? Do you buy any from the market or what is produced
in the Ashram suffices? Does any fruit grow in sufficient quantity in
the Ashram to meet your requirements fully? I know that you require
time to think about and plan all this. You may carry out only those of
my suggestions which you can and leave the rest. If, however, we can
have correct information on these matters, we can so plan things as to
benefit considerably both in regard to health and expenditure. Our
farm, orchard and kitchen should be run with this aim in view.
It is not, it ought not to be, beyond our capacity to banish illness
from the Ashram. All that is necessary is that somebody should pay
attention to the problem and maintain strict vigilance about it. If you
can select someone from among the many workers at your disposal,
train him for the job. You can train even some of the boys or girls if
you find them suitable.
I was pleased by the certificate which you have given to
Kanhaiyalal. What progress has his wife made?
Tell him about the climate of Orissa. If their health is not good,
don’t send them to Orissa just now. If, however, they are ready to
endure all hardships, they may leave even now.
I am glad to learn that Manekbai has arrived there. I don’t
suppose you knew her before. I hope Ba sees her frequently.
Amtussalaam must have left for Delhi.
I got the slivers sent with Prabhudas. There is no change in the
condition of my elbow. However, I have started spinning since
yesterday. As there has been no improvement though I had stopped
spinning, I don’t think it right to continue the restriction. I have
informed the doctor, too. If the pain increases, I will stop spinning
again. I am not being unnecessarily obstinate in this matter. I look at
it entirely from the point of view of dharma.
I am certainly very glad that jowar1 and bajri 2 are grown
in the Ashram itself. It would certainly be good if the hand-mill is
revived even for our own needs only. But I am afraid that this
1
2

114

Kinds of millet
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

thing is beyond our capacity. Of course the practice of getting small
quantities ground occasionally in the Ashram will continue.
Doesn’t Bhau keep good health?
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

166. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL K. MEHTA
January 25, 1933
I understand what you say about Tambe’s hotel.1 If he does not
himself announce his intention nor let us do it, how are Harijans going
to know about it? Such secret help does not serve our purpose; it fails
to educate the people or create public opinion. We workers would
then have no chance of seeing where we stand vis-a-vis the people.
Our initial proposition therefore should be to have an eating-house
run to suit our own convenience.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 88

167. A LETTER
January 25, 1933
2

I know . . .’s weakness. In my view it is misplaced pity or
excess of pity and hence it is violence. I think I would not indulge in
such pity. Therefore wherever I shall see the absence of truth I shall
immediately tell you about it. You are open-minded. And so you will
certainly progress. Truth and non-violence both demand fearlessness.
If that is lacking, there is often a chance of untruth creeping in. And
where an untruth has been committed, it is violence as well. Hence let
the world laugh at you or call you a fool or bury you alive or starve
you—but we shall always observe truth. This cannot be done without
fearlessness.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 88

1
The proprietor Tambe was willing to admit Harijans but reluctant to make an
announcement to that effect.
2
The name is omitted in the source.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

115

168. A LETTER
January 25, 1933
There is no other cause but the atmosphere for the slackness
which sets in at a later stage.1 But a man who wishes to progress has
always to fight against the discouraging circumstances and for the
same reason Tulsidas stresses the need of satsang2. But it is not to be
found everywhere. We should therefore look for the subtle form of
satsang which is to be found within our own self, i.e., in noble
thoughts and deeds. One who achieves this inner satsang can fight to
the last against the unfavourable environment and succeed in carrying
out his resolves.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 88

169. LETTER TO VIDYA HINGORANI
January 25, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

I have your letter. You ought to have written to me earlier that
you were in the family way. There is nothing to be ashamed of in it.
That is the way of the world. Of course it is very good to practise
restraint but that is possible only for a few. Since the child’s brithday
coincides with Mahadev’s let us call him Mahadev. I am returning the
photograph. Hope you are both well. Keep on writing to me. Send my
blessings to Anand.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

1
Gandhiji is referring to the pious resolutions and the initial enthusiasm of
workers whenever they were imprisoned.
2
The company of saints or good people

116

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

170. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
January 25, 1933
Asked if his intention was to hold his fast in abeyance till the fate of Mr.
Ranga Iyer’s Bill was known, Mahatma Gandhi replied that it would depend on
circumstances arising from day to day. If Mr. Ranga Iyer’s Bill hung up indefinitely,
the question of temple-entry could not await solution so long.

I am hoping that Mr. Ranga Iyer’s Bill being of a negative
character, all Hindus will see that it does not interfere with religion in
any shape or form and if sanatanists admit that the Harijans should
suffer under no social disabilities they must make good their
admission by welcoming the measure. They do not seem to seek legal
protection for enforcing religious observances. Religious observance
ceases to be religious, the moment it becomes enforceable by law. It
must depend on mutual goodwill and on the readiness of Hindus in
general to perform religious observances.
There are numerous religious observances in the Hindu religion
as in all other religions but they are not enforceable by law and what
Mr. Ranga Iyer’s Bill provides is that the religious prohibition against
temple-entry should not be forced at the point of the bayonet. But
should the sanatanists not appreciate this obvious proposition of mine
and there is opposition to the Bill, it would become a question for me
as to what would be my duty. But I am hoping that there would be an
unequivocal declaration by the vast mass of Hindus to favour the Bill
so as to compel the acceleration of its passage through all its stages.
The Hindustan Times, 26-1-1933

171. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 26, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

This is before prayer time Thursday. I get your weekly
letter Wednesday noon and I write the reply Thursday morning after
prayer or sometimes before as now. So whenever you get my letter
later than usual or not at all? you will know that there has been no
delay on my part. But accidents will happen in the best of all possible
worlds. There is no such thing as accident in God’s dictionary. The
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

117

world is a chapter of accidents. For accidents are events which we
cannot control and often can’t find causes for even after they have
occurred.
As you see I have again taken to writing by the right hand. I do
not do much writing. Some Gujarati every day not more than two
hours and the weekly English letter to you. That cannot injure the
hand. At least no one has suggested that as the cause. The wheel was
blamed. But even that seems to be an exploded theory. I
recommenced moderate spinning on Tuesday last. But I shall not be
obstinate. I shall give it up, if the pain increases. The weight went
down 2 lb. yesterday but the little fluctuation is a matter of no
concern whatsoever.
Now about yourself. Whatever the cause of that giddiness, you
ought to discuss with the doctor. If it is due to the stenches, you
should be transferred to a better place. If you do not mind I would
like to write to the Government myself. You have a very sensitive nose
and therefore are more readily acted upon than others by foul smells.
Shall I apply for transfer? Perhaps you will be allowed to answer this
question apart from your usual weekly letter.
Blind Morris1 will appreciate your letter. It will be an event with
him for many days. This reminds me of Mrs. Aiman. Did you know
her? Andrews says we all did. Mahadev remembers her. I cannot. If
you do, you may know that she is no more. Aiman is connected with
112 Gower Street. Andrews made me write to Mr. Aiman.
The expression “There is no prayer without fasting” is
thoroughly sound. Here fasting has to be of the widest character
possible. Fasting of the body has to be accompanied by fasting of all
the senses. And alpahar, the meagre food of the Gita, is also a fasting
of the body. The Gita enjoins not temperance in food but
‘meagreness’. Meagreness is a perpetual fast. Meagreness means just
enough to sustain the body for the service for which it is made. The
test is again supplied by saying that food should be taken as required,
not for taste but for the welfare of the body. ‘Meagreness’ is perhaps
better rendered by ‘measured quantities’. I cannot recall Arnold’s
rendering. A ‘full’ meal is therefore a crime against God and man—
the latter because the full-mealers deprive their neighbours of their
portion. God’s economy provides from day to day just enough food
1

118

Vide “Letter to John Morris”, 6-1-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for all in just medicinal doses. We are all of the tribe of full-mealers.
Instinctively to know the medicinal dose required is a Herculean task.
For by parental training we are gluttons. Then when it is almost too
late it dawns upon some of us that food is made not to enjoy but to
sustain the body as our slave. It becomes from that moment a grim
fight against inherited and acquired habit of eating for pleasure.
Hence the necessity for a complete fast at intervals and partial fasts for
ever. Partial fast is the meagre or measured food of the Gita. Thus
‘There is no prayer without fasting, is a scientific proposition capable
of verification by experiment and experience.
Yes, I remember Manorama. Poor girl. If I know where she is to
go, I would gladly write to her. If she is there, here is a note for her.
The Superintendent will kindly hand it to her or to you for giving it to
her or if she is transferred, send the letter to her.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6260. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9726

172. LETTER TO SHAM LAL
January 26, 1933
DEAR LALA SHAM LAL,

I have your letter. I am glad you have fixed up everything for
the famine-stricken Harijans. It is just like you.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
LALA S HAM LAL
ADVOCATE ,
9 DAYAL S INGH MANSIONS
LAHORE
From a photostat: G.N. 1283

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

119

173. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR1
January 26, 1933
MY DEAR MARY,

I have your two letters, but not knowing whether any letter from
me could reach you at Tirupattur I have refrained from writing and
am now sending you this in the hope that you will receive it at the
Bombay address given by you. I am trying to reach you at the Poona
station also through Shastri, for if you want to stay in Bombay for two
or three days, you will stay where I stay in Bombay. The place you
know: “Mani Bhuvan, Laburnum Road, Gamdevi”. You will present
the accompanying note to Manibhai or Dhirubhai, the two brothers. It
is as good as a home. You will find there also the late Dr. Mehta’s
daughter, Jekibehn. Of course if you stay there one or two days, you
should meet as many members of the growing family that you have
entered. You might have to pay heavily for the choice you have made.
Perhaps you know something of what it has cost Mira to become a
daughter. She is generally the Cinderella not however2 having the
expectation of getting the golden slipper some day or other.
I sent you a card3 telling you that I have received the book The
Little Plays of St. Francis. I got on to one of the plays marked by you,
I suppose, and perhaps that is all the progress I shall have made with
it. It is a hopeless thing for me to try to read or do anything outside
the work in front of me.
About idol-worship I would like you not to worry. Let it
unconsciously simmer in the brain, and when you have leisure and I
have leisure and we can meet, you will discuss it to your heart’s
content. But if there is a difficulty that gnaws you, you must have it
out and I shall try patiently to solve it if I can.
At the Ashram you are going to be truly at home and ask
1

The addressee remarks in her book Bapu: Conversations and Correspondence
with Mahatma Gandhi: “In Bombay the posted copy of this long letter reached me,
enclosing the note of introduction to his friend. So he had sent four letters to make
sure that one unimportant person should be safe and comfortable in Bombay. Could
any meticulous business man do more for his partner, or loving father for his
daughter?”
2
The source has “who”.
3
Vide “Letter to F. Mary Barr”, 21-1-1933

120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

everything that you may need for physical comfort. I will not easily
forgive you if you damage your health, because the foolish people at
the Ashram could not anticipate your want and you foolishly would
not express it. I would call it ‘not playing the game’. I am supposed
to have the instinct of a mother. I do often succeed in anticipating
people’s wants, but I admit that I have also failed miserably and not
anticipated wants that I should have. I have therefore exacted a
promise even from guests that if they would make me feel at ease
about them, they would at once tell me what they need. If I had the
time, I could give you some ludicrous instances, all at my expense, of
how, if the friends had not told me, they would have made themselves
miserable and judged me uncharitably in the bargain. People at the
Ashram are a self-satisfied lot. They think that nobody can possibly
want more than they do, wherein they are quite wrong. They would be
quite right if they were to say nobody should want more than they do,
for they themselves take more than what they should want and more
than [what] millions of people get.
Again, don’t think that the Ashram is an abode of angels where
there can be no pilfering. As it so happens, we have just now very
dangerous neighbours. Their occupation is stealing at night, and in
broad daylight, and that without ally compunction. Quite selfishly we
are trying to do some work in their midst. I say selfishly, because
through that service we would like them to leave the Ashram
untouched, but they don’t, and they say it quite frankly. You will
make their acquaintance if you are so minded. These are the known
thieves, but there are unknown thieves also to warn you that you are
not entitled to possess anything beyond the poorest garment that you
have on your person and the coarsest food with which you can
manage. But if you will have more than that, you expose yourself to
be deprived of the superfluities by those who are in greater need. We
have the vow of non-possession in the Ashram, but we do not follow it
strictly. At the present moment it is only there as an ideal. You should
study the rules of the Ashram, if you have not done so already.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
The note of introduction in the letter posted to Bombay. But
you may go even without that letter for I have written directly to
Dhirubhai.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5989
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

121

174. LETTER TO TEJ BAHADUR SAPRU
January 26, 1933
DEAR DR. SAPRU,

I hope that you have benefited by your English visit and that the
strain this time was not anything like what it was in 1931.
This is however to seek your guidance about Ranga Iyer’s Bill
about untouchability. If you have not already read my statement1 on
the Government of India announcement sanctioning the introduction
of the All-India Bill and withholding it for the Madras Bill, I would
ask you please now to read it, and then criticize it freely, and tell me
how to go about it.
To be interested in the passage of Bills is an experience I have
not had since the passing of the Champaran Ryots’ Relief Bill in
1917. But then my task was easy, as both the Government of Bihar
and of India were interested in its passage, and it was a Government
measure. Here the circumstances are quite novel. I therefore approach
you, as to an expert, and if you think that you would like a
conversation with me before you could guide me, I know that you
would not mind taking the trouble of running down to Yeravda.
I hope that your son who had that nasty accident just after the
Yeravda Pact has no trace left of it.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Sapru Correspondence. Courtesy: National Library, Calcutta. Also
G.N. 7589

175. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
January 26; 1933
MY DEAR SATISBABOO,

I understand every word of what you have said in your letter of
the 21st and you are going to do as the spirit leads you. I must think
aloud all the reactions that your letters produce upon me so that
whenever they find an echo in your heart, you may re-adjust yourself
1

122

Vide “Statement on Viceroy’s Decision”, 24-1-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

accordingly. But there is to be no re-adjustment if there is no such
echo in your heart because in reading letters, even yours, hurriedly, I
may miss a word here and a word there which may alter a conclusion
equally hurriedly come to. Thus, take this startling statement of
yours—I mean startling for me—“As soon as I feel that I have been
able to set up some arrangement for serving the Harijans on proper
basis, I shall revert to my old field of activity.” This is what you
would undoubtedly do as a chemist and mechanic, as you have done
so successfully often. But service of Harijans is no such mechanical
thing to be arranged, put on a basis, and then left to workers. It is a
spiritual act, soul acting upon soul, and therefore there is no such
mechanical replacement as we have in purely temporal activities.
There do come replacements even in spiritual activities, but those
replacements are of a different character. Even the Pratishthan work is
a spiritual activity but can be arranged up to a point as a temporal
activity; not so the Harijan work. Your great organizing ability may
even be a hindrance than a help in doing Harijan work, for you might
have to plough what may appear to be a lonely furrow without
yielding any fruit which you can see with your physical eyes. You
have simply to believe that fruit is there whether you see it or not.
Thus having once taken up Harijan work in the style that you have,
there is no reversion to the “old field of activity”. Reversion can only
be consistently with the unimpaired continuance of Harijan service. I
wonder if I have made my meaning perfectly clear. Of course your
conception of personal service in the basti may be quite different
from mine. You are not to fit in mine with your own. You must hold
on to your own, unless mine appeals to you as the correct one. The
two won’t run together. But all this is only by way of illustration as to
what I am trying to drive at. Please also bear in mind that whenever
you feel like running down to Poona, you should do so. It won’t be
money thrown away. Andrews has done it so often with me. He has
not even heeded my chiding, for, he would say, “What you consider
to be waste of money is for me a definite want which I must satisfy”,
and from his own standpoint he has been right. He would have been
torn to pieces if he had not run to me. No writing of letters would
have satisfied him. Even as I am dictating this letter a cablegram has
come to me from him. Just now he is sending a cablegram per day.
This is a costly affair, but I cannot restrain him. I do not need his
cablegrams, but he needs to send them for his peace. Look at this
latest samples: “Thank God—Charlie, Esther”. This cablegram
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

123

perhaps you cannot even understand but it has a world of meaning for
me. The latest statement of mine has reached him and as he drafted
his cable under Esther’s roof, he added her name, for Esther is like a
daughter to me. But the cablegram has no place in the plan of Harijan
service, and considered in terms of money it deprives Harijans of so
much money.
If, after your walk of 26 miles in one day, you had no sense of
over-fatigue, you are certainly in a fit state, and if that is due to the
pills you took, it is worth knowing them.
I would like to be just as free from anxiety about Hemprabha’s
health as you are making me about yours.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1624

176. LETTER TO DUNICHAND
January 26, 1933
DEAR LALA DUNICHAND,

I thank you for your letter giving me information about
Surajbhan. Do please ask him to write to me.
I know your and Mrs. Dunichand’s concern for me. It touches
my heart. Please be assured that I am safe in God’s hands.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 5583.

177. LETTER TO S. SALIVATI
January 26, 1933
MY DEAR SALIVATI,

I have now got from Madras a true copy of your message. So
far as I can see it, there is complete justification for my complaint. I
am afraid that your over-zeal has led you astray. Thinking that you
must have a copy yourself by now, I am not sending you the copy in
front of me, but you can have it if you want to see it. Before I write to
Rangaswami again, I would like to know what you have to say.
124

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I have had your telegram about the Bill and now your letter.
Icould not possibly postpone my statement.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20105

178. LETTER TO G. S. CHETTY
January 26, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter1. I do not quite understand what you
are driving at. Is it the handful of Congressmen who are serving the
anti-untouchability campaign who are misbehaving themselves, or, is it
the very large body of non-Congress reformers who are the
mischief-makers? Is your complaint against the Congressmen or the
other reformers exploiting my fast which may never come? If you
have any proof in your possession that Harijans do not want
temple-entry, I should like to have that proof, and supposing that what
you say is true, is that any reason for caste Hindus not to discharge the
obligation that they owe to Harijans? Then, is it any argument against
reformers that they do not carry out the principle of equality in all
their transactions? May not imperfect human beings take part to the
best of their ability in the progress of mankind?
Yours sincerely,
S JT. G. S. CHETTY
MADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20113

1

In which the addressee had expressed doubts about the sincerity of the
“so-called” reformers who, he thought, would create trouble and “disrupt the tranquillity of the peace-loving population”. He had asked Gandhiji “to educate public opinion to elevate the social standards of untouchables” by teaching them clean living
and good habits.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

125

179. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 26, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

Read my letter to Kanhaiyalal.
It would be very good if Amina could be sent to Sharda Mandir.
Read my letter to Qureshi too.
It would help Bhau very much if he could go to Rajkot. He and
Jamnadas will like each other’s company. If for any reason Bhau does
not feel comfortable in Rajkot, send him here. I will arrange for him
to stay at Lady Thackersey’s place and keep a watch on his health. I
will also give him some work to do. His constipation must be cured.
You must have received the letters posted yesterday. Let me pass
on to you one discovery which I have made. If it is very cold at night
or at any other time, one can keep oneself warm by wrapping paper
round oneself. If the cotton sheet used for covering the body during
sleep is further covered with paper, one will immediately feel warm. It
is very cold here these days. But I sleep in the open. Even three
blankets are not enough to keep off cold. I don’t have the courage, or
I don’t want to use a fourth blanket. So once I put a newspaper
between the cotton sheet and the blanket, as also under the bed-sheet.
This gave more than enough warmth. For a long time now I have been
covering the legs, when they feel very cold, with a newspaper and keep
them warm. If one puts paper on the plastered floor when sitting, it
does not feel cold. These are a poor man’s ways of keeping himself
warm. That even these are not available to the village folk is a
different problem.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

180. LETTER TO BHAU PANSE
January 26, 1933
CHI. BHAU,

Even if I am very busy, you must write to me. You should go to
Rajkot full of faith. It will not matter if you do not improve. We shall
think about fasting after you have tried Rajkot. Describe your other
experiences at Vijapur.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 4491. Courtesy: Bhau Panse

181 LETTER TO GULAM RASUL QURESHI
Y. M.,

January 26, 1933
CHI. QURESHI,

I got your letter. The boys must be given education in Islam
from their childhood. I will not hesitate to keep the children with
Noor Banu for whatever reason. I regard her as one of the family. It is
essential that the children should get instruction in Islam and Amina
should get the training she needs at present. Don’t mind the children
being separated from her in the process. If we keep insisting on this, a
Hindu institution would impart instruction in Islam and a Muslim
institution instruction in Hinduism. Such a day may be distant but is
not inconceivable. You may have read in the Autobiography that I
used to do that in South Africa. I had Muslim, Christian and Prasi
children with me. They got religious instruction to the extent I could
provide them such instruction. At the moment, however, this is only a
dream. I have mentioned it only by the way. I should be very pleased
if they admit Amina to Sharda Mandir. She need not worry at all. If
she does not feel comfortable there, she can go back to the Ashram.
Why need one feel ashamed of returning to one’s home? And in any
case Amina will be joining Sharda Mandir for education. I greatly
value the benefits of education. If Amina studies well and then devotes
herself to service, Imam Saheb’s soul, wherever it may be, will be
pleased. Let Amina join that particular school without second thought.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

127

She need not then go to Bhavnagar. I am willing to write to Pyare Ali
if you wish. I hope you are now quite well. The children must have
recovered. I am not writing separately to Amina.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 10818. Courtesy: Gulam Rasul Qureshi

182. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
January 27, 1933
DEAR MAJOR BHANDARI,

With reference to the late Dr. Mehta’s estate I need to see the
following parties in addition to the thirteen for whom permission has
already been given:
(1) Padmabehn, Dr. Mehta’s grand-daughter.
(2) Sjt. Kantilal A. Doshi, the son of the well-known Morbi
shroff and engaged to be married to (1).
(3) Shrimati Vrajkunwar Ratilal Sheth, wife of Sjt. Ratilal Sheth
for whom permission has already been granted.
I hope that early permission will be received as I have to advise
about the marriage of (1) with (2), and it is proposed to be celebrated
in February.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : G.N. 3877

183. LETTER TO BILL LASH
January 27, 1933
DEAR BROTHER LASH,

I have your letter and the questions which are very good.
Enclosed you will find my brief answers1. If you find them to be too
brief to be clear, you will not hesitate to tackle me further, and if it will
serve the purpose better by coming, please do not hesitate to come.
1

128

These are not available.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am glad the ointment has cured you of the poisonous sting.
You should now give me a receipt for that ointment.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
BRO. B ILL LASH
C HRISTA S EVA S ANGHA ASHRAM
P OONA
From a photostat : G.N. 39

184. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
January 27, 1933
I have your letters and plenty of cablegrams.1 I know their
meaning and the anxiety complex underlying them. I have no doubt
that the Government of India should have given their assent to the
introduction of both the Bills. But the sanatanist agitation has
frightened them. I do not mind however the refusal to give the assent
to Dr. Subbaroyan’s Bill. No doubt it protracts the agony, but that
cannot be helped. After all, it is the Hindu mass mind that has to be
awakened. If the touchable Hindus are not ready for the removal of
untouchability, I do not want even the all-India Bill, though, as you
will see, from my statement2 on the Bill, it is perfectly harmless. It
simply refuses to give the sanction of secular law to untouchability,
thus leaving free scope to the reformers and the objectors to carry on
the education of the masses. It is strictly a Bill of non-interference
either way. Nevertheless, I shall be prepared to reconcile myself to the
Bill being blocked by the Government, if it is conclusively proved that
caste Hindus will not have it. My difficulty is to prove the readiness of
the vast mass of caste men for the change, unless the Government are
prepared to accept the ordinary methods of proof. Just at present a
vicious agitation that, so far as I am aware, has no authority from the
public at large is being conducted in the name of sanatana dharma. It
is difficult to show to outsiders that it has no genuine public support.
If this agitation is taken to be the genuine expression of the Hindu
1
The addressee had written in his letter dated January 13 that it would be better
if the proposed legislation regarding untouchability was made “an all-India question”
and dealt with by the Central Legislature rather than by the Madras Council.
2
Vide “Statement to Viceroy’s Decision”, 24-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

129

mass mind, a very difficult and critical situation will undoubtedly
arise. I am however moving heaven and earth to ensure purity and
trust that all will be well in the end. Meanwhile, the fast remains
postponed. I have absolutely no will of my own in the matter. I am
continually praying for light, and if the fast comes, you will know the
source, and therefore not get at all anxious.
I observe what you say about Kunwar Maharaj Singh’s boys,
and I am glad that your effort was successful. It was a kind of
temple-entry, as you have put it.
I take it that you are getting all my statements. Nevertheless, I
enclose herewith my statement on the all-India Bill. I would like you
to study it carefully and appreciate, if you can, the fundamental
distinction I have drawn between the temple-entry and the economic
and educational programme.
I hope your ailing mother is better and more amenable. to
control.
C. F. ANDREWS
From a photostat: S.N. 19004

185. LETTER TO S. D. NADKARNI
January 27, 1933
DEAR MR. NADKARNI,

It was a pleasure to hear from you. My faith has not weakened;
if anything, it has become stronger. Civic rights will certainly be
protected by law if they are to be worth anything. There is no
question of Harijans existing on the sufferance of anybody. But law is
one thing, cultivation of public opinion wholly another. Society holds
together on the strength not of law but of mutual goodwill, and unless
the majority of caste Hindus are converted, there is not much use in
the law protecting rights which the majority is not prepared to
recognize. The whole of the present campaign is directed towards
cultivating and ascertaining the opinion of caste Hindus. The legal
guarantees and all that they mean are bound to be there, but they will
be an expression of the will of the majority and not a superimposition.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. S. D. N ADKARNI
KARWAR
From a microfilm: S.N. 20116

130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

186. LETTER TO V. M. NAWLE
January 27, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. You cannot say that I do not give you time. I
gave you plenty of time the other day, and I am giving you time by
answering your letters promptly, and I would have, given you more
time by inviting you if I had found your proposal 1 to be sound or
even workable. Let me tell you that it is not in any sense a new
suggestion. It was put before me when I returned from South Africa
in 1915 and I rejected it. It is a bad training for the Harijans and it is
bad also for caste Hindus. What however you and I want is that caste
Hindus should do penance and make reparation to those whom they
have ignorantly or may be even insolently regarded as untouchables.
What is therefore wanted in terms of religion is not a fraud, however
pardonable, but a conscious act on the part of caste Hindus of
welcoming Harijans with open arms. That Hinduism has absorbed
people who were once under boycott but who had stolen in by
assuming other names is only too true. But it is not in my opinion a
practice to be copied. I wish I could convince you that the removal of
untouchability2 is purely a religious problem which does not admit of
questionable methods or tricks. Do you not now agree with me?
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20117

187. LETTER TO S. KRISHNA AIYAR
January 27, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. You evidently contemplate that
those who are seeking the assistance of law whether in British India or
in the States want to force people to do anything against their will,
especially in matters of religion. What is wanted is that there should be
no State recognition of untouchability. At the present moment there is
1
That untouchables should give up caste names like Mahar, Mang, Chambhar,
Dhor, etc.
2
The. source has “this method of untouchability”.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

131

this anomaly that the State not only recognizes untouchability,
but helps believers in it to enforce their views against others, thus
making what they believe to be a religious precept a matter of legal
obligation. Seeking assistance of law therefore becomes obligatory for
reformers in order to have the anomaly removed, and when the
anomaly is removed there will be no question of forcing the entry of
Harijans into temples but it would be possible for the majority of
those who are under the present usage entitled to enter temples to
throw them open to Harijans. In that event there can be no question of
boycott of temples by the majority. There may be a minority who
may cease to take advantage of the temples. It would be their loss, but
I have in my compromise proposal made allowances even for their
views or prejudices as I would call them. Therefore those in
Travancore who believe that untouchability should be removed for the
good name of Hinduism will work might and main on the one hand to
convert by gentle means and purity of conduct orthodox objectors to
their own view and on the other work among the Harijans so as to
induce them to shed those habits or customs which are repugnant to
the moral sense.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. K RISHNA AIYAR , B. A., B. L.
HIGH C OURT VAKIL , T RIVANDRUM
From a microfilm: S.N. 20119

188. LETTER TO V. S. BARVE
January 27, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter, but I am very much afraid that I
have no capacity for giving you satisfaction. I have not arrived at what
I believe to be truth in the analytical way and therefore it is most
difficult for me to understand some of your questions. It is not even
possible for me to say how I have arrived at my present outlook upon
life as a whole. A multitude of contacts with books, men and events
are together responsible for what I am today, as they must be for
everyone. Some may have the ability for locating the cause or causes
132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for everything they think, say or do. I confess that I am very stupid
and often cannot account for things I do and beliefs I hold and
sometimes I fancy that God is speaking or acting through me. I am
painfully conscious of the fact that such belief may be merely a
figment of my imagination, but while it lasts, believe me, it is as true to
me as it is that I am dictating this letter to you.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. V. S. BARVE
C ONTRACTOR
917 S ADASHIV P ETH
P OONA C ITY
From a photostat: S.N. 20123

189. LETTER TO STUDENTS’ HARIJAN
SERVICE LEAGUE
January 27, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I am glad that you have formed the League.
At the present moment I do not think that I can add anything useful
to the suggestions you have already made. There need be no
overlapping if your League will work in conjunction with and even
under instructions from the Servants of Untouchables Society.
Yours sincerely,

THE S ECRETARY
THE S TUDENTS ’ HARIJAN S ERVICE LEAGUE
NAI S ARAK , D ELHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20124

190. LETTER TO P. GOMATHINAYAGOM PILLAI
January 27, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter and three copies of your pamphlet
on untouchability. I am wholly unable to judge whether Tamil and
Malayalam translations are necessary. That is a matter for the
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

133

provincial branch of the Servants1 of Untouchables Society to
determine and I would like you to consult them in the matter.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. P. G OMATHINAYAGOM P ILLAI
ILANJI , T ENKASI , (S. INDIA)
From a microfilm: S.N. 20125

191. LETTER TO V. JAGATHRAKSHAKAN
January 27, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I think we have made a fetish of preservation of the purity of
stock through unnatural restrictions. The ancients never knew these
restrictions. This does not mean that I am an advocate of promiscuous
unions. I think that it is a wise rule to have marriage among people
having common thought and common habits of life, but it is a vicious
thing when it becomes so rigid as to make a departure from it a sinful
act, especially in these days when the varnas have lost their purity, if
not their original significance altogether. The division between the
superior and inferior people that you seem to believe in is, in my
opinion, a monstrous perversion of truth.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. V. J AGATHRAKSHAKAN
7 S OUTH MADA S TREET
TRIPLICANE, M ADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20126

192. LETTER TO G. V. MAVALANKAR
January 27, 1933
BHAI MAVALANKAR,

I got your letter. Blessings from us all to both the new entrants
to the ranks of the twice-born. May they live long and do honour to
the sacred thread.
The weakness will decrease day by day.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1236
1

134

The source has “Service”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

193. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAZMUDAR.
January 27, 1933
BHAI PARIKSHITBHAI,

I have your letter. Read the proposed Bills. Is not giving
scholarships to the children a form of bribe or a reward for attending
school? If it is, do you think this practice should be encouraged?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3961

194. LETTER TO INDU N. PAREKH
January 27, 1933
CHI. INDU,

I got your letter. How did you become ill? I hope you are
careful about eating. You may use a bicycle, but you should also walk
daily. Send me your time-table for the day’s work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6254

195. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
January 27, 1933
Mr. Gandhi said that he was surprised and pained to find that Mr. Iyengar, an
ex-judge, had spoken “so irresponsibly” as he had done.1 If he had taken the trouble
of studying the movement, he would at once have seen that, with Mr. Gandhi, the
removal of untouchability was an article of faith before he knew anything of politics.
If he (Mr. Gandhi) had been guided by political, instead of religious instinct, he would
have excluded temple-entry from the programme and confined his attention to
economic and educational uplift. But he had staked his popularity, such as it was,
1

Srinivasa Iyengar was reported to have said at a sanatanist meeting in Madras
that the present temple-entry movement was but a political stunt of Gandhiji and his
followers to placate the Harijans and win them over to the Congress so as to present a
united front.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

135

because he believed that without temple-entry untouchability could not be said to
have been abolished from Hinduism. Mr. Gandhi added:

I make an offer to Mr. Iyengar and other sanatanists who say
that they do not wish to ill-treat Harijans, and would like to promote
their economic and other temporal welfare. Let them join the Servants
of Untouchables Society and finance and work its programme for
temporal uplift and leave temple-entry to me and those who think with
me. Mr. Iyengar should know that the Society contains few
Congressmen. The organization contains many prominent Liberals.
Indeed, sanatanists can, if they mean what they say, by bringing
money and workers to the Society, take charge of it and shape its
policy. If this does not suit them, let them run a rival organization and
spread its branches all over the country, and win the hearts and
gratitude of Harijans. I would take my chance of gaining religious
merit by prosecuting the temple entry movement and showing that it
will, at a stroke, uplift the Harijans and caste Hindus, and purify both
and automatically promote the temporal welfare of the former. Mr.
Iyengar should realize that, in a matter concerning the masses, no
stunt can be of much use. They are open to be appealed to by
everybody, and only honesty and hard work can win in the end.
As for the charge of religious interference, Gandhiji said:

I have already dealt with the question in my previous statements.
I can only reiterate my view that I myself will be the first person to
oppose religious interference by the State even when real power passes
to the people. But sanatanists cannot have it both ways. They would
want, as they have done before, the aid of law to sustain what, to one
like me, appears to be prejudice or worse; and when I seek to remove
that interference, the cry of interference is at once raised by the
upholders of prejudice in the name of religion. Indeed, I want to
respect even prejudice, for I realize what may appear to me prejudice
may be enlightenment to others. But these are matters where the aid of
the law cannot be sought. The law can only take a temporal view of
the questions that come before it. It cannot recognize the Agamas1
upholding thieving. I have, at the Ashram, neighbours who honestly
believe that thieving is an occupation enjoined by God to them as a
caste. I respect their prejudice, but the law does not. I am here not
giving a hypothetical case. I am quoting from actual experience.
1

136

Scriptures
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Mr. Iyengar says that I do not believe in the Shastras. He will
fail to produce a single statement of mine to support his accusation.
Surely, he is too good a lawyer to claim infallibility for his interpretation of the Shastras or his judgment of their authenticity. I would
ask him and those who are flinging all sorts of charges against me,
distorting my writings in order to prove them, whether they will
uphold sanatana dharma by such methods. Let them believe me when
I say that I am quite capable of saying so if I had the slightest desire
to found a new religion or a new sect.
I have no other wish in this world, but to find light, joy and
peace through Hinduism. It is for that reason that I want to see it
purified. It satisfies me because, as I have understood and lived it, it
has enabled me to treat other religions on a footing of absolute
equality and their followers even as my blood brothers and sisters.
Hinduism and my conception of the Gita, of the Vedas, the
Upanishads, the Bhagavata, and the Mahabharata, teach me that all
life is one, and that in the eye of God there is no superior and no
inferior. I am sick of controversy. But I am more sick of untruth and
impurity. I invite sanatanists to join hands with me in fighting them.
The Hindu, 28-1-1933, and The Bombay Chronicle, 28-1-1933

196. LETTER TO V. M. NAWLE
January 28, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your two letters. The proposed newspaper 1 will not be
issued under my editorship. It will be an English weekly issued under
the aegis of the Servants of Untouchables Society. I think that you
should continue your own paper without any outside interference,
giving such help as you can to the movement.
With reference to your other letter, I have already sent you an
answer yesterday.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20128

1

Harijan

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

137

197. LETTER TO K. KELAPPAN
January 28, 1933
MY DEAR KELAPPAN,

I have your letter. You must have seen my statement. That
explains my position. I think we have to concentrate on Ranga Iyer’s
Bill. I know that it has many difficulties to face, but that does not
matter. The legal obstruction must be removed. We must therefore
educate the public on the necessity of the removal of the legal bar,
and meanwhile, where there is no obstruction from trustees and the
public desire it, temples should be thrown open. Our programme,
therefore, practically remains as it was, the all-India Bill replacing the
Madras Bill. Rajaji is coming here on Monday and I shall discuss the
future programme with him.1
My elbow need not cause you any worry. I am on the alert and
if I find that it requires immediate treatment from outside, I shall not
hesitate to apply for it. Without permission however no outside help
can be received.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20130

198. LETTER TO K. RAMACHANDRA
January 28, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter 2. It is very difficult for me to give you
any further advice. 3 I am quite convinced, however, that the
interference on the part of non-Hindus cannot be tolerated in a matter
which is a purely religious issue and which is one essentially for
1

For the discussions with C. Rajagopalachari, G. D. Birla and others vide
“Discussion with aaC. Rajagopalchari and Others”, 30-1-1933
2
Dated January 23, 1933 (S. N. 20078). Referring to Gandhiji’s statement in
an interview to the Associated Press of India, vide “Interview to the Associated Press
of India”, 2-1-1933, the addressee had stated that in spite of his warning non-Hindus
were determined to champion the cause of temple-entry as their own, to collect funds
in its name and to start direct action.
3
For Gandhiji’s previous letter to the addressee, vide “Letter to K.
Ramchandra”, 31-12-1932

138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Hindus to settle among themselves. I am surprised that non-Hindus
should persist in their interference.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K. R AMACHANDRA
S RI WICKRAMA R OAD
WELLAWATTE
From a microfilm: S.N. 20131

199. LETTER TO R.. KAIMAL
January 28, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I can only vaguely gather what you are
driving at. I wish you will adopt a simple style to express simple ideas
and give up all metaphor and ornamentation.
Remember the following:
1. No cause that is backed by truth is ever lost.
2. Legislation is required now and will always be required to
remove legal obstruction.
3. Both hotels and vilasams 1 are bad; both pander to the palate.
4. One can be a glutton on vegetarian food and strictly
temperate on flesh food which he does not consider forbidden
food.
5. Virtue lies in abstaining from visiting public eating houses
altogether, and even in one’s home, partaking of food as
medicine, just enough to sustain the body, and never to please
the palate.
6. Don’t mix up the loose life of modern times with a very big
movement for religious reform.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20132

1

Eating-houses

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

139

200. LETTER TO N. H. PURANDARE
January 28, 1933
MY DEAR PURANDARE,

I had written to you before receiving your postcard of the 25th.
I have nothing more to add to what I have said. If you are prepared to
take over the book, I shall gladly go through the estimates you have
received and you will pay no more than the market rate.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20134

201. LETTER TO KOKKIRAKULAM BRETHREN’S
UNION
January 28, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter and resolution1. If my compromise is
ever accepted by the sanatanist Hindus, you will find that, not only
does it not wound the self-respect of Harijans, but it actually enhances
it; but the matter is just now irrelevant.
Yours sincerely,
THE HON . S ECRETARY
THE KOKKIRAKULAM BRETHREN’S UNION
S ELVAVINAYAGAR S T., K OKKIRAKULAM
TINNEVELLY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20136

1

Which, among other things, stated that “the suggestion of allotting separate
hours of worship in Hindu temples by Harijans made in Mahatma Gandhi’s
compromise formula is not only detrimental to the unity of Hindu society . . . but also
wounding to the self-respect of the so-called Depressed Classes.”

140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

202. LETTER TO SAROJ MOHAN SEN
January 28, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I cannot imagine Sjt. Sasmal being guilty of
any such thing as you attribute to him. But if he or anybody has been
guilty of action such as you describe you should institute proceedings
against them. I am sending your letter to Sjt. Sasmal asking him to
enquire into the matter.1
Yours sincerely,

KAVIRAJ S AROJ MOHAN S EN
VAIDYASASTRI
C ONTAI, P. O. M IDNAPORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 20137

203. LETTER TO B. N.. SASMAL
January 28, 1933
MY DEAR SASMAL,

Here is a postcard for you to digest. Please enquire and let me
know what truth, if any, there is in the charge made by the Kaviraj. I
have written to him saying that you are incapable of inciting people to
shoot others.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. 1: p. c.
S JT. B. N. SASMAL
BAR-AT -LAW
MIDNAPORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 20135

1

Vide the following item.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

141

204. LETTER TO G. V. KETKAR
January 28, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your card. I have no objection to my opinion 1 on your
article being published, only it must be as addressed to you, for, as a
prisoner, I have no right to address letters to editors apart from matters
of untouchability.
As to your article on temple-entry, I did go through it when I
received it, and I have a recollection that it seemed to me to be
reasonable, but I am just now working under a very severe strain and I
glance through the literature that I get to an extent just enough for my
purpose. My opinion therefore has no value when I do not express it
as a result of deliberate study.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20138

205. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 23, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your mail2. I have not received slivers from Chhakkaddas.
I have written to Maganlal and asked if he can send any. If you can
send slivers from there without any difficulty, please do so. Parachure
Shastri and Dastane also are supplied slivers from here, and Mahadev
and Chhaganlal give all their time [to spinning]. Hence making slivers
to meet the requirements of five spinners is likely to take a great deal
of our time. If, however, Chhakkaddas from there cannot supply any,
don’t trouble him. If Keshu can offer any without inconvenience to
himself, you may send them.
Do you get any letters from Tulsi Maher? He doesn’t seem to
be making much progress about spinning. If you know anything
about this or have information, let me know.
1
2

142

Vide “Letter to G. V. Ketkar”, 11-1-1933
According to the source this was posted on January 26.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Barring two days, I have written to you daily for the past few
days.
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. II, p. 24

206. LETTER TO RADHAKRISHNA BAJAJ
January 28, 1933
CHI. RADHAKISAN,

I wrote one letter to you about the Mahilashram. I hope you got
it. I frequently see Jamnalal. He keeps good health. I heard yesterday
that the number of visitors to the Lakshminarayan temple had gone
down. Is this true? Is any record maintained of the number of daily
visitors? Find out also the position regarding the other temples which
have been thrown open to Harijans.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3038

207. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
January 28, 1933
CHI. KAKA,

I got your letter. As I told you in a previous letter you ought not
to have got into the condition in which you find yourself.
I had understood what you said about the offering of food to
the deity. All the same, the issue is not worth raising now. If and when
it is raised, we shall see.
Rohit is in King Edward Hospital. He is under the treatment of
Dr. Deshmukh.
Would it not be wiser to cling to your decision not to take up
any work till the treatment of your teeth was completed, unIess you
had a valid reason for doing otherwise?
You may do what you think proper regarding Chandrashankar.
Do not neglect your health.
Don’t include chiku and bananas among the fruits which you
may eat. For the teeth, citrus fruits alone are useful. Only fruits like
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

143

pomegranate, pineapple and fruits of the citrus group (orange,
mosambi, papanas, grapes, etc.) from which juice can be extracted
will be useful. I think apple also is included in this class.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
What is the matter with Haribhau? I suppose Parel means
K. E. M. Hospital. Isn’t that so?
From Gujarati: C.W. 9492. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

208. LETTER TO HRISHIKESH
January 28, 1933
BHAI HRISHIKESHJI,

I have your letter. You have opened your temple to Harijans;
this will do immense good. Please accept my congratulations.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6278

209. LETTER TO TULSI MAHER
January 28, 1933
CHI. TULSI MAHER 1 ,

Your letter. It cannot be said that your work is at all progressing.
Let there be no self-delusion. If it is impossible to popularize the
charkha in Nepal it must be given up. There are many other branches
of service. But I would say nothing if you have confidence in
yourself.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6544

1

144

The original in Gandhiji’s hand has “Mehta”, evidently a slip.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

210. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
January 28, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I hope you got the letter which I wrote yesterday. If you can
arrange for Amina to be admitted in Sharda Mandir, do so
immediately. I have already written to you regarding the boys and the
girls. If the parents approve of the arrangement suggested, make it
immediately.
If Tilakam’s things have been stolen, I suppose you have
replaced such of the articles as are indispensable to him.
Mary Barr must have arrived there. I would advise you to assign
her some teaching work and some work connected with the uplift of
Harijans. If she intends to live there for a short time only, let her, if
she likes, learn ginning, carding and spinning thoroughly. Probably
she is accustomed to eating fruits. If so, supply her what she needs. I
am sure you must have provided her with a commode. If she wishes to
join in cleaning lavatories, let her do so.
Read my letters to Liladhar, Ramji, etc.
This time my weight was less by two pounds. That is, it has gone
down from 104 to 102. But my health is quite good otherwise. You
must have read in the papers about my getting headaches. But they
were soon cured by mud-packs and it is an old story now. There is no
cause at all for worry. We have in the Ashram a book by Kellogg
named Dietetics. Send it with somebody who may be coming to this
side.
BAPU

[PS.]
There are 37 letters in all.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

211. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
January 29, 1933
MY DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

I understand what you say about the Bengal agitation on the
Pact. Whilst we should know for our purposes accurately who the
untouchables are, personally, the more people are included in the list
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

145

the better it is in view of the circumstances.
I do not despair of the Ahmedabad Vaishnav friends, as you
seem to have done. I wrote to both Chamanlal Sheth and Sheth
Sakarlal. The latter has sent an amiable reply. I shall still try.
About Shastri’s suggestion, I shall write to you after he comes
here and after I have discussed the whole thing with him. Of this I am
quite sure, that we shall not want two men of the same level for the
English weekly. You may tell me what work you were taking or you
had intended to take from Shastri.
You have asked Mahadev to send you about 25 copies of the
Hindi translation of the opinion on untouchability of the learned men.
Mahadev destroyed the copies. He has only one or two copies for his
file. You will therefore have to multiply the copies you have in your
possession. I wonder if you have carried out all the corrections in the
Hindi copy. If you are still going to have the opinion in all the
principal vernaculars in one cover, I expect you to ensure absolutely
correct translation and to see to it that the pamphlet is free from any
errors.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: G.N. 1107

212. LETTER TO JANARDHAN SHARMA
January 29, 1933
MY DEAR JANARDHAN,

I was pleased to receive your letter. God will forgive you for
having thought low of Harijans, if you will abide by your pledge and
continue to treat them as if they were blood brothers and sisters.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. J ANARDHAN S HARMA
C/ O B. P ANNALALJI
C LERK, C HANDNI C HOWK POST OFFICE
DELHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 19259

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

213. LETTER TO P. N. RAJBHOJ
January 29, 1933
MY DEAR RAJBHOJ1 ,

I have your letter with the constitution of the proposed hostel.
We should discuss together your scheme if you will kindly come on
the 4th February at 2 p.m.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19260

214. LETTER TO A. RANGASWAMI IYENGAR
January 29, 1933
MY DEAR RANGASWAMI,

I had a visit from Salivati yesterday. Poor man, he is very much
dejected. He has really no defence. The sub-editor at your end made
no mistakes at all in carrying out his message. But in his own
over-zeal for the cause, Salivati drew upon his imagination. He admits
that many things he attributed to me I never said, but he simply
inferred from a word here and a word there that had dropped out of
my lips that I had meant what he said. That of course was very
dangerous, but he thought that he would serve the cause by allowing
his imagination full play. He admits also that I had warned him that he
was not to make any use whatsoever of the conversation, but again he
thought there was no harm, since the cause was good. There was no
mala fides behind his action. I think and hope that this mistake will
last him for the rest of his life. Therefore, beyond warning him that he
must act purely as a reporter and not at all as a protagonist of a cause,
nothing further need be done. When one sees so much of indifferent,
incompetent and even unscrupulous reporting it would be a pity to
punish a mistake, though serious, quite unintentional.
Yours sincerely,
[PS.]

1

Honorary Organizer and General Secretary of a society for the service of
depressed classes
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

147

After dictating this letter I got from Salivati a carbon copy of his
letter to you. I think it fairly represents what he conveyed to me
yesterday.
From a microfilm: S.N. 19264

215. LETTER TO S. SALIVATI
January 29, 1933
MY DEAR SALIVATI,

I have your letter, for which many thanks. Your letter fairly
represents what you said to me yesterday. I do hope that no harm will
befall you.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19261

216. LETTER TO BHAGWANDAS
January 29, 1933
DEAR BABOO BHAGWANDAS,

I hope you received my previous letter with the accompanying
essays from Shastris.
I enclose today another and that is from Raghunath Shastri
Kokaje. His essay is not convincing. The argument is somewhat loose,
and it does not examine the position of the opposite school. The
Hindi admits of much correcting, which I hope you will see to.
I have been having regularly cuttings from newspapers from the
Aaj office, for which many thanks, and which give me useful
indication of what is going on in the Hindi Press.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19262

148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

217. LETTER TO M. M. ANANTA RAU
January 29, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your last letter which is undated but which was received
yesterday.
The first part of that letter is a complaint against unseemly
behaviour of certain people at the meeting organized by the
“followers of sanatana dharma”. I was grieved to hear of the incident
referred to by you. I shall discuss it with Shri Rajagopalachariar who
is expected here tomorrow. It hurts me whenever there is any
rowdyism or untruthfulness on either side. Honest differences of
opinion there will always be. The cause of Truth cannot be served by
hard swearing, stone-throwing or untruthfulness.
The second part of your letter relieved the pain caused by the
first part owing to the manner in which you approached my argument
about untouchability. As it so happened, I read your letter aloud
amongst us, four prisoners, and I must confess to you that, as I
proceeded, I could not help bursting into laughter, in which my
companions heartily joined. But behind the laughter was also a
sadness that you, an agent of sanatana dharma, could not see that
religion could not be treated in terms of algebra. You have, instead of
going straight to the core of my argument, launched out into an
irrelevant discourse, ending in a ludicrous algebraical formula.
You will pardon me for writing straight from the heart. Of
all the letters that I have been receiving only yours and one or two
others that I can mention have been courteous and have attempted to
argue cogently. I should only return your courtesy and your honest
attempt to convince me by giving you an honest reply. Let me tell
you that all the letters and literature that have come to me have only
confirmed me in the opinion that untouchability, as we are practising
today, is a big blot upon Hinduism and an atrocious error in which
we are still persisting, simply because of our laziness to understand
and act up to the very fundamentals of Hinduism. This inglorious
persistence in error cuts me to the quick, but I am an optimist. I have
implicit faith in the ultimate victory of Truth. I know therefore that
untouchability will go and Hinduism will live a purified religion.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. M. M. A NANTA R OW
From a microfilm: S.N. 19263. Also C.W. 9573. Courtesy: Government of
Mysore
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

149

218. LETTER TO C. P. SRINIVASA IYER
January 29, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I cannot recall a single occasion when I called
the Mahabharata a heap of rubbish. I have not had many occasions
to speak or write about the Mahabharata, and when I did write about
it I compared it to a diamond mine, whereas I compared the Gita to a
diamond chest. Perhaps, the Shankaracharya had that simile in mind,
but at the present moment, for sanatanists, whether they are big men
or small men, any stone is good enough to fling at me.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. C. P. S RINIVASA IYER
NORTH VILLAGE
C HITTUR (COCHIN S TATE )
From a microfilm: S.N. 19265

219. LETTER TO K. P. RAMAN PILLAI
January 29, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for the letter giving me the information that
Koteshwaram Mahadev temple near Kuzithurai in South Travancore
was opened to the Harijans. I hope to see that other temples follow
suit.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. K. P. R AMAN P ILLAI
OLACODE
C OLACHEL , P.O.
S. T RAVANCORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 20142

150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

220. LETTER TO DHIRENDRANATH MUKHERJI
January 29, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. So much untruth, almost bordering
on the libellous, is being broadcast at the present moment about me
that I should warn you not to believe anything against me unless you
have it verified by me or you yourself have verified it from my
authentic writings. Thus, I have never declared to the world that “the
hereditary caste system of the Hindu society is an artificial creation of
some designing men”. By hereditary system I suppose you mean
varnashramadharma. If so what I have said and written is that I believe
in hereditary varnashramadharma which is one of the gifts that
Hinduism has made to the world.
Again, what I have resisted and what I would resist with my life
is untouchability as it is being practised today. But I have never said
that there is no such thing as untouchability. On the contrary, I have
said that untouchability of a kind is common to all mankind and all
religions and that it is a necessary institution, and in that real sense all
mankind become untouchable while they are performing certain
functions of nature. This is only one instance of natural necessary
untouchability, but that carries no sin with it.
Again, interdining, intermarriage and the like are no part
whatsoever of the campaign against untouchability as it is being
practised today. I have written in favour of interdining and even
intermarriage under certain circumstances, but that is wholly irrelevant
to the present discussion. You can, if you desire to know my views on
things not pertaining to untouchability, do so by studying my
writings.
I hope this fully answers your letter.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. D HIRENDRANATH MUKHERJI
S ENHATI P.O.
KHULNA DIST. (BENGAL )
From a microfilm: S.N. 20143

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

151

221. LETTER TO BHUJANGILAL
January 29, 1933
CHI. BHUJANGILAL,

I got your letter. If I had not understood your point of view at
all, I would not have written to you. All the same, I do wish to
understand it better.
I very much like your resolution to apply yourself exclusively
to your studies and please your parents. I believe that you will be able
to please them with your gentleness and your self-control.
Write to me occasionally.
Improve your handwriting. You will be able to do so if you
write slowly and with care.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2596

222. LETTER TO KESHAV GANDHI
January 29, 1933
CHI. KESHU (JUNIOR),

I got your letter. God does not let things happen as we wish. We
should go on working and rest satisfied with that. The result is in
God’s hand.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3287

223. LETTER TO RUKMINIDEVI BAJAJ
January 29, 1933
CHI. RUKMINI,

I got your letter. Having regard to your difficulty, I should
exempt you from writing to me. I know very well what the burden of
guests can mean. You need not, therefore, write whenever you have
guests on hand. I don’t want you to put yourself to trouble for writing
to me. When I don’t hear from you for some time, I will conclude that
152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you are very busy and have not been able to write.
I am very glad that your weight has gone up.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9138

224. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
January 29, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

I must have your letters, no matter how foolish they are. So
don’t keep me without one any week. How are you now?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10324

225. LETTER TO BABALBHAI MEHTA
January 29, 1933
CHI. BABALBHAI,

I got your letter. There is no point in writing anything to
Nanasaheb now. Nothing further can be done in the matter. You may
go on doing what other service you can.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9444

226. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI G. PATEL
January 29, 1933
CHI. SHIVABHAI,

You did very well in writing to me. You are faced with a really
difficult moral dilemma. All that I can say in this matter is that you
should consult your own conscience and fearlessly follow its bidding.
There is a risk of your committing an error in taking that course, but
that risk is worth taking. In such matters, the advice of others never
helps. If, in consequence, you feel that you ought to leave the Ashram,
do not hesitate to do so. Nobody can force himself to observe
brahmacharya. If one cannot observe it, one should admit one’s
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

153

weakness and follow the common way. It is possible to exercise
self-control even in conjugal life. You may do as much as you can.
Write to me from time to time. Do not hesitate to write to me out
of fear of adding to my burden.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9510

227. LETTER TO ANNAPURNA
January 29, 1933
CHI. ANNAPURNA,

Your handwriting is quite good, but you should make the letters
larger. I know Chunilal’s address. Does he write to you?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9422

228. LETTER TO NARAYAN M. KHARE
January 29, 1933
CHI. PANDITJI,

The more you write to me about the Chharas, the more I feel
that we the Hindus are responsible for their evils. We do not recognize
our dharma. If we do, then we have not observed it. Now do what you
can. If we try we can definitely reform them.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 244. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

229. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA N. KHARE
January 29, 1933
CHI. RAMACHANDRA,

Your letter is fine. It is very good indeed that your weight has
increased by 20 lb. Continue putting on more weight. Those who
improve in body, improve in mind also. Keep on writing to me. Since
you know a little Urdu, brush it up.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 303. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

154

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

230. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
January 29, 1933
CHI. JAMNA,

I had a letter from Purushottam. Bombay will probably suit him.
He should try it, and then come and see me whether it suits him or
not. How happy I would be if both of you completely recover your
health.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 871. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

231. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
January 29, 1933
CHI. PURUSHOTTAM,

I got your letter. It would be a very good thing if you would
set us all at rest in regard to your health. And you can do so. I do not
want you to do anything in which you have no faith. It is certainly
good that you intend to seek the advice and help of Dhurandear. Let
me know what exactly is. Madan also runs a ‘Health Home’ or some
such thing. Get acquainted with it with the help of Bhai Khambhatta.
His address is 275 Hornby Road. We have close relations with him and
he is a very good man. I want you to come and see me after you have
spent some time there or if you find that the place does not agree with
you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 907. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

232. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
January 29, 1933
CHI. RAMA (JOSHI),

May I describe your letter, received after a long interval, as a
favour? Chhaganlal takes down the letters which I dictate, looks after
files and puts every letter in its proper file, prepares dates for me to
eat, etc., etc. He is learning the Gita by heart and trying to improve his
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

155

handwriting. He is also trying to put on weight. I have already written
to you that he has succeeded somewhat in this. All four of us take a
walk every morning and evening. You need not, therefore, worry
about Chhaganlal at all.
Tell this to Vimu also. If even then she continues to worry you
about her father, tell her that I would then not call her a sensible girl. I
should like her to say: “If father’s body and mind improve and
become stronger, let him remain in jail. I will endure separation from
him.”
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, p. 288

233. LETTER TO ANANDSHANKAR B. DHRUVA
January 29, 1933
I have always needed you; and do that more so now, as I have
given you and Malaviyaji the rank of my guru 1. Therefore you must
act your role.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 100

234. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
January 29, 1933
BOYS AND GIRLS,

Your letter can be said to be beautiful. I cannot send you such a
beautiful one. All of you should try and increase your knowledge of
farming. The more you know of farming, the more you will be
interested in it. Take it from me it is a good training.
All of you going out to serve the Harijans I regard it a better
training still. If you work conscientiously and do not tire of it, you
will be able to win them over and wean them from their bad habits.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

1

Gandhiji is jestingly alluding to the Bombay asnatanists’ charge that he had
come to look upon them as his gurus.

156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

235. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
January 29, 1933
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

Your letter. You did very well in going to Dr. Sharma. Write to
me every week; if you write oftener, all the better. I will certainly
write. Leave Delhi only when you have recovered fully.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 275

236. LETTER TO MOOLCHAND AGRAWAL1
January 29, 1933
BHAI MOOLCHAND

(i) The varna system proper is no longer in practice and there
are no varnas like the Bhangi or the Chamars. If we have to make a
proper division we have to take into consideration the qualities of each
individual.
(ii) It is a matter of one’s inclination.
(iii) Inter-dining should be left entirely to individual choice.
(iv) Who bothers about anyone’s wearing yajnopavit these
days? Having no preference in this matter I have no opinion to offer.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 769

1

The addressee had asked the following questions: (i) Under the varna system,
to which varna do Bhangis and Chamars belong? (ii) Should there be intermarriage
between people of different occupations? (iii) As removal of untouchability is the
goal, should not people interdine with the Harijans? (iv) You are indifferent on the
subject of yajnopavit [sacred thread]. Nevertheless, if Brahmis, Vaishyas and others
can
wear
yajopavit,
can
Bhangis
and
Chamars
too
wear
it?
Vide also “Three problems”, 7-4-1933.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

157

237. LETTER TO GUJARAT CASTE HINDUS 1
[Before January 30, 1933] 2
I have settled amongst you since 1915. I have often spoken to
you on untouchability. You have often condemned it and promised to
give it up. Fulfil this promise or . . . you can fill up the sentence.
I have used the word ‘so-called’ purposely. I do not believe in
high or low. Religion teaches that he who believes himself high
commits a sin. God creates various classes, but does not make any
class high or low.
Bulletins are being issued against me. I have been subjected to
abuse. My writings are being torn from their context and used against
me. Don’t feel angry at that. Those who serve have been always
treated like that. If they tolerate it, they profit thereby. I have been
long used to it.
The Hindu, 31-1-1933

238. LETTER TO HARIJANS OF GUJARAT
[Before January 30, 1933] 3
Sooner or later, the temples are bound to be open for you. That
is, you will be admitted to public temples on the same conditions as
other Hindus, but devotees of God should be as clean as possible
internally and externally. Do not say other Hindus are also unclean.
Do not take the example of those who err.
The Hindu, 31-1-1933

1

According to the source, Gandhiji wrote this to the “so-called highcaste
brothers and sisters of Gujarat”.
2
The report is dated January 30, 1933.
3
The report is dated January 30, 1933.

158

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

239. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
January 30, 1933
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

There has been no letter either from you or from Sushila. No
sooner you leave the shores of India, my complaints start. Sita’s boils
must have disappeared as soon as the ship had left the shore.
I hope your work has become smoother. Let me know what
arrangements you have finally made. If you wish to live happily and
preserve your reputation, pay off the debt soon and never borrow
money again. One should not incur a debt even for the sake of one’s
father. One may give one’s life for him, but not forsake one’s
dharma, and incurring a debt is as good as forsaking dharma.
I am all right. I do not know whether or when I shall have to
fast, but I am sure of this, that I will fast only if, and when, God
prompts me. If you believe me when I say this, you will not be upset
and will not be anxious to come running here. You should leave
South Africa when you feel beyond doubt that it is your duty to do
so. Till then, your duty is to remain there and do what service you
can. You should live as if at present your country was South Africa.
You should preserve the utmost simplicity in your life except in
regard to things which may be necessary for conforming to the
standard of life there. Do not discontinue the daily recitation of the
Gita; Chapter XII is in fact your spiritual food in the journey of life.
Not only should you be able to recite the verses from memory but
they should have also sunk into your heart. If they have, you will find
that they contain the essence of all Shastras.
Did I write to you that Chhaganlal Joshi was with me? We are all
well.
Ramdas also is well. Devdas is touring with Rajaji in connection
with the temple-entry movement. Most probably they will see me
today. Ba has gone to Kaira district. She writes to me. Radha and
Kusum keep indifferent health. The former is likely to go and stay in
Deolali. Dahyabhai is completely all right how and is now in Poona
for change of climate.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4805
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

159

240. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
January 30, 1933
BHAI MUNSHI,

I read your three speeches. Two of them do not help one much
to understand you but I did get something from the third. I liked it.
The speeches would have told me more about you if the dates of all of
them had been given. I will now try to glance through some of your
books which have been received here and, if I feel like it, will write to
you about them. You have aroused my interest. I do want to get much
public service from you, and your books will help me to know you
well.
Now about another matter. You are one of the trustees
appointed by Kabibai’s will. I saw your scheme for the high school. It
was shown to me by Bhai Multi. You must be aware that the High
Court’s order includes primary education. Despite that, why have you
decided to start only a high school? And even in the high school I see
that you have given place only to pupils drawn from a higher social
level. Think over the following points and let me have your views:
1. What is meant by “high class Hindus”?
2. Does not the clause of the will under which you have
framed your scheme also include primary education?
3. If it does, why have you excluded primary education?
4. Don’t you think that you have made the hostel of the
high school very expensive?
5. What place have you given to the mother tongue in your
scheme?
6. Does the phrase “for high class Hindus” mean that the
untouchable communities cannot take advantage of the high school? I
have heard of a case in which it was ruled that, if an institution was
established for a particular class, there was no bar to the admission of
other classes if they could be admitted without injury to the interests
of the former and if that class did not raise any objection to these
others being admitted.
I hope you are all right. If you cannot write with either of the
two hands, you need not write yourself. You may take the help of one
of your companions.
160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Lilavati has not yet come and seen me. We are all well. Regards
from us all to you and your companions.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 20144

241. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[January 30, 1933] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got the big packet of letters sent by you.
Your decision regarding the Giri family seems all right. It must
be carried out now. Be firm and carry it out. If we do not act thus, the
Ashram cannot go on. Its good requires that the decision should be
carried out.
Be firm in talking with Ramji also. Discuss his problem with all
the others, and call him when you do so. We should act towards him in
the same way as you would towards me or I towards you in similar
circumstances. The path of ahimsa is like a razor’s edge. Everybody
in the Ashram should realize that the institution does not exist for him
or her, but that it exists in order to train all the inmates for service, to
teach them to offer themselves as sacrifice in the yajna of
self-purification. There can be no room in it for selfish objectives.
Why didn’t Santok go with Radhika? Who will look after her?
BAPU

[PS.]
Give me the cost of the quantity of grains consumed of which
you have supplied the figures.
I think it would be better not to trouble Chhakkaddas for the
slivers. It is not quite impossible to make them here.
Take immediate measures for Prema’s throat.
There are six letters: for Prema, Amina, Mathuradas, Bhau,
Mahavir and Narayan.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

1

The date is supplied in Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. II.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

161

242. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVLEKAR
January 30, 1933
BHAI SATAVLEKAR,

I am sending for your perusal a book by the late Rajendralal
Mitra. Return it to me after reading. I shall then read it along with
your comments. One thing needs consideration. There could hardly
be any doubt that the meanings he has inferred are the same as the
meanings inferred by Hindus who studied Vedas and performed
cow-sacrifices on their authority. If this is a fact, is there a historical or
some other reason for it?
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
S HRI P ANDIT S ATAVLEKAR
S VADHYAYA MANDAL
AUNDH
DIST. S ATARA
From Hindi: C.W. 4770. Courtesy: S. D. Satavlekar

243. LETTER TO USHAKANTA MUKHERJI
January 31, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of 21st instant. I do not recollect
having received yours of the 16th November last.
In reply to your elaborate argument I can only commend to
your attention the various statements that I have been issuing from
time to time. The more I study the question and the literature that
correspondents send me, the more deeply I become convinced that
there is absolutely no warrant in the Shastras for untouchability as we
practise it today. He who runs may read the signs of the times and see
that it is crumbling to pieces even as it is. Is it not better that we should
deliberately destroy it and purify Hinduism? Its destruction merely
through its own weakness will leave Hinduism weaker. The whole of
162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

your letter in my opinion betrays want of perception of the realities of
the situation.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. U SHAKANTA MUKHERJI
12 M UKHERJI P ARA LANE
KALIGHAT, C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 19272

244. LETTER TO MANMATHNATH SANYAL
January 31, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of 24th instant for which I thank you. The
extract from my article of 1920 seems to be quite correct though
I have no means of verifying it. But I should repeat the ideas
contained in that extract even today word for word, and I repeated the
same thing to Sjt. R. Patwari. I do not know what is now going on in
Bengal, but you can proclaim it from the house-top that in my
opinion interdining and intermarriage form no part of the movement
for removal of untouchability.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. M ANMATHNATH S ANYAL
P.O. KANTALIA
DT. M YMENSINGH (BENGAL )
From a microfilm: S.N. 19273

245. LETTER TO KALI MOHAN GHOSH
January 31, 1933
DEAR KALI BABOO,

It was a matter of great joy to me to receive your letter
describing the activities of Santiniketan and Sriniketan in the service
of the Harijans. My heart-felt congratulations to you for the solid
work you are doing.
I note that you are presently holding a district conference of the
Harijans of Birbhum. I hope that that would result in a great wave of
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

163

purification both amongst the Harijans and the caste Hindus followed
by really solid work.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. K ALI MOHAN GHOSH
HON . S ECRETARY
S ERVANTS OF UNTOUCHABLES S OCIETY
BIRBHUM, B ENGAL
From a microfilm: S.N. 19274

246. LETTER TO BHAGWANDAS
January 31, 1933
DEAR BABOOJI,

The shorter form is more affectionate than the longer. Any. way
I use it as such.
I wish I could induce you to follow my rule—not to publish a
newspaper unless it becomes self-supporting. If the public want a
newspaper, they should pay for it, and when it does not pay for itself,
it shows that it is not wanted. For such a paper naturally there are no
advertisements. There is no padding. It contains only that which the
editor cannot help giving and the staff of such newspapers will also be
chosen for its spirit of self-sacrifice. You at least may not be party to a
paper that exists on charity. Of course you will throw these ideas in
the waste-paper-basket of your mind if you have any rigid notions
about the conduct of newspapers and if these ideas find no echo in
you.
I take it that as editor of the supplement you have every right to
add your own comments to any of the opinions you may be
publishing in the supplement.
I am now torturing my brain and heart to yield to me the right
method of dealing with the situation that has arisen from the Viceregal
decision. My statement is but the prelude to the action that is
developing.
The suggestion you make does not appear to me to be practical
in the sense that the people require prolonged training for its
adoption. The vast mass of those who are today in the habit of
attending temples fervently believe in darshan and its spiritual benefit.
They will not deny to themselves a spiritual benefit for the sake of
164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

others who might be deprived of it and from their own standpoint
they will be right. If they could be persuaded to believe that there can
be no spiritual benefit to be derived from a temple whose trustees
perpetuate injustice, it would be a different thing. That is the lesson we
are trying to drive home, but we have not yet succeeded to the extent
we would like to.
I never knew that Sri Prakasa was a stickler for the proper
spelling of his name in the Roman character.1 His name in Devanagari
can only be spelt in one way. Rendered in a character with defective
phonetics, it cannot be a matter of much consequence how it is spelt.
However I shall respect his weakness.
I had a letter some time ago from Shivaprasad which led me to
think that he was making steady headway. But your letter seems to
point the other way. I would therefore like you to give me an accurate
account about him when Sri Prakasa returns.
Of course if you can get the permission for the publication of
my opinion of your book, if I succeed in sending one, I should have
no objection whatsoever. Of course my private letters do find their
way to the Press. That’s no concern of mine. What I have to guard
against is sending of opinions on books for publication or messages
to newspapers for publication apart from untouchability.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19275

247. LETTER TO HRIDAY NATH KUNZRU
January 31, 1933
DEAR HARIJI,

I have your letter of the 26th instant. If you will look up my
telegram about Lakshmanshastri2, you will find that it was accurate
enough. You got the telegram at 10.45 p.m. The next day began after
midnight. Therefore Lakshmanshastri was reaching there, as he did, at
2 a.m. following 10.45 p.m. I would not however have bothered you
about this, as it was quite a small matter, if I did not want to write to
1

Earlier Gandhiji used to spell his name as “Shri Prakasha”.
Lakshmanshastri Joshi; Gandhiji had asked the addressee to receive him at
the station.
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

165

you about the defeat of the Harijan candidates.1
This defeat makes me sad. I would not trouble you to enquire
again into the matter. But I cannot help owning to you my utter
stupidity. I had fondly believed, I suppose quite without any warrant,
that Harijan candidates will have a walk-over at elections, especially in
the beginning stages. I see, however, that without reservation they
would have a poor chance of being elected unless caste Hindus
develop a high sense of honour or unless Harijans are overwhelmingly
represented on the voters, list, but where there is neither honour nor
overwhelming representation on the voters’ list, reservation seems to
be their only safety. This Cawnpore election opens my eyes as
nothing else before did, and I can now appreciate the force of the
summary rejection by Dr. Ambedkar of any convention. Nothing but
statutory reservation would satisfy him, and it may be that we shall
have to have statutory reservation everywhere as fit punishment for
our selfishness. In order to avert a calamity of such a nature
descending upon us, if I had my way, I would right this evil by three
caste Hindus vacating their seats and allowing three Harijans to be
elected. It would be a striking demonstration of our ability to repair
wrongs if the defeat of Harijan candidates was a striking
demonstration of our selfishness.
You may make whatever use you like of this letter.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. H RIDAY NATH KUNZRU
1 KATRA R OAD
ALLAHABAD
From a microfilm: S.N. 19276

248. LETTER TO MADHAVDAS AND KRISHNA KAPADIA
January 31, 1933
BHAI MADHAVDAS,

I got your letter. May God protect you. I shall tell Devdas to
wire to Medh. He is here. But if Medh sends something, isn’t that
enough hope?
CHI. KRISHNA,
1

In the Municipal elections at Kanpur, all Harijan candidates had been

defeated.

166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You should keep on writing to me. There is no need to worry
about my elbow.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI MADHAVDAS GOKALDAS
MANORDAS S TREET
BOMBAY, F ORT
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXII

249. LETTER TO KASHI GANDHI
January 31, 1933
CHI. KASHI,

I have your letter. Do not at all worry about Prabhudas. He is
indeed Prabhu’s das.1 God will look after him better than we can. We
may do the best that we can.
He must now go to Almora as early as possible. It seems
necessary that he should again settle down there and be free from all
worries. On the plains, the days will get hotter by and by. All of us will
look for a suitable girl for him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33071

250. LETTER TO DR. RAGHUVIR SINGH AGRAWAL
January 31, 1933
BHAI RAGHUVIRJI,

I have your letter. I am not permitted to send for doctors from
outside. They can come only with the special permission granted by
the Government. So it cannot he helped. I have gone through your
book and shall carry out the experiment prescribed therein when I
have some leisure.
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI
DR. R. S. A GRAWAL
R AM EYE C HARITABLE HOSPITAL
BULANDSHAHR
From Hindi: C.W. 9665. Courtesy: M. S. Agrawal
1

That is, Servant of God

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

167

251. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
January 31, 1933
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

Your letter. I have understood your position. God will help you.
Your faith will save you from all disasters. Stay on at Sodepur and do
whatever you can from there. Your health is closely connected with
your mental state. It will improve as your worries diminish. Come here
whenever you feel like it.
Encourage Arun to write to me.
You must keep writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1696

252. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO VICEROY
February 1, 1933
THE P RIVATE S ECRETARY
TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY
NEW DELHI
DEAR SIR,

On the 30th December I sent you a telegram1 for submission to
His Excellency on the question of what is known as Dr. Subbaroyan’s
Bill regarding temple-entry. I have had no acknowledgement of it,
formal or otherwise. Nevertheless I deem it my duty to make my
submission to His Excellency on the decision just announced
regarding Sjt. Ranga Iyer’s Bills.
Though I feel that it would have served the cause of humanity
better, in point of time, if Dr. Subbaroyan’s Bill had been allowed, I
feel thankful that sanction has been granted for the introduction of
Sjt. Ranga Iyer’s Bills, one of which is drawn after Dr. Subbaroyan’s
disallowed Bill.
My purpose in addressing this submission is to invite His
Excellency’s attention to some considerations that warrant helpful
1

168

Vide “Telegram to Private Secretary to Viceroy”, 3-12-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

action by the Government of India regarding the consideration of the
Bills by the Assembly at as early a date as is consistent with the
importance of the object of the Bills.
Not knowing the procedure of the Assembly, I sought Sjt. M.R.
Jayakar’s assistance and guidance which he very kindly gave me
yesterday. He told me that the Government, if they wished, could
make it possible to pass one at least of the Bills during the ensuing
session of the Assembly.
If such is the case, I would urge that the Government are
morally bound to give such assistance as may be necessary for the
speedy consideration of the measures. By the acceptance of the
Yeravda Pact relating to the representation of the ‘depressed classes’,
now commonly described as ‘Harijans’, in the legislatures, they
bound themselves morally to facilitate as far as it lay in their power
the observance by caste Hindus of all the other conditions of the Pact,
which had reference to social and religious matters. Inasmuch as His
Majesty’s Government endorsed the legislative part of the Pact, they
recognized the representative character of the Conference that passed
the various resolutions. One of them is as follows:1
It is in due fulfilment of the pledge thus given to the Harijans
that the Bills have been brought. They are necessary inasmuch as the
English Law of Trusts bars the progress of reform in the shape of
opening temples to the Harijans. I am advised that the decisions of
British Courts hold it a breach of trust by a trustee who would open
temples contrary to the usage prevailing at the time of his entering
upon his trust. Therefore it is not open either to the trustees or the
congregations of the numerous Hindu temples even if they so wished
to admit Harijans if usage shows, as it would show, that the general
body of Hindu temples are not open to them on the same terms as to
the caste Hindus. But for decisions based on the English Law of Trusts
it would be possible for Hindu pandits and the laity to vary the custom
and introduce reforms.
The Bills are designed to remove this obstacle to progress and
restore the condition that existed prior to the decisions referred to
above. His Excellency may not know that cases have already occurred
in which Harijans have been fined for entering temples in good faith
1

This is not reproduced here. For the text of the Resolution, vide “Statement
on Viceraoy’s Decision”, 24-1-933
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

169

and for the sole object of offering worship. Hindu religious usage
warrants no such punishment. It enjoins purification of the idol and
the temple and prescribes purification of caste Hindus in the shape of
a bath, but no punishment of the offending worshipper.
Until therefore the Bills are passed or an equivalent is found by
the Government, the vital part of the Hindu pledge cannot be
performed. For me, personally, holding my life as hostage for the due
and timely fulfilment of the pledge, an indefinite prolongation of the
impediment is an intolerable agony. And as a prisoner I have, I feel, a
right to seek Government’s active assistance.
I ask for no State interference in religious matters. I am
personally opposed to it. In the present case what is sought is to
remove the existing State interference.
I hesitate to point out how the Government can help the
introduction and consideration of the Bills. It would be presumption
on my part to make any such attempt. I hope however that I have
shown sufficiently clearly that this is a case for the Government of
India to facilitate the progress and passage of the Bills in every way
legitimately open to them.
Though I have shown this to some friends, I am not sending it to
the Press. 1
From a copy: C.W. 7925. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

253. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
February 1, 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

I enclose herewith copy of my letter to the Viceroy on the Bills
whose introduction he has just sanctioned. I take it that you have
already seen my statement on the first Bill. I have not issued any
public statement on the sanction for introducing a Bill which is almost
a copy of Dr. Subbaroyan’s Bill, except that it is meant now for the
Assembly instead of the Madras Council. It is feared that the Bills,
although formal sanction for their introduction has been given, will be
shelved unless the Government are helpful and even anxious that the
Bills should be considered by the Assembly during the session that
1

For the Government of India’s eply, vide “Letter from Government of India”,
17-2-1933

170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

begins on the 3rd instant. You will see my argument in my letter to
the Viceroy. So far as I can judge, it is a conclusive argument making
it a moral obligation on the part of the Government to facilitate the
immediate consideration of the Bills.
The telegram referred to in my letter to the Viceroy was a long
argument urging that sanction should be given for introduction of Dr.
Subbaroyan’s Bill as early as possible.
Love.
M. K. GANDHI
Home Department, Political, File No. 50/II/33, p. 7. Courtesy: National
Archives of India. Also S.N. 19284

254. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
February 1, 1933
DEAR MR. JAYAKAR,

Herewith copy of my letter to the Private Secretary to the
Viceroy. I hope I have correctly set forth your advice. If you could
directly write to the Viceroy, I would ask you please to do so.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Home Department, Political, File No. 50/II/33, p. 6. Courtesy: National
Archives of India. Also S.N. 19279

255. LETTER TO DR. MOHAMMAD ALAM
February 1, 1933
DEAR DR. ALAM,

Id Mubarak from us all. It is very naughty of Begum Alam to
get sick. I hope however that it was no more than a superficial fever
and that there was nothing wrong about the appendix. You must carry
out rigorously all the medical instructions and become proof against
disease before you take up any active work.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
DR. S HAIKH MOHAMMAD ALAM
33 F EROZEPUR R OAD
LAHORE
From a photostat: G.N. 22
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

171

256. LETTER TO ALOO E. LALKAKA
February 1, 1933
DEAR ALOO,

I am glad you have been able to gain admission for two Harijan
girls. What is the use of your having got the necessary funds from
Nargisbehn? You should have collected the small. amount needed in
Poona itself. Next time you must develop faith in yourself. Of course
the girls have my blessings, and tell them when they grow up I expect
them to become fine servants of the Harijan cause.
I did know, I don’t know who told me, that Sister Mary was
joining Verrier.
1

Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19277

257. LETTER TO DUNCAN GREENLEES
February 1, 1933
DEAR MR. GREENLEES,

I write this in accordance to my promise. I am taking you at
your word.2 I shall make use of your services for untouchability work,
but since you have offered yourself, body, soul, and mind for that
service, after consultation with Sjt. Ghanshyamdas I have decided first
to send you to the Ashram and have a little bit of the experience of
the method we adopt in service and then to put you wherever you may
be most wanted. Experience at the Ashram would enable you to come
in touch with the variety of workers and the manner in which Harijan
service is being organized. I mention nothing as to your remuneration
because, if I understand you rightly, you want nothing more than what
may be needed for the sustenance of the body. That may be fixed up
after you have had your time at the Ashram. If, therefore, you retain
1

The addressee had asked for Gandhiji’s message and blessings for the two
Harijan girls who were to be admitted to Karve’s institute at Hingne, Poona.
2
The addressee wanted to consult Gandhiji about his “possible future work for
Harijans”.

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the opinion you expressed to me here, please come to Poona as early
as you can. Everything else can then be fixed up.
Yours sincerely,
MR. G REENLEES
C/ O THE MANAGER
ALLAHABAD BANK LTD .
ALLAHABAD
From a microfilm: S.N. 19278

258. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
February 1, 1933
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,

I have your letter.1 Ghanshyamdas is here and he will be able to
tell you something about what happened in Bombay, for I had no
knowledge of the composition of the Conference. I have simply
concerned myself with the Pact purely from the Harijan point of view,
for I assumed as an axiom that whatever was good for Harijans was
necessarily good for caste Hindus and that too much good can never
be given to Harijans. So far as the question of separate electorate is
concerned, for my purpose the scheme of the Pact bears no analogy
to the separate electorate provided for in the Government scheme.
That caste Hindus have no voice in the selection of candidates cannot
be a matter for complaint. The election of one out of four candidates
selected by Harijans leaves a wide range of choice for caste Hindu
voters cum Harijan voters. However, you will please let me know the
progress of events there.
I wonder if Kamala will be fully restored to health so as to
enable her to do active work. Thank you also for Abdul Alim’s case. I
hope the young man has already been admitted to the Refuge.
Yours sincerely,
DR. B IDHAN R OY
36 WELLINGTON S T.
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 19280
1

The addressee had said that the caste Hindus of Bengal wanted to alter the
Poona Pact “either by taking away the reservation of seats for the depressed classes
altogether or by giving them a lesser number of seats by mutual arrangement”,
because they apprehended that “at the second election after the new constitution is
established, the number of so-called caste Hindus in the local legislature will be
reduced to less than forty . . .” (S.N. 19247).
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

173

259. LETTER TO BHAU PANSE
February 1, 1933
CHI. BHAU,

How did you get fever? I hope you are all right now. If your
health does not improve in Rajkot, you will come here. We shall then
think about a fast. In Rajkot you may eat the food which you get in
the normal course, that is, rotli1 made from wheat flour, ghee, milk,
green vegetables and fruits. Jamnadas knows something about this
subject. Follow his advice. There is also a good vaid there. If
necessary, you may consult him. Instead of my advising you from
here, I think it will be better if you let Jamnadas guide you there.
Show this letter to him. Write to me regularly.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6794

260. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 1, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

You ought to be careful about your throat. I had cautioned you
and advised you not to exert it soon after the operation. You should
now please show it to Dr. Haribhai and follow his advice and improve
it. Don’t neglect it and invite trouble. You cannot afford to be obstinate in this matter. Your duty is: obey my order. The frequent colds
must disappear. You are not the only one whose tonsils have been
removed. Thousands of people have got their tonsils removed and
benefited from the operation. If the operation turns out to have done
you harm, that will be your misfortune. But before you are convinced
that it has done you harm, you should give a trial to the doctor’s
advice. At any rate you must stop speaking loudly. Complete silence
would of course be the best. But go and see the doctor and let me
know what he advises.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati G.N. 10325

1

174

Chapati
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

261.

DRAFT CABLE TO C. F. ANDREWS1
February 2, 1933

REUTER’S

SUMMARY

FAIR.

HUMANLY

SPEAKING

THAT

IS

LOGICAL

OUTCOME VICEREGAL DECISION. WHAT GOD WILL DIRECT GOD ALONE KNOWS.
CONCENTRATING
DERATION
HELP

BILLS

AT
PRESENT

PRESENT
SESSION.

ON

SECURING

GOVERNMENT

IF

WILLING

CONSICAN

HERE.

From a photostat: S.N. 19288

262. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
After morning prayer, Thursday, February 2, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

Though I have not received your weekly letter as usual, I must
commune with you as I do every Thursday morning.
There is one pound increase in weight to report this week. The
saltless continues. The articles have become stereotype: papaw, 20
dates, four oranges, two sour limes, four dessert-spoonfuls honey, one
lb. goat’s milk, one dessert-spoonful almond paste. Honey I take
twice with hot water and ten grains of soda bicarb each time and limes
twice with cold water and soda bicarb. Milk in the morning and
almond paste evening. There is a variation between the paste and _ lb.
milk. This gives you an accurate idea of my food. I began yesterday
to take unboiled fresh milk. They say that unboiled milk if fresh and
clean is any day preferable to and more digestible than boiled milk. I
shall watch the effect of the experiment.
Raja, Birla, Devdas and Mathuradas have been among the
visitors. They will all have left this morning for Bombay and thence
for Delhi. Raja tells me that Devdas has discovered himself a most
polished and effective speaker. He has just finished his tour in the
South for untouchability work.
Radha is bad and has gone to Deolali. Kusum has slightly
1

In reply to the addressee’s cable which read: “Reuter quotes you follows: No
occasion declare fast at present. Threat fast not extended embarrass Government but
waken reformers. Fast now will virtually apply whole India not Garuvayur only. Is
this fairly accurate satisfactory?”
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

175

improved. Mary Barr must have reached the Ashram by now, Prabhudas is now in search of a wife.
We are all well.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Herewith Devdas’s speech in Hindi and its translation. It is an
extraordinary performance
[PS.]
After all I have your weekly letter but not the intermediate as
yet. I have not the time to say more today. I would send you another
note in continuation of this. Perhaps it will be allowed as part of this.
God keep you.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6261. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9727

263. LETTER TO GAURISHANKAR BHARGAVA
February 2, 1933
MY DEAR GAURISHANKAR,

I have your letter. I presume from your letter that you are
entirely free from the attack that you had of facial paralysis of which I
was sorry to learn.
Do you mean that the Harijan employees in the B.B.& C.I.
Railway Workshops are admitted to temples, the temple authorities and
the caste Hindu worshippers well knowing that they are Harijans, or,
do you imply that they being well-dressed pass unnoticed? Measures
are being taken everywhere to introduce clean ways of living among
Harijans. I am glad therefore that you are having a Conference 1 just
for the sake of bringing this home to Harijans. I wish your Conference every success. If Dr. Ambedkar comes to see me I shall talk to
him about it. I take it that you have already written to him and to Sjt.
Rajagopalachari. He will be leaving Bombay for Delhi tonight. You
may therefore write to him directly.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. G AURISHANKAR BHARGAVA
P HUL NIWAS
C IVIL LINES, A JMER
From a microfilm: S.N. 19287
1

Rajputana Provincial Conference of the Harijans which was to be held at
Ajmer on February 25 and 26

176

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

264. LETTER TO U. GOPALA MENON
February 2, 1933
MY DEAR GOPALA MENON,

I have your letter. Satyagraha regarding Guruvayur in the old
style is not to be thought of just now. We must for the moment
concentrate upon the passing of legislation and educating public
opinion in favour of complete removal of untouchability and in
getting those temples opened which are private properties or about
which both the trustees and the public are agreed. Therefore our
programme should be threefold:
Firstly, meetings all over the country urging the Government of
India to provide all facilities in their power for the introduction and
consideration of the two Bills and appealing to the members of the
House generally not to obstruct the passage of the Bills, regarding
them as measures demanded by the dictates of humanity and noninterference with anybody’s private faith, and appealing to the Hindu
members to vote solidly for the measures so as to leave Hindu
conscience complete freedom of action regarding untouchability.
Secondly, you have to carry on house-to-house propaganda
amongst caste Hindus and induce them to show in a concrete manner
that they have ceased to believe in untouchability as it is practised
today.
Thirdly, propaganda should be carried on amongst Harijans
with reference to the observance of the laws of cleanliness and
abstention from food and drink forbidden by Hinduism.
And all this work should be carried on by men of character who
have a living faith in Hinduism.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19289

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

177

265. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
February 2, 1933
CHI. DEVDAS,

I read your speeches in Hindi and English. You have expressed
yourself well in both languages. Every speech is short and full of
thoughts and most of the suggestions are useful. It is difficult to say to
what degree the reform of Hindi is possible. Many languages have
irregular genders for inanimate objects and this cannot be changed.
There must have been some rule originally behind this phenomenon.
The difficulty is felt only by those to whom the language is not their
mother tongue, and should be accepted as unavoidable. The reform
suggested by you involves a change in the basic structure of the
language and seems impossible, at present at any rate. There has been
no instance of a language which was simplified by a deliberate effort
in such manner. A common script for all the languages would
probably save some effort in learning them. But this is a question
which concerns the science of the study of languages. I wanted to
refer only to the beauty of expression in your speeches.
Have you studied Tamil and acquired any proficiency in it?
We could not talk much and you did not come again. But don’t
mind. You have congenial company at present and so I do not worry
on your account.
Now that you are in Delhi, send me the Urdu books which you
were to send and one small dictionary in which I can find the spellings
of words without difficulty. It should preferably be a combined
Urdu-English and English-Urdu dictionary. One book on grammar.
And any other books which you may like. Write to me often.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1997

178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

266. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
February 2, 1933
Interviewed by the Associated Press, Mahatma Gandhi expressed pleasure that
Mr. Ranga Iyer’s second Bill, which is virtually a copy of Dr. Subbaroyan’s Bill, has
received the Viceregal sanction. He continued:

I can only hope that every facility will be offered for the immediate consideration of these measures by the Assembly. Though they
are private Bills, they are measures of all-India importance and, from a
humanitarian standpoint, of world importance. I hope that members
of the Assembly have no difficulty in recognizing that the Bills
constitute no interference with anybody’s religion, whatever is being
said to the contrary in utter disregard of the facts.
The Bills are necessary, if the State is to observe the strictest
religious neutrality. Both the Bills are simply designed to remove
impediments in the path of progress and do not coerce anybody or
alter any religious custom or usage.
Replying to another question regarding the chances of the introduction of the
Bills in the Assembly this session itself on which Mahatma Gandhi had been seeking
information from prominent persons, he stated that he could say on authority of
those who had been members of the Assembly, it was perfectly possible not only for
the Bills to be introduced, but if members desired it, the Bills would become law. It
was quite possible for the Government and members at least to afford reasonable
facilities for the introduction of the Bills this session.
Asked for his views on the suggestion that the Bills should be circulated for
eliciting public opinion, Gandhiji said:

I can only hope that no such procedure will be adopted, because
the question underlying the measure is in no sense new and the Bills
contain no complicated sections which may be difficult to understand.
Opinion of different individuals and groups of parties is also well
known. Therefore, circulation of the Bills means, to me, a mere
dilatory procedure.
Asked if any definite programme has been chalked out as a result of his
conversation with Messrs Birla, Rajagopalachariar and others, Gandhiji said that
they had compared notes and tried to understand the implications in the Viceregal
sanction for the introduction of the Bills as all-India measures. They had debated on
the method to be adopted for consolidating public opinion and for demonstrating the

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

179

sincerity of the sanatanists. There was no essential difference between them and
reformers, and the latter did not revolutionize religious customs or flout Shastras.
It was felt that the sanatanist agitation was largley due to the refusal of the
sanatanists to appreciate the reformer’s point of view, and the suspicion that more
lay at the bottom of the movement for the removal of untouchability than was stated
in their programme. It was, therefore, recognized that propaganda for enlightening
the public should be continued and workers should be advised not to engage in vain
debating but confine themselves to placing the issues in the clearest possible
manner.

The Bombay Chronicle, 3-2-1933

267. LETTER TO PREMNATH BHARGAVA
February 3, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter enclosing your questions. I return
the questions with answers given against them.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P REMNATH BHARGAVA
BAGH R AMSAHAI , G HAS KI MANDY
AGRA
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Q.

The report of the Hide Cess Committee, vide copy enclosed, states that the

depressed classes and the peasantry would derive much benefit from the development
of the tanning industry and incidentally refers to the existing appalling waste. Can
this statement be accepted entirely in respect of unslaughtered cattle hides? If it can
be, how should the development be brought about so as to yield maximum benefit to
the depressed classes and to the peasantry?
A. It can. The development can be brought about only by
teaching the classes concerned simple but scientific methods fitted for
individuals and villages of lifting carcasses at the places where the
cattle die and of treating every part in an economic manner excluding
the use of meat for food.
Q. Should tanning of unslaughtered hides be taken up in India to the exclusion
of slaughtered hides or only as an industry mixed up with that of slaughtered hides as
at the present stage? Is it in any way derogatory for caste Hindus to take up this
industry as a profession?

180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

A. I should love to have tanning of the unslaughtered hides as a
separate industry distinct from that of slaughtered hides. In my
opinion it is not derogatory or irreligious for caste Hindus to take up
this industry. It is essential for the purpose of cow-protection that this
industry be developed as an aid to cow-protection and therefore on
philanthropic lines.
Q. Would not the tanning of unslaughtered cattle hides on a large scale by
modern scientific methods be helpful to the following?
(a) Economic uplift of Harijan brethren and an immediate item of programme
of work for the Servants of Untouchables Society.
(b) Improvement of the living wealth of the country.
(c) The creation of a new field of activity for the educated unemployed.
(d) Protection of cows.

A.

I have my doubts. Home or village tanning is necessary.

Q. The unslaughtered cattle hides can be tanned to near perfection of the
slaughtered ones. Is your information to the contrary?

A. I believe that this is only partly true, if the carcass is taken up
immediately after death and removed so as not to damage the hide.
Q. In the manufacture of leather goods, particularly shoes, difficulty is being
experienced in providing lining which is to be thin and delicate. Such a leather is
only available from the skins of live sheep and goat. Since Hindu India in a fair
number is a flesh eater would it go against the principles of the industry of
unslaughtered hides to utilize the skins for lining and other purposes of such sheep
and goats as are unavoidably killed for food?

A. Much as I should like to answer otherwise, I believe that for
the majority of Hindus the use of the skins of goats and sheep
slaughtered for food will not offend their religious sense.
Q. In the event of the Agra Tannery at Agra restricting its activities to the
tanning of unslaughtered hides exclusively, may the Tannery expect your blessings
and distinguished patronage?

A. Any tannery restricting its activities as suggested would
certainly receive my blessings if it is run on the lines suggested by me,
but whoever does so should realize that in the initial stages he might
have to lose. I can say nothing of distinguished patronage.
From a microfilm: S. N. 19291

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

181

268. LETTER TO ELIZABETH F. HOWARD
February 3, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

It was good of you to send me the in memoriam card announcing the death of your great and good mother, of the meeting with
whom I have pleasant memories. Please accept from both Mahadev
and myself our sympathies in your bereavement, though I know that
those who have faith in God have the conviction that death is but a
sleep and a forgetting. Do not harbour grief over the departure from
this earth of loved ones.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 865

269. LETTER TO M. S. SESHACHARI
February 3, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. 1 In every case where
there has been resistance offered by prostration, whether in front of a
temple or elsewhere, I have condemned it as being contrary to the rule
of satyagraha. For, satyagraha requires suffering in one’s own person,
not offering physical resistance to another which prostration undoubtedly does. Being the author of satyagraha I have endeavoured to lay
down certain rules for the guidance of those who recognize my authority, but as I claim no monopoly of the knowledge of the doctrine of
satyagraha, it is open to anyone to give what meaning he likes to
satyagraha and lay down rules also according to his liking.
My letter to the President of the League in Ellore has only a
limited application. The word ‘dodge’ is to be taken in its dictionary
meaning. I never knew it to bear the meaning of tramping over any
person. Once Pandit Malaviyaji ‘dodged’ to the amusement of the
public and to the discomfiture of the so-called satyagrahi students
1
The addressee had asked why it could not be called a satyagraha and could be
“dodged” if four or five orthodox Brahmins prostrated themselves in front of a temple
and peacefully resisted any attempt to allow untouchables in the temple.

182

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

prostrating in front of his college by erecting a bridge over them and
making a safe passage for the fellow-students who wanted to exercise
the right of attending the college. Not one of the prostrating
brotherhood was in any shape or form injured or molested, and, if my
recollection serves me right, the prostrating ones admired Malaviyaji’s
non-violent resourcefulness. But that was only one way of dodging.
The dictionary says you can make a dodge behind, around, under,
between or into what will hide one. But you will recognize that all
these dodgings exclude violence.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. M. S. S ESHACHARI
704 NORTH ADAYAVALANJAN
S RIRANGAM
From a microfilm: S.N. 19293

270. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[February 3, 1933] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter.
You. must have got my letter regarding Mahavir and the family
must have left now. If they have not left, you may use the accompanying letter. It is best now that the chapter should be closed as early as
possible. After it is closed, I will write in greater detail about the duties
of people who live in the Ashram.
Titus’s overstaying his leave seems improper. We would be in a
better position to judge if we know the reason for his doing so. But it
can be stated as a general rule that nobody should overstay his leave
except for reasons absolutely beyond his control. However, do not
start enforcing this rule with Titus. Know the reason from him after he
has returned and write to me. But we can lay down the following rule
for the future:
Anybody who violates a vow or pledge taken by him should, if
he is outside the Ashram at the time of doing so, keep out of the
Ashram and, if he is in the Ashram, leave it. In an ashram which is
dedicated to truth, this rule should be observed without any exception.
1

The date is supplied in Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. II.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

183

It will not apply in a case in which the reason for violating the vow or
the pledge is beyond the control of the person doing so. A person
who goes on leave also promises to return before a certain date. This
rule is observed even in ordinary institutions. An institution in which it
is not observed will not run for long or will lose its reputation.
You and other senior inmates there should discuss this rule
among yourselves and, if all of you agree, read it out to the other
inmates. If all the people accept it, enforce it rigorously thereafter.
The enforcement of such rules is essential for the work which the
Ashram has to do. I feel that it will soon be necessary for us to lay
down our lives for banishing untouchability. But only those who are
perfectly pure in their lives are fit to make such a sacrifice. If we did
not strictly observe the necessary rules in looking after all the girls in
the Ashram, we would be lost. We should not mind if the Ashram
breaks up, but should not tolerate the violation of rules which we
accept for ourselves. We are judged by the manner in which we
observe formal rules in their true spirit. Only God can know whether
we observe a rule in its spirit, but everybody can know whether or not
it is formally observed. However, the Ashram does not belong to me
alone; it belongs to you all. I have only stated my views. It is for you
all to consider whether you should act upon them.
Mahadev had got Vasram’s letter to him. I have referred to this
in my letter to him. I hope he got that letter.
What you write about Chhotubhai is correct.
My headaches did not last long. They were cured by mudpacks.
I have continued the packs as a preventive measure.
BAPU

[PS.]
Give the accompanying letters after reading them. Letters for
Durga, Krishnamaiyadevi, Nimu, Liladhar, Bhagwanji, Ba and Mary
Barr.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

271. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
February 3, 1933
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I got a letter from you after many days. Do we tolerate in other
people what the Harijans do, i.e., refuse to work and yet ask for more
money? What error do you see in what Narandas says? Shouldn’t we
expect them to give eight hours’ work? Misplaced pity is violence. I
make no distinction between them and other people, or only that we
may tolerate faults in them which we would not in other people.
Discuss this also with Totaramji, Panditji and Chimanlal and try to
understand the point. I hope you will see the error in your reasoning
or show me mine.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 351. Courtesy: Bhagwanji P. Pandya

272. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
February 3, 1933
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I got your letter. I need not write anything about the Giri
family. I have seen instances of asthma being cured by giving up salt
and through such other experiments. It is because of that that I
recommen-ded giving up salt in the book 1 on health. In India I have
not had the miraculous experiences I had in South Africa, and being
very busy with other affairs I have not been able to make any
experiments. However, there will be no harm at all if you try the
experiment. You will also have to take the Kuhne-bath in sunshine.
The head must be covered with a mud-pack or a wet towel to protect it
from heat. The bath should be taken before eating anything. The diet
should consist only of fruit and milk. As for fruits, the papaw and
mosambis will suffice. Such a diet requires no salt. One should get
clear stools; if there is any difficulty, one should take enema. You
should also daily practise slow breathing, retaining the air in the lungs
for some time. All this may help you. If you do not know how to do
1

Guide to Health, first published as a series entitled “General Knowledge about

Health”
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

185

the pranayama exercise properly, you may learn it from somebody in
the Ashram who knows it. It helps very much.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 24375

273. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
February 3, 1933
CHI. HARIBHAU,

I got your letter. You should stop dates, munakka, dried grapes
and bananas for the present. Take mosambi juice or juice of fresh
grapes in the morning. I hope you can get good milk. Drink only as
much as you can easily digest. You can take moderately fermented
curds. Take honey together with milk. Take it with lemon juice and
water, or take ten grains of soda bicarb with it. You can take the juice
of pomegranates and apples. This should be all your diet till the
wound has completely healed up. You may also drink the juice of
fully ripe tomatoes without making it into soup. Just a little quantity
will suffice for the present. Meet Gaurishankar who is in Santacruz.
Purushottam is under his treatment. You may also inquire in Kaivalyadhama. Gomatibehn knows Gaurishankar. I will read [what you have
written] about ahimsa. Look after Rohit. Give him my blessings.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 6075. Courtesy: Haribhau Upadhyaya

274. LETTER TO MOHANLAL M. BHATT
February 3, 1933
The world is not a carefully drawn geometrical figure but is a
supreme work of art painted by the brush of a mysterious artist, whose
significance is known only to the artist and will ever remain unknown
to us. That leaves only desireless effort to us.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 113

186

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

275. LETTER TO MAGANBHAI P. DESAI
February 3, 1933
We should try to cultivate in ourselves the strength of our elders
and never follow the example of their weakness. We should see love in
their eyes red with anger and save ourselves from their indulgence.
Through ignorant compassion for us, they may permit us to do or ask
us to do many things, but we should steel our hearts and refuse to
avail ourselves of their indulgence. I may ask people never to tell a lie,
but in a difficult situation may be tempted to connive at a lie. You will
then show your love for me by forcibly opening my eyes, but will act
as my enemy if you condone my weakness.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 113-4

276. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVLEKAR
February 3, 1933
BHAI SATAVLEKAR,

Your letter. The Harijan Sevak Sangh is to bring out a Hindi
weekly from Delhi. Will it be necessary to publish something over and
above that? If so, why? or, are you by any chance suggesting something in Marathi? I shall discuss it with Lakshmanshastri when I see
him.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
P ANDIT S ATAVLEKARJI
S WADHYAYA MANDAL
AUNDH
DIST. S ATARA
From a photostat of the Hindi:. C.W. 4771. Courtesy: S. D. Satavlekar

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

187

277. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
Y. M.,

February 3, 1933
CHI. NIMU,

Is it not better that you write regularly once a year rather than
not write at all? Observing rules, however light, helps to form
character. What would happen if the seasons did not follow a regular
cycle and the sun did not rise regularly? That is why I have taught up
to lesson of observing rules, by suggesting that you should write
regularly once a year. Learn the lesson if you can.
Your decision to go to Lakhtar in order to wean Kanu is correct.
It is also good that you will stay there for some time.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Nirmala Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

278. LETTER TO PALLATH RAMAN
February 4, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I have no doubt that when the so-called
higher classes or castes have forgotten the distinctions between high
and low and given up untouchability, Harijans will give up untouchability as among themselves.
The origin that you give of Nayadis 1 is very interesting and
instructive if it is historically true.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. P ALLATH R AMAN
“SAHITHU S ADANA”
P ALGHAT
From a microfilm: S.N. 19294

1

188

An untouchable community of Kerala
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

279. LETTER TO BHAGWANDAS
February 4, 1933
DEAR BABOO BHAGWANDAS,

I have your letter with 15 copies of the Supplements. I talked to
Sjt. Ghanshyamdas about the cost and he told me that he would
certainly send you a contribution and write to you also. If he has not
done so already, will you please remind him quoting this letter?
I know what you say about caste. By caste I have not meant
varna. I draw a broad distinction between varna and caste. Caste is a
comparatively modern growth. It had some material use and it may
even have it now, but I feel that it has outlived its use, and in any event
it was and is a social institution, having no spiritual basis, which varna
has. But of this I would love to write when the occasion comes and
time permits. Meanwhile, do please let me have your views whenever
you have the time.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19295

280. LETTER TO L. L. YELIGAR
February 4, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of 30th ultimo enclosing an
explanatory article on one of sister Mahadevi’s sayings. As soon as I
get the time I shall go through the article and write to you.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. L. L. YELIGAR
C/ O K. B. MUMMIGATTI
S CHOOL MASTER, H OSAYELLAPUR
DHARWAR
From a microfilm: S.N. 19296

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

189

281. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
February 4, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter. If Damodarlalji sends you any money, you
will of course accept it as from anybody who sends it, but in my
opinion there can be no approaching him. We would be well without
his financial help unless it comes unsolicited and of his free will.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
S JT. G HANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
BIRLA HOUSE
ALBUQUERQUE R OADS
NEW DELHI
From a photostat: S.N. 19298. Also C.W. 7926. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

282. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
February 4, 1933
CHI NARAHARI,

I got your letter. It is a good sign that we are able to see our own
weaknesses. Even if people call us simpletons or impractical fools, we
will not violate truth in word or deed. Your experience that it is
difficult to live in that manner in a place like that is that of others too,
but one may be said to follow dharma only if one does so even in the
face of difficulties. He is not the best captain who steers a ship in a
calm sea; it is the one who does not let a ship sink even in stormy
waters. But we should not feel unhappy about the past. We have learnt
the necessary lesson from it. In future let God decide what work you
should take up and what you should not. All that we should do is to
resolve to cling to truth in whatever circumstances we may be placed.
We should have faith that God does not test beyond their strength
those who trust Him. The pity is that we do not trust Him. If we do,
why should we feel concerned whether we shall lose our good name
by clinging to truth, or harm the cause or displease a co-worker? God
is there to concern Himself with all these problems.
But my purpose in saying all this is only to advise you not to
190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

bemoan the past.
Give me a description of Kuvalayananda’s Ashram. Who are the
teachers there? What things do they teach? What fee do they charge?
Manibehn and you should learn this lesson from what has
happened, that a mother should know how to take care of the
children’s teeth. Their food should not be very soft and should not
contain too much starch. They should have sugar and jaggery in very
small quantity only. Instead, they may be allowed to suck juice from
lots of sugarcane in the season. When the season is over, the children
may be given fruits containing sugar, like figs, munakka, dates, etc.
Moreover, the mother should stand by the side of the children when
they brush their teeth in the morning and teach them to clean the teeth
with the babool stick vigorously, and also see that they use a mixture
of powdered coal and salt which has been properly sifted. They
should be taught to gargle properly after every meal and to massage
the teeth and the gums with their fingers.
The truth is that most of us are scarcely fit to be parents. Why
should those who have not learnt the science of child-care bring
children into the world? This question led some to the discovery of
brahmacharya and some others to the discovery of artificial birthcontrol. The second is a dangerous and perilous way. The middle
course, that of lethargy and indifference, is still more dangerous and
perilous.
While teaching Mani how to take care of the children’s teeth,
teach her the whole science of child-care. She should also learn to
observe the stools and the urine of the children. She should examine
them from time to time. She should also examine their eyes, ears and
nails, their habits of breathing and their tongues, and watch how they
speak and what they do during the whole day.
All these things become very easy to do once the mother has
formed the habit of doing them.
Tell Gomati that she may come whenever she wishes.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9054

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

191

283. LETTER TO ANANDI L. ASAR
February 4, 1933
CHI. ANANDI,

I got your letter. Your fever will not be cured by our blessings, it
will be cured by your own care and effort. You should take complete
rest. Complete rest means lying in bed all the time. You may read a
little in bed. You should even eat without getting out of bed. The diet
should be milk, curds and fruits, also boiled vegetables if you want.
You may eat rotlis too, but need not worry about them if you cannot
digest them because of lack of exercise. I am sure you will come to
relish milk. If you do this, you are sure to be all right.
Not only three, but four of us give you blessings for eighteen
years. Don’t you want the blessings of Chhaganbhai? Ask Prithuraj to
write to me and explain what the trouble with him is. Who is treating
him? And what is the treatment being given? Does Rohini glow with
the brightness of the constellation of that name?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5068. Courtesy: Anandibehn
P. Buch

192

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

284. STATEMENT ON “HARIJAN”
[Before February 5, 1933] 1
The first number of the English edition of Harijan2 to be
published under the auspices of the Servants of Untouchables Society
will be published on Saturday the 11th instant. It will be printed at the
Arya Bhushan Press. Mr. A.N. Patwardhan, of the Servants of India
Society, is the declared Printer and Publisher. Mr. R. V. Shastri, B.A.,
B.L., is the Editor. Only recently the latter left a lucrative post in
partnership in Calcutta, and gave his services on a mere living wage to
Mr. A. V. Thakkar, Secretary of the Servants of Untouchables
Society. When it was decided that this English edition is to be
published in Poona, I asked Mr. Thakkar whether he could spare Mr.
Shastri for the editorial work, and whether the latter would undertake
the responsibility. Both promptly responded.
I hope to contribute my full share so far as it is possible for me,
to the contents of the paper. I hope the paper will have a very large
patronage. It is desired to make the paper completely self-supporting.
The annual subscription, inland, will be Rs. 4 including postage and
Rs. 3 without, while the foreign subscription will be Rs. 5-8. A single
copy will be priced one anna. Intending subscribers will please send
their names to Mr. Patwardhan, with subscription charges in money or
stamps.
The Hindu, 6-2-1933

1

Vide “Letter to V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 5-2-1933.
After Gandhiji’s arrest in January 1932, Young India was discontinued, its
last issue being that of January 14, 1932. As the movement against untouchability
grew stronger, Gandhiji decided to bring out another journal, Harijan, to propagate
his views. The first issue of Harijan appeared from Poona on Fabruary 11 , 1933
under the editorship of R. V. Shastri. On April 13, 1935, Mahadev Desai became its
editor. In 1940, during the Individual Civil Disobedience movement, it was
suspended. However from January 18, 1942 it again began to make its appearance
from the Navajivan Press, Ahmedabad, till the press was raided on August 21, 1942
and the journal banned. After the removal of the ban by the Government on January
10, 1946, the journal was revived on February 10, 1946, under the editorship of
Pyarelal who continued to work in that capacity up to February 22, 1948.
Subsequently, it was edited by Kishorelal G. Mashruwala and lastly by Maganbhai P.
Desai till the journal stopped publication in March 1956.
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

193

285. MESSAGE TO HARIJAN CONFERENCE, KOLABA
February 5, 1933
I hope the Conference will pass constructive resolutions, with the
full intention of carrying them into effect.
The Hindu, 6-2-1933

286. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
February 5, 1933
DEAR COL. DOYLE,

Major Bhandari has just shown me the Bombay Government’s
order in connection with my cable 1 to Mr. Andrews. As it was rather
important that it should go at once I have asked Major Bhandari
kindly to withdraw an amount from my private account which as a
matter of fact is not my own property. I am hoping for a revision of
the Government’s order and thus to reimburse my private account.
My reason for asking for a revision is this. But for the very heavy bill
that was paid to the dental surgeon my account would show a good
balance. You will recall that the dental surgeon was called in at your
suggestion and not mine; also that when you suggested that I should
obtain a new plate I asked for Dr. Desai, a dentist friend, to be called
in, and that I also told you in my letter of the 28th June, 1932 that I
had suggested his name as “I had no desire to land the Government
in the expense of a new set of teeth”, and I knew that “Dr. Desai
would not want to make any charge for the plates he might make for
me.” You will thus see that I could have had the plate without any
charge and at that time I had never suspected that the dental charges if
they had to be paid would be paid out of monthly allowance. As you
are aware, from month to month I was saving as much out of the
hundred rupees as possible. But you chose to call in a dental surgeon
of your own selection. I could have no objection and when the bill
was shown to me by Major Bhandari and when he told me that the
money had to be paid out of my allowance, though I demurred I did
not wish to raise any objection because I did not think then that I
would want to draw upon the balance that was then outstanding in my
1

194

Vide “Draft Acable to C. F. Andrews”, 2-2-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

favour.
But in the new circumstances that have arisen, I must ask for the
dental charges being removed from my account and if that be done
there wouldbe at once a balance in my favour. I would further suggest
that Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel’s and my accounts be amalgamated.
There is a balance in his favour still left. If therefore these two
accounts are amalgamated there would be a surplus left. I have
consulted the Sardar and he is quite willing that our accounts should
be amalgamated. In fact both of us have often suggested the adoption
of this course to Major Bhandari.
May I ask you please to secure an early decision on this point as
telegrams have to be frequently sent by me especially at this moment.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I. G. P. File No. 10

287. LETTER TO BILL LASH
February 5, 1933
DEAR FATHER LASH,

You do confound a poor man like me. Who is father, and who is
brother, and when, and also perhaps why? But that is neither here nor
there.
It is a fine thing to find you in Sabarmati. I hope you will feel as
much at home there as at the C.S.S.A., and it is good too that you are
there when Mary Barr is there. I take a promise from every stranger
that visits the Sabarmati Ashram that he should give me his criticism
of the Ashram and especially tell me frankly all about the defects he
might have noticed in it. You have to make the promise, please.
Now, for your difficulty. It is not necessarily wrong “to be
compelled to act against one’s reasoning and instinct through fear of
hurting someone whom we love”, provided of course that the thing
we do is in itself not only not wrong but morally worth doing. You
will notice that I have copied your own wording. Conversely, to be
compelled even through love to do a thing that is wrong is undoubtedly wrong. But then that love itself is wrong. It is good for me to love
you and be loved by you. But it is immoral for me to do wrong for
the sake of love. If there is any likelihood of that happening, we have
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

195

to shun each other’s company.
Having stated these two propositions, let me cite the world’s
experience in proof. Whether it is right or wrong, it is a fact that in
innumerable cases men and women are good, not for the sake of
good, but for the sake of love which they owe to others or which they
receive from them. In an equal number of cases such love keeps us
from falling. Perhaps you will easily admit that Jesus Christ was and
still remains one of the greatest among moral coercers of the world.
He continually coerces you, a very weak man otherwise, to do the
right thing though your weak flesh would have you to do the wrong
thing, and the strange thing is that you sing hymns of praise to Him
for holding you tight in His chains. You do not mind some people
laughing at you for your helplessness and weakness. Do not retort by
way of answer: “But Jesus was Christ and God Incarnate.” I have
given you the most telling illustration to show what is happening in
everyday life. Some have God to rely upon; others, poor mortals, have
their parents; and yet others, like me, have their wives, sons and friends
to lean on. I had, not very many years ago, all but fallen, but the
thought of Devdas, who was then living with me, of Mahadev,
Mathuradas and others who were at that time surrounding me and
whom I believed to be themselves leaning on me, and the thought of
my wife, kept me from going to perdition. It was their love which
chained me so tightly and strongly that I could not burst through the
bond although the flesh was pulling hard enough to tear the chains to
bits and rush into hell-fire.
That is the type of coercion and no other which my love, expressed through my fast, was intended to exercise, the common thing in
all these illustrations being the doing of a right act. There is nothing
wrong in people doing the right thing under the pressure of love and
later doing the same thing for the sake of it. I hope I have made my
point clear, even though I might not have carried convition.
You must pardon me when I contradict you by saying that
God’s shoulders are broad enough to bear the responsibility even of
anything that is wrong. In Christian parlance, does He not bear easily
the humanly intolerable burden of the world’s sins? This contradiction is unnecessary for our purpose, but I thought I would draw
your attention to what I think is a clear slip. My fast was certainly
right so long as I hold the belief truthfully that it was prompted by
God. But even under God’s shelter I cannot claim immunity from a
196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fast which may be designed to compass unknowingly an immoral
thing. Therefore, the motive behind must be right, the end in front
must be equally right, and the act itself propelled by the motive
should also be right. Hence in this chain the intermediate act, if it is
violent, would vitiate both the motive and the end. Hence the necessity
for unadultered ahimsa—non-violence in thought, word and deed.
And since the Gita says “Man can really only control his acts” 1, if
they are right he may safely leave the rest to God, and whether he
willingly and wittingly does so or not, God alone controls the rest.
I do hope that your foot is quite all right now. If it is not, I
would not now ask you to try the earth-cure, but ask Narandas to send
you to a doctor or fetch a doctor for you. It is no use playing with
even a small mischief.
With love from us,
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 40

288. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
February 5, 1933
Ere this reaches you, you will have seen from the papers that an
English weekly called Harijan will be published from Poona by the
Arya Bhushan Press, Patwardhan being the Printer and Publisher and
R. V. Shastri, whom you know well, being the Editor. Of course I shall
be writing for the paper and guiding the policy. It will be solely
devoted to the Harijan cause. If you at all feel like it, I would
appreciate a message from you, addressed in your own inimitable way,
both to the caste Hindus and the Harijans, but the manner of doing it I
leave entirely to you.
I hope you are keeping well.
R T. H ON . S ASTRI
From a photostat: S.N. 19299

1

II. 47

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

197

289. LETTER TO N. C. KELKAR
February 5, 1933
DEAR MR. KELKAR,

I do want your active help in the campaign against untouchability. How far and in what manner you can give it, you alone know.
But please understand that I am a beggar knocking at your door.
When you have the leisure, do please give me a call by appointment,
Wednesdays, Thursdays and Sundays excepted.
As you know, an English weekly called the Harijan will be
presently out. It will occupy me for the whole of Wednesday and
Thursday every week, and Sunday is a bad day for the jail authorities.
I would also like you to give me a message for Harijan, if you feel
like giving one.
From all accounts, I understand that you have physically
benefited by your recent visit to London.
Yours sincerely,
N. C. KELKAR
From a photostat: S.N. 19300

290. LETTER TO R. VENKATA SIVUDU
February 5, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter and the memorandum of items of work to be
undertaken by your Anti-untouchability League. I notice seven items,
of which five relate to the carrying on of agitation or propaganda, one
relates to satyagraha and one relates to the administration of funds.
My advice is that all these may be cut out altogether and the activities
of the League be confined to actual constructive work by individual
workers. It is wholly unnecessary to agitate for waste land, political
rights or even about matters of education. What you need today is to
educate as many as possible and to relieve economic distress of as
many as possible and to have as many temples opened as possible.
There may be some propaganda required about this, but that is part of
the constructive work itself and cannot absorb the whole of the time of
198

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the members. There is no question just now of satyagraha for
anything. Such is my idea.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. R. V ENKATA S IVUDU
HARIJAN S EVA S AMITI
BRODIEPET , G UNTUR
From a microfilm: S.N. 19301

291. LETTER TO N. H. PURANDARE
February 5, I 933
MY DEAR PURANDARE,

I have been working at your long letter. I handed it to Sjt.
Patwardhan and asked him to tell me whether there was any
overcharge at all in connection with the bill for the publication of the
book. He placed himself in touch with Vasukaka and he says that you
never showed him the book but asked him for quotation for printing a
book containing eight demi pages. When he saw the proof and saw the
corrections you have made, he said that in some respects the Arya
Bhushan bill was lower than his. Thus whereas for composing, the
Arya Bhushan bill is Rs. 18, for the same amount of work,
Chitrashala’s will be Rs. 36, for printing, Arya Bhushan 3, Chitrashala
5; for paper, Arya Bhushan 4, Chitrashala 8; and even in the bill as
rendered by Chitrashala Press, the amount is 32 as against Arya
Bhushan’s 25/8. For covers Arya Bhushan has charged 7, Chitrashala
would charge 7/8, for binding Arya Bhushan has charged 7/8,
Chitrashala would charge 10.
So you will see that at every step you are wrong. I wish you
could see your mistake.
Yours sincerely,
P ROF. N. H. P URANDARE
P OONA 2

[PS.]
Before this letter was typed, I had your postcard. You will
see I have anticipated you in the foregoing. But if you will have
Vasukaka Joshi to formally go through the bill, I will gladly hand
the Arya Bhushan bill to him and give his opinion as to its fairness
or otherwise, I will accept his opinion as final and on payment by you
of the amount fixed by Vasukaka Joshi, less what might have been
received for the books already sold, the books will be delivered to
you.
From a microfilm: S.N. 19302
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

199

292. LETTER TO SEENU
February 5, 1933
DEAR SEENU,

I must thank you for your letter and the very good photographs
you have sent me. They gave me a good idea of the work you are all
doing.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19303

293. LETTER TO T. SUNDARAM
February 5, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Please do not ask me to read and correct what
you have written1. It is really beyond me, and from what little I have
read, my advice to you is to abstain from writing anything at all about
temple-entry or anything else to the papers. You have no restraint
over your pen.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. T. S UNDARAM
TYPIST
TEPPAKULAM P. O.
TRICHINOPOLY
From a microfilm: S.N. 19304

294. LETTER TO T. M. KRISHNAMURTHI
February 5, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. Let me first of all set
your mind at ease by telling you that no temple is to be opened to the
Harijans except by the consent of the overwhelming majority of those
who are at present entitled to offer worship at the respective temples.
1

200

On “Temple-entry Compromise”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Therefore, there never will be any cause for desertion. Nor, so far as I
know, are temples already opened—and there are no fewer than 500
temples opened—deserted by the ordinary temple-goers except a few.
I entirely agree with you that the hearts of people can only be
changed by prayer, but my own experience and the experience of
innumerable people shows that there is no intense prayer without
fasting. My fasts have been in the past, as I hope they will be in the
future, if they have to come, an expression of intense prayer.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. T. M. K RISHNAMURTHI
2/19 CHENGAL R OY MUDALI S T.
TRIPLICANE, M ADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 19305

295. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
February 5, 1933
CHI. KAKA,

I got your letter. You should have got your teeth extracted
earlier. Even now, you should get as many of them extracted as may
be necessary, and not only thirteen. As too many midwives complicate
labour, so also with doctors. Till you feel safe about the teeth, remain
in Bombay. Don’t feel at all that by doing so you will neglect your
duty. You can serve in many ways while staying in Bombay While the
treatment of the teeth is going on, you should live in the open air and
daily go for as long walks—up to fifteen miles—as your body can
endure without fatigue. I am sure you go to bed early and rise early.
The morning hours should always be spent in taking walks. In food, it
is necessary to exclude all starches for the present. The best diet of
course would be milk, curds, ghee and the juice of oranges and
mosambis. These things do not have to be chewed. The starch should
be converted into sugar in the mouth, which will not be possible in the
present condition of your teeth. Hence the diet which I have suggested
is the only suitable one. You may, if you wish, eat some green
vegetables, like gourd or bhaji, but even these are not necessary.
Have no fear about my teeth. Since the doctors here don’t
worry about my elbow, why should I? For calling my own doctor, I
would have to obtain special permission, which the Government is not
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

201

likely to give. You should rest assured that I am not at all neglecting
my health. The moment I suspect something, I will not remain
indifferent even for a moment. And why should you worry about that
which I myself am ready to worry about?
Your suggestion about Bal is correct. Write to me and let me
know when he comes to Bombay. I believe Harijan will be published
on Saturday.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9490. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

296. LETTER TO BALWANTSINHA1
February 5, 1933
BHAI BALWANTSINH,

I have your letter.
l. The guru must possess the virtues of a sthitaprajna2. I have
not come across such an embodiment of perfection. But I have found
a few people in all countries who possess varying degrees of these
virtues.
2. To remain equally unmoved by happiness and unhappiness,
honour and dishonour means that one should not be hurt by insults
nor feel elated by honours. But in no way does it follow that one
should not reply to the insult or end the sorrow.
3. The virtues of a devotee can be acquired by effort and the
direction of effort has been indicated in the chapter 3 on bhakti. But
there is nothing to hinder one from acquiring the virtues in a different
way if it be possible.
4. Sleep can become sounder by practice. On waking from
sound sleep there is awareness of nothing except sleep and a sense of
well-being. Even when the Gita, etc., are recited many thoughts rise
unawares in the mind. Sound sleep is possible when the soul is in
rapport with the Gita or, in other words, with God. Therefore we
should faithfully continue the present effort of filling ourselves with
the Gita.
1
The letter carries the following note in English evidently for the jail
authorities: ‘‘This contains only answers to religious questions. M.K.G.”
2
A man of steadfast wisdom
3
Bhagavad Gita, Xll

202

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

5. The idea of writing about the Ramayana too has always been
there but lack of time has stood in the way. Anyway there is no longer
much need of it. One who studies Anasaktiyoga1 well can easily get at
the secret of the Ramayana.
6. The history contained in the Ramayana is only secondary.
Spiritual philosophy is the main thing. Dharma has been revealed
through the unfolding of events. Hence while studying the
Ramayana, you must regard Rama as the Supreme Being and Ravana
as the forces opposed to Him. You may equate Rama with Krishna, his
forces with the Pandava army, and Ravana with Duryodhana. The
Mahabharata and Ramayana express one and the same idea.
Your study of the Gurumukhi works is also useful. The vow of
memorizing the Gita must be kept.
I have answered Bhai Fulchand’s letter. I hope this letter reaches
[him].2
We are all well.
Blessings to all from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1869

297. LETTER TO G. T. HINGORANI
[Before February 6, 1933] 3
You should not be impatient. There should be no satyagraha
just yet. We must educate public opinion, and deal gently with
orthodoxy. Remember that at one time many of us shared the same
prejudices as orthodox people do today. You must, first of all,
ascertain whether it is the trustees who refuse to open the temples or
whether it is the temple-goers who would not tolerate the admission of
Harijans. For that purpose, you should have a scientific and accurate
referendum, voting being strictly confined to those who are entitled to
enter the respective temples. The proprietors of hotels and saloons
stand on a somewhat different footing. They have their bread and
butter to consider, and they must not be expected to take risks.
1

Gandhiji’s commentary on the Gita; vide
An earlier letter to the addressee had miscarried; vide, “Letter to Fulchand B.
Shah”, “Letter to Ada West”, 24-2-1933
3
The letter was released to the Press from Karachi on February 6, 1933.
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

203

Therefore, you must take a referendum of their actual patrons and if
the patrons have no objection, I have no doubt the proprietors of
hotels and saloons will be quite glad.
The Hindu, 7-2-1933

298. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT
OF BOMBAY
February 6, 1933
THE S ECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY
HOME DEPARTMENT
DEAR SIR,

I enclose herewith letter from Shrimati Mirabai (Slade) dated
28th ultimo and handed to me only this day. It speaks for itself. Being
in answer to an anxious enquiry from me, the letter might have
been given to me earlier. Since this letter was written the usual weekly
letter was received in which she stated that she was examined by
the Civil Surgeon who had recommended her for transfer. Miss Slade
had repeatedly complained to me in her weekly letters about
the stenches and the stifling atmosphere of Arthur Road Prison and
recurring attacks of headache, giddiness, eruptions and the like. But I
felt, as she had felt, that as a prisoner she must suffer the hardships of
prison life. It might however be held pardonable, if not even right, in
cases causing anxiety about health, for prisoners to bring to the
knowledge of superior authority the condition of their health. Acting
in accordance with that rule I have approached Government before
now, wherever I have felt the necessity of bringing to their notice cases
of prisoners in whose welfare I have been interested as if they were my
own nearest relatives. The letter enclosed gives a true picture of Miss
Slade’s health, and her attachment towards me. It has been a privilege
to me to enjoy that affection. She came to me with the fullest consent
of her late mother and the reluctant consent of her father the late Sir
Edmond Slade who never cut off the annuity that he used to give to
her. I hardly need to say anything more about her family connections
which are better known to Government than to me.
You will notice the dread she has of being sent away to a place
further away from me. I wish she was less sensitive, but her
sensitiveness has to be taken into account as it so quickly affects her
body. I therefore suggest her transfer to the Female Yard attached to
204

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

this Prison. From all the accounts that I have heard of the Yard, it is
airy, roomy and much cooler than Arthur Road Prison. She will
certainly be happier there.
I suggest too that she be examined by specialists in view of what
she says about her glands and the condition of her tonsils. I would
gladly name my doctors if Government would entertain their names,
but I have no desire to press the point. I should be entirely satisfied so
long as she is examined by specialists.
It grieves me to have to approach the Government over a
delicate and personal matter. But I entertain the hope that perhaps the
Government may even appreciate the fact that I have brought this
matter to their notice. I shall be thankful for an early decision.
I remain,
Yours truly,

M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800
(40) (3), Pt. IV, pp. 29-31

299. INTERVIEW TO MACRAE1
February 6, 19332
There may undoubtedly be points on which we will agree to
differ, but I have no doubt that there will be so many points of contact
between us that there will be no real difficulty. Whether there is or not,
my own course in the matter is simple, as I have said repeatedly that
caste Hindus have wronged the so-called untouchables, and that those
of us who have realized the magnitude of that wrong have got to do
penance for it.
Home Department, Political, File No. 44/35, 1933, pp. 16-8. Courtesy:
National Archives of India

1

This has been extracted from R. M. Maxwell’s letter dated February 14,
addressed to Home Secretary, M. G. Hallet.
2
From Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 129
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

205

300. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
February 7, 1933
MY DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

I have your several letters. As to the second edition of
Holloway’s, we must give up the idea for the time being.
As to the second Harijan day, can you tell me how much was
collected on the previous Harijan day?
It is most vexing that the Hindi Harijan is taking all this time. I
wonder if I sent you or Ghanshyamdas an offer from Delhi from a
man to take over his weekly which he is now publishing—lat;- It
might be worth while seeing him. According to his statement, Indra
knows him.
The English edition would be out on Saturday. We are bringing
out 10,000 copies of the first issue. It will be stopped if it does not
become self-supporting, and it cannot but be self-supporting if all the
Provincial Boards subscribe to a certain number of copies. They must
need them for their workers if they are efficiently working organizations. Every such organization has to have a common organ. This
applies to you also. So you will please telegraph to me how many
copies you will want and you have to pay in advance for the copies
you may need. You may send for the minimum number, so that at
your end too there may be no waste. Some copies no doubt you will
have to distribute free.
I would like you also to send Patwardhan a cheque or draft for
Rs. 500. I had Rs. 544-6-0 with me which I wanted to transfer to you,
but now I am paying that amount to Patwardhan. It would be regarded
as a loan as from you to the paper, and as soon as subscriptions arrive,
the loan will be refunded, unless there is a loss from the very
commencement. Thus, you will credit me with Rs. [5]44-6-0 1 as
having been received from me for untouchability work and debit
Harijan with Rs. 544-6-0 in addition to the Rs. 500 I have asked you
to send from there. Patwardhan cannot possibly need more than Rs.
1000 to go on with. Before he begins to receive subscriptions, moneys
have to be disbursed for stamps, wages and paper.
If there is any news to impart for publication in Harijan you
1

206

The source is illegible here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should send a telegram to Shastri; as a matter of fact, if you are
receiving reports from all the Boards, you should be able to send
Shastri a press telegram every week.
Yours sincerely,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1108

301. LETTER TO VISHWANATH PRASAD MISHRA
February 7, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. 1 Whilst I should be delighted to see election
of Harijans to all elective institutions, I must not intervene by way of
anticipating results. It would be hardly proper for a prisoner to do so.
Yours sincerely

S JT. V ISHWANATH P D. M ISHRA
P LEADER
C HAPRA
From a microfilm: S. N. 19306

302. LETTER TO BHAGWANDAS
February 7, 1933
DEAR BABOO BHAGWANDAS,

A professor of Arabic has written to me asking for assistance in
the work that he has undertaken of translating Manusmriti into Arabic.
He does not know Sanskrit himself. Therefore he has to rely upon
English translations. I have, however, warned him against taking the
printed text going under the name of Manusmriti as the reality. When
I read this book, whilst I was stirred by many verses of moral beauty, I
was repelled by several verses which seemed to be so wholly contrary
to the spirit of the moral teaching. I have therefore always held that
the printed text is not the work of the same author nor written at the
same time and that there have been many interpolations after the
1
The addressee had requested Gandhiji to send his blessings for the success of
a Harijan candidate in a bye-election for the membership of the Bihar and Orissa
Legislative Council.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

207

original verses were written. I have no authority for this statement save
my own instinct. You have however made a deep study of this book
and perhaps a comparative study of all the Smritis. If you have come
to any decision and written something on it, I would like to have your
opinion, or, if you know any person who has held the view that I hold
of the Smriti or how he has reconciled the contradictory verses, I
would like you to enlighten me. I am just now hard pressed owing to
Harijan work falling on my shoulders. I wanted to write separately to
Principal Dhruva on this matter, but I must give up that ambition and
ask you to kindly pass this letter on to him so that he can let me have
his own views also. I have warned Professor Haqqi against translating
the printed text without examining the question from the standpoint
suggested by me. But I cannot help him if he wants to be guided
along the lines suggested by me unless I have some authoritative
guidance myself. My instinct is good enough for my consolation but
it can be no guide for others if I cannot support it with external
convincing evidence.
Yours sincerely
From a microfilm: S.N. 19308

303. LETTER TO N. R. KSHIRSAGAR
February 7, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. 1 I understand what you say. If
Harijans were not Hindus, samskara 2 would be necessary. None is
necessary for Hindus before they can enter temples. Of course they
have to observe the laws of ceremonial cleanliness and the rest.
Yours sincerely,
S JT. N. R. K SHIRSAGAR
15 NABHIKAM S TREET
VELLORE (N.A.)
From a microfilm: S.N. 19309
1
The addressee had written: “It is yet not a settled fact that the untouchables
are really Hindus.”
2
Literally, ‘impression’; here, a ceremony, especially of initiation

208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

304. LETTER TO HARIBHAU PHATAK
February 7, 1933
MY DEAR HARIBHAU PHATAK,

I have your letter. I am sorry that Mr. Mate should think that I
betrayed any impatience or anger in carrying on the argument with
him the other day. If there was any such betrayed, I must apologize to
him. It was certainly not intended. He can come and discuss the whole
thing with me. I promise to observe complete silence and listen to him
whilst he is speaking. After all, my business is to deliver my message
and convert those who think differently from me. I have no desire
whatsoever to impose my views on anybody, and I cannot convert
anybody by being impatient or angry. He may bring any friend he
likes. Let there be a previous appointment made so as to avoid
disappointment. Now that I have to attend to Harijan I must not give
any appointments for Wednesdays and Thursdays. Fridays and
Saturdays would be quite good.
As to the subject-matter of your letter Mr. Mate is quite wrong
in thinking that any but Hindu voters will have the right of voting
under the Temple-entry Bill, and I can show quite clearly that there is
absolutely no question whatsoever of compulsion. Nor is there the
slightest desire to see the Bill passed if the Hindu Members do not
want it. The first Bill has no reference even to temples. It is the most
innocent that can possibly be conceived. It simply takes
untouchability out of the penal law of the land. Surely, it was wrong
when the courts were first called upon to give a legal status to
untouchability. I should very much like to know in what respect either
Bill constitutes an interference with anybody’s liberty.
I am sorry to hear about Yashoda Bai. I shall certainly write to
her.
With reference to the charkhas as you know, Kanitkar was
manufacturing the very thing in Poona. His boy knows the thing. I
had suggested slight improvements in the pattern that was brought to
me. To have them from Bardoli would mean probably four annas
railage, if not more, for each charkha, when the whole thing is capable
of being made locally and cheaply. But if they must be had from
Bardoli, I can easily get them.
Please thank the makers of the oils of the two bottles. I have still
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

209

a lot left of Narayan Thaila1. I would plead with them not to send any
more till I ask for it, and I undertake to ask for it when I have
exhausted the stock so kindly sent by them.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20175

305. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
February 7, 1933
MY DEAR C. R.,

I am sure you are doing good work there.
I do not at all like Ranga Iyer’s statements in reply to
Jagadguru’s telegram. He there says, in spite of the Guruvayur
referendum result, that Malabar Hindus are against temple-entry and
gives a certificate to sanatanists for earnestness of purpose,
conservatism and what not, and makes me out to be a fair approach to
Buddha. If all the three statements were correct, one could have
nothing to say against them, however embarrassing they may be. But
they are all the three wrong. Apart from the Guruvayur referendum,
nobody knows the opinion of Malabar Hindus. Your own evidence of
Travancore is against Ranga Iyer’s opinion. The sanatanists cannot
deserve a good certificate if they can produce no one who will at all
listen to reason and understand the viewpoint of the reformer. They
exaggerate the reformers’ claim out of all proportion, and then to
describe me as Buddha is to damn the cause in advance, for
orthodoxy believes Buddha to have been an atheist denying the
authority of the Vedas, varnashrama and everything. They take pride
in the fact that Shankar arose to drive out Buddhism and they will
naturally want to drive me out if I am anything like the Buddha of
their imagination. The latest statement of Ranga Iyer therefore
increases my fear of advocacy.
I hope Devdas had my letter awaiting him when he reached
Delhi. That letter anticipated his letter just received. I am too full of
Harijan work just now to give you more or write to him separately.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20176

1

210

Narayan oil used in massage
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

306. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
February 7, 1933
Requested to explain further his statement of 14th January1 in view of
interpretations in the Assembly yesterday, Gandhji declared to the Associated Press:

The written words stand. I must not add to what 1 have already
said in my statement.
Gandhiji’s attention was drawn to different interpretations put on this
statement, and particularly to the reference made by Sir Harry Haig in this connection
to the meaning attributed to his statement by the Bombay Congress Bulletin.
Gandhiji replied:

I cannot help people putting all sorts of interpretation to my
writings. It is not a new experience to me. My statement is quite
explicit. You can surely find the correct meaning. I have certainly not
intended the statement to be equivocal, but it should be read as one
whole. You can read many meanings out of sentences detached from
their context.
Always alive to the limitations to his freedom of speech, Gandhiji declined to
answer more pointed questions in this connection, saying:

You are treading on slippery ground.
Replying to another question regarding the charge of inconsistency levelled
against him, in so far as he, a non-co-operator, had sought the aid of the Government
and the legislature in connection with temple-entry, Gandhiji said he could not
answer the question without entering into the region of politics, which he could not
do. He proceeded:

I must therefore take the risk of damage to my reputation. But I
prize my honour above reputation, and if that remains safe, then
reputation will take care of itself.
The Hindu, 8-2-1933

1

Drafted on January 7; vide “Statement to the Press”, 7-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

211

307. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
February 7, 1933
Commenting on the letter of Jagadguru Shankaracharya of Puri to Mr. Ranga
Iyer and the latter’s reply thereto, Gandhiji said in an interview to the Associated
Press:

I am really sorry that the Jagadguru should have written that
letter about the Bills. I venture to think that the Bills do not, in any
shape or form, interfere with religious liberty. On the contrary, both
the Bills jealously guard it. Nor is the analogy used by the Jagadguru
correct. There is no technical question involved in the Bills requiring
technical knowledge. It is always open to worshippers to determine
what company they would take with them for prayer. You may call
that even a change of religion if you like. But you cannot deprive the
people of that right.
What is there to prevent cent per cent of the worshippers in a
temple admitting whomsoever they choose, even though such
admission may be against the Agama governing that particular
temple? There is no religious interference involved in restoring to the
people a right that should never have been taken away from them.
And if it is admitted that cent per cent of the worshippers can, if they
choose, alter the rules of admission into a temple, then it should easily
be conceded that a sufficient majority should have the right of
determining the question of admission so long as they do not interfere
with the liberty of the minority to perform worship in isolation from
the majority.
Surely, it is a serious thing for a responsible person like the
Jagadguru to label reformers, who claim to be followers of the same
faith and believe in the same Shastras, as renegades from sanatana
dharma. It also passes my comprehension how the passage of the Bills
can be considered an unconstitutional procedure.
If the Jagadguru’s letter is thus open to objection, I am afraid
Mr. Ranga Iyer’s reply also needs some corrections. I am not so sure
as he is, that Malabar Hindu opinion is against the Bill, and so against
the temple-entry of Harijans. The results of the Guruvayur
referendum may be regarded as an indication to the contrary.
Eyewitnesses who have been in Malabar have also told me that
popular opinion is by no means against temple-entry. But that is a
212

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

matter which can be determined anywhere if both the parties agree to
have an unofficial referendum under joint supervision.
Then, Mr. Ranga Iyer, in his enthusiasm and blind affection for
me, has been betrayed into an unfortunate analogy. I do not consider
myself in any way fit to be compared with the Buddha. I regard
myself as a very common man—a poor worker, liable to all the errors
mankind is prone to make. I am merely a humble truth-seeker. But
the analogy is unfortunate for another reason also. Sanatanists would
say that the Buddha was an atheist, and that he did not accept the
authority of the Vedas and did not believe in their divinity—not that
as a matter of fact he was an atheist or did not believe in the Vedas.
But, what he really was, is not pertinent to our point. Therefore, if I am
also considered an atheist or non-believer in the divinity of the Vedas,
I am certainly out of court, as a reformer asking Hindus to reject
modern untouchability as being wholly against Hindu Shastras
regarded as a whole.
The Hindu, 8-2-1933

308. LETTER TO G. R. ABHYANKAR
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

February 8, 1933
MY DEAR ABHYANKAR,

Will you please go through this letter and do whatever you can
in connection with the money? Get hold of it or let it be sent to me,
and do please advise me as to the best method of using a part of it in
connection with untouchables in Sangli.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: G. R. Abhyankar Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

213

309. LETTER TO R. D. ATHAVALE
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

February 8, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

Sjt. V. Joshi of Sangli was here the other day to discuss matters
about untouchability, and he reminded me that when I was in Sangli a
part of the collections made there amounting to over Rs. 850/- was left
with you. He told me too that the amount had accumulated with you
together with interest and that you would not part with the amount
except under my authority. As I did not remember much about the
collection and as Sjt. Gangadharrao Deshpande was entrusted with the
collections, I referred the matter to him, and he tells me that he has
recollection of this particular collection.
Will you kindly now send the amount with interest to me, or, if it
suits you better, hand it over on my behalf to Mr. Abhyankar to
whom I am writing by the same post that will take this letter?
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: G. R. Abhyankar Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

310. LETTER TO MATHURADAS JAIN1
February 8, 1933
MY DEAR MATHURADAS,

I was glad at last to hear from you. If I was to stop your fast I
had to use strong and precise language. As you had taken the fast in
connection with something I had done or not done, I had to assume
authority and also presume that I knew you sufficiently to send you a
peremptory telegram. Now that you claim to have known me through
my writings and doings, evidently the authoritative tone I adopted in
my wire was quite justified. You must remember that I was acting like
a responsible physician to his patient and I am glad that you promptly
responded by breaking your fast. I am quite sure even after receiving
1

214

Vide also “Letter to Dr. Parashuram Sharma”, 25-1-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

your letter, that you did well in acting in accordance with my
telegram. Since you cannot write in English yourself, do write to me
in Urdu, but write in bold clear hand and I shall be able to follow it.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
S JT. M ATHURADAS JAIN
ZIRA
DIST. F EROZEPORE, P UNJAB
From a photostat : G.N. 8942

311. LETTER TO S. A. K. SUBRAMANIAM1
[Before February 9, 1933] 2
I can say, with certainty, that those who prevent the depressed
classes from burying their dead in Hindu burial places are against
religious truth.
The Hindu, 14-2-1933

312. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[February 9, 1933] 3
CHI. MIRA,

Your weekly letter came in, in due course. And just two days
before that was given to me your special letter describing your
condition. Whereupon I sent a letter to the Government requesting
your transfer to Yeravda and also an examination by specialists. I have
done what I thought was my duty to do from every point of view. No
prisoner has a right to demand transfer. He has to submit to the
condition in which he is placed except under extraordinary
circumstances. When I think of the prison life of Howard’s4 days and
1
This was in reply to the addressee’s letter regarding the controversy raging in
the Settlement of Penang between caste Hindus and depressed classes over the Hindu
burial grounds.
2
The letter was released to the Press on February 9, 1933.
3
The source has “9-1-1933” which is evidently a slip as the “special letter”,
was dated 28-1-1933; vide “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay”,
“Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay”, 6-2-1933
4
John Howard (1726-90), prison reformer

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

215

I look at today’s, I marvel at the betterment in the condition. And yet
to prisoners who find themselves in for conscience’s sake, thereshould
be no difference whatsoever between that life and this. They must be
prepared cheerfully to submit to the life of Howard’s days. For to
them conscience is dearer than the ease of body and the pleasure of
communion through physical means with the nearest and dearest
ones. There should be therefore on the one hand every honest and
permissible attempt to keep the body in good condition and to obtain
the other amenities, on the other to receive disappointment with
perfect detachment. You should continue to report the whole of your
condition to the Civil Surgeon and give him the history of your
previous glands. I wish you had written about them before to me.
Anyway now the matter is in the Government’s hands and more in
God’s hands. ‘Not a blade moves but by His will.’
The passage you quote from the Gita refers to moderate habits.
That is not what I had in mind. The passage I had in mind occurs in
the last chapter, 52nd verse. I should translate it thus. “Who prefers
solitude, who eats meagre food, who has under perfect control
thought, speech and action, who is intent on meditation, who is free
always from attachments.”
You have no reason to complain of the quantity of your food.
You dare not go by the abstract measurement. Double your quantity
would be really meagre for many of our friends. The condition of
your own body should be the sole guide as to the quantity without
reference to that taken by others. All we should recognize is that
voluntary meagre eating is one of the most difficult things in the
world. It is a perpetual fast much more difficult than the complete
periodic fasts. Meagre food voluntarily taken must lead to perfect
poise, i.e., perfect health of body and mind. We can but make the
attempt.
My food and weight remain what I described them to be last
week. The elbow continues as before. I do not think any more about
it. I thought I told you that I had resumed spinning. I did it, I think,
Tuesday last week. I do it whilst I am receiving visitors. I have fixed
no minimum. I have not yet reached even 160 rounds. Yesterday’s
was the highest, 141. The count is over 40.
What you say about Devdas is true. His must prove a very happy
216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

marriage. Lakshmi1 too seems to be blossoming. It appears to be a
case of pure love with high motive behind it. Devdas has always liked
to serve Rajaji whom he regards as his English teacher. He could not
have found a better.
I am, we all are, just now very busy over the forthcoming
Harijan. I have a very good editor and an equally good manager. The
press belongs to the Servants of India Society with which I enjoy what
may be called spiritual relations. I have therefore not to worry about
the details of management. God is great and compassionate if He is
also terrible.
Love from us all. It is now 5.15 a.m.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6262. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9728

313. LETTER TO KESHAVRAO JEDHE
February 9, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

With reference to our conversation of the 7th instant, I do hope
that the members of the Satya Shodhak Samaj2 will throw themselves
heart and soul into the campaign against untouchability subject to the
limitations prescribed by the Servants of Untouchables Society. I
know that the Satya Shodhak Samaj is against Brahminism and against
varnashrama. The present campaign does not deal with varnashrama at
all and is not a campaign against Brahminism, but against untouchability, pure and simple, because the Society does not believe that
untouchability is any part of Brahminism. We must not here mix up
Brahmins who swear by untouchability with Brahminism. For we have
a large and growing body of Brahmins who are as much opposed to
untouchability as you and I can be.
Yours sincerely,
KESHAVRAO JEDHE
JEDHE MANSION, P OONA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20191

1
2

Daughter of C. Rajagopalachari
‘Society for Discovery of Truth’; founded by Jyotiba Phule

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

217

314. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
Immediate

February 9, 1933

DEAR COL. DOYLE,

Major Bhandari communicated to me yesterday the contents of
the Government orders about a certain letter from Appasaheb
Patwardhan addressed to me and withheld by Government. Not
knowing the contents of the letter I can say nothing about it. I see in
this morning’s Times of India that Appasaheb Patwardhan has put
himself on reduced rations. This has naturally disturbed me. I shall
thank you to tell me whether there is any truth in the report.
Will you also please let me know what the orders of the
Government of India are in the matter of conservancy work by
volunteer prisoners?
Yours sincerely,
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800
(40) (6), p. 319

315. LETTER TO RAMJI
February 9, 1933
BHAISHRI RAMJI,

Swarupbehn, wife of Ranjit Pandit and daughter of late Motilalji,
is at present in Bombay. I think it would be nice if a tour of Kathiawar
was arranged for her in connection with untouchability. You should
collect money for that purpose and perhaps it may influence people.
At present she is going to do this work alone. She has been detained
so that she can be of service to Kathiawar. She is married to a
Kathiawari, so we have a claim over her. If you wish to invite her, send
me a wire and the programme. Who will tour with her? One woman
should also travel with her. It would be better if Saraladevi or some
other woman from there itself went with her. She could well be taken
to several places in Gujarat. I shall write about this to Ahmedabad.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XX

218

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

316. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
February 9, 1933
Mahatma Gandhi has put himself in communication1 with the Government in
connection with the reported fast of Appasaheb Patwardhan, a political prisoner in
the Ratnagiri jail, and he will decide his course of action in this matter on receipt of
the Government reply.

I have no knowledge of the fast or rather his putting himself on
reduced rations, apart from the newspaper report just shown to me. Of
course, the news is disturbing; it has vital connection with my previous
action2 regarding Appasaheb and untouchability in Indian prisons. I
have sought authoritative information from the Government, and
meanwhile, I hope the Press report is incorrect.
Asked if this fast will have his support, Gandhiji said he would prefer not to
say anything at present, not having all the facts in his possession.

The Bombay Chronicle, 10-2-1933

317. TELEGRAM TO MANILAL J. VYAS
[After February 9, 1933]
3

MANILAL
S ERVANTS UNTOUCHABLES S OCIETY
BUNDER R OAD
KARACHI
LETTER4 .

YOUR
VATION

UNDER

SUBJECT
JOINT

JAMSHED5
ELECTORATE

OTHER

EXPERTS’

OPINION

RESER-

INEVITABLE.

GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20194
1

Vide “Letter to E. E. Doyle”, 9-2-1933
On December 4, 1932, Gandhiji had suspended the fast he commenced on the
previous day in sympathy with Patwardhan on the question of granting permission to
political prisoners for doing scavenging work; vide “Statement on Fast to AntiUntouchability Committee”, 4-12-1932 and “Telegram to S. P. Patwardhan”,
6-12-1932
3
Joint Secretary, Servants of Untouchables Society, Sind
4
The addressee, in his letter dated February 9, 1933, had stated that since the
Karachi Municipality Bill was being presented in the Legislative Assembly
provision for reservation for Harijans should be made in it.
5
Jamshed Mehta, President of the Karachi Municipality
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

219

318. LETTER TO E. E. DOYLE
Immediate

February 10, 1933

DEAR COL. DOYLE,

I had hoped to receive your answer by this time (11 a.m.) in
reply to my inquiry 1 about Appasaheb Patwardhan. I would like you
please to answer my query today and allay, if you will, the growing
anxiety.
Yours sincerely,
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No.
800(40)(6), p. 323

319. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
February 10, 1933
MY DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

I have your letters. With reference. to Jitendralal Bannerji and B.
C. Chatterji, I think you should take no public notice of their letters,
but you should carry on quiet correspondence with Ramanand Baboo.
I am carrying on correspondence both with them and Dr. Bidhan. No
public controversy is needed at least at this stage.
With reference to your letter about Harijan, after the letter was
sent Ghanshyamdas came here and he gave the verbal sanction.
Nothing more was therefore necessary. Nevertheless, the written
sanction should be recorded in your books.
With this you will have the Harijan itself. I am hoping that it will
be entirely self-supporting.
I have also the Memorandum about the proposed change of the
name of the Society. I note the decision recorded by you and Hariji.
Nothing more need be said about it now, and I think that the decision
was inevitable.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 1109

1

220

Vide “Letter to E. E. Doyle”,9-2-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

320. LETTER TO HORACE G. ALEXANDER
February 10, 1933
MY DEAR HORACE,

This is just to tell you that the prayers of us all are with you for
your complete restoration to health and we all hope that you are again
healthy and strong.
I want your criticism of Harijan, as also of Jack Hoyland, to
whom I am not writing this week.
Love from us all to you and Olive.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1419

321. LETTER TO SUBEDAR GHATGE AND OTHERS
February 10, 1933
DEAR FRIENDS,

With reference to the application of A. J. Sonone for the post of
Personal Assistant to the Chief officer, Poona Municipality, and our
conversation about it, it is obvious that I can give no opinion in such
matters, but I can say as a matter of guiding principle that merits of
candidates being equal a candidate belonging to the depressed classes
should be given the preference.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S UBEDAR GHATGE AND OTHERS
P OONA C ITY MUNICIPALITY
P OONA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20200

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

221

322. LETTER TO BERNARD
February 10, 1933
MY DEAR BERNARD,

I was sorry to hear of your brother-in-law’s sudden death. But
birth and death are always with us and if there is joy about birth we
must cancel it through the knowledge of coming death, and if there is
sorrow about death we must cancel it by the knowledge of coming
birth.
Florence has hardened her heart after her operation. Wrote long
and good letters before; now she observes complete silence.
This week you will get ten copies of the first number of Harijan.
You must try to get at least ten subscribers who would send the
subscriptions in advance. That will save some commission. But if you
cannot get the subscribers you need not worry. Only remember that
unless there is advice from you, copies won’t be sent to you next
week.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20204

323. LETTER TO BHAGWANDAS
February 10, 1933
DEAR BABOO BHAGWANDAS,

I have your letter for which many thanks. I think that as a matter
of courtesy and for our record, we should print Raghunath Shastri
Kokje’s essay.
I have already written to you about the expenses. Ghanshyamdas has promised to send you a contribution and he told me that he
would write to you too. I hope you will remind him if you have not
done so already.
Shastri Dharurkar’s replies were sent only for your information
and satisfaction. They need not be published at all.
I know you want to save my time by writing to Mahadev, but it
is as well not to do so. It may cause delay and your letters are no
strain on me.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20205

222

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

324. LETTER TO GULCHEN LUMSDEN
February 10, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I thank you for your letter. This time Sir Henry Lawrence was
right when he told you that “Abide with me” was one of my favourite hymns.1 Though I am a devout Hindu, or even because I am a
devout Hindu, I have no difficulty in appreciating the devotional
hymns of other religions, and having had intimate contact with many
Christians I came to appreciate some of the hymns even as a young
ster. You will perhaps be glad to know that among them
“Lead,Kindly Light” is the most favourite. But there are others also
which you do not need to know.
As to the fast, let me say that you have been wholly misinformed. My fast was not directed to a political purpose at all. It was a
purely spiritual act after the same style as Buddha’s, only upon an
infinitely humbler scale.
I am sending you a new weekly which is being published this
week. In the light of your letter you might find it of some little
interest.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From the original: C.W. 9528. Courtesy: Mrs. Hugh Lumsden

325. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
February 10, 1933
MY DEAR CHILD,

Yes. You did keep me without a letter this time for some weeks
and I was wondering why. I must not give you a long letter this time,
because the new weekly Harijan absorbs me to the exclusion of everything else. You will see the copy that will reach you at the same time
as this.
I can quite understand what a source of pleasure Charlie
Andrews’s presence must be to you and the children. His presence in
1

Vide also “Letter to Gulchen Lumsden”, 3-5-1932

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

223

your midst takes away from me too a load of anxiety on your behalf.
Love from us all to you all.
BAPU
From a photostat: No. 118. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also My
Dear Child, p. 98

326. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
February 10, 1933
MY DEAR MARGARETE,

I do hope you have been receiving my letters. I have the lovely
photographs you have sent me. Everyone admired the album.
I am glad you are able, with the consent of your mother, to keep
up your vegetarianism. I hope the body will feel none the worse for it.
The spirit can only prosper under that simple food. But you must not
be so cock-sure about your being more economical than I. You spent
5d. on one meal. I have made occasionally 3 meals out of 6d. in
London. This may be in your favour that I did it when the things were
cheaper than now. I did it in London in 1890. You were not even
born then, were you?
You will get by this mail the Harijan which I hope you will like.
Love.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

327. ITS IMPLICATIONS
Rev. Stanley Jones paid me a visit the other day1 before sailing
for America. He said that in America he would be asked many
questions about the campaign against untouchability and had,
therefore, some questions which he wanted me to answer. I was glad of
the visit and I readily answered his questions. I do not propose to reproduce the whole of our conversation and all his questions and
crossquestions, but I propose to give to the readers the main questions
1

On February 4, 1933. Mahadev Desai’s report of this meeting appeared in
Mahadevbhaini Diary, “Indian Traders in Natal”, 18-11-1899

224

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and the substance of my answers. His first question, then, was:
Why do you restrict the movement to the removal of untouchability
only? Why not do away with the caste system altogether? If there is a
difference between caste and caste, and caste and untouchability, is it not one
only of degree?
ANSWER: Untouchability as it is practised in Hinduism today is,
in my opinion, a sin against God and man and is, therefore, like a
poison slowly eating into the very vitals of Hinduism. In my opinion,
it has no sanction whatsoever in the Hindu Shastras taken as a whole.
Untouchability of a healthy kind is undoubtedly to be found in the
Shastras and it is universal in all religions. It is a rule of sanitation.
That will exist to the end of time; but untouchability as we are
observing today in India is a hideous thing and wears various forms in
various Provinces, even in districts. It has degraded both the
‘untouchables’ and the ‘touchables’. It has stunted the growth of
nearly 40 million human beings. They are denied even the ordinary
amenities of life. The sooner, therefore, it is ended, the better for
Hinduism, the better for India and, perhaps, better for mankind in
general.
Not so the caste system. There are innumerable castes in India.
They are a social institution. They are so many trade guilds, as was
well said by the late Sir William Wilson Hunter. And at one time they
served a very useful purpose, as, perhaps, they are even now doing to a
certain extent. This institution has superadded to it restrictions which,
in my opinion, are undesirable and are bound to go in course of time.
There is nothing sinful about them. They retard the material progress
of those who are labouring under them. They are no bar to the
spiritual progress. The difference, therefore, between caste system and
untouchability is not one of degree, but of kind. An ‘untouchable’ is
outside the pale of respectable society. He is hardly treated as a
human being. He is an outcaste hurled into an abyss by his
fellow-beings occupying the same platform. The difference, therefore,
is somewhat analogous to the difference between heaven and hell.
There is one thing more to be remembered about the caste
system. For me, it is not the same as varnashramadharma. Whilst the
caste system is an answer to the social need, varnashrama is based
upon the Hindu scriptures. Not so the caste system. While there are
innumerable castes (some dying out and new ones coming into
being), the varnas are, and have always been, four. I am a firm believer
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

225

in varnashrama. I have not hesitated before now to consider it as a gift
of Hinduism to mankind. Acceptance of that dharma is, so far as I
have been able to see it, a condition of spiritual growth. But I may not
here elaborate my view of these four famous divisions in Hinduism.
Their consideration is irrelevant to the present purpose. . But I may
make this admission that today this varnashramadharma is not being
observed in its purity. There is an utter confusion of varna and if
Hinduism is to become a living force in the world, we have to
understand its real purpose and revive it; but we cannot do so, unless
the canker of untouchability is destroyed. The idea of inferiority and
superiority has to be demolished. The four divisions are not a vertical
section, but a horizontal plane on which all stand on a footing of
equality, doing the services respectively assigned to them. A life of
religion is not a life of privileges but of duty. Privileges may come, as
they do come to all, from a due fulfilment of duty. In the book of
God, the same number of marks are assigned to the Brahmin that has
done his task well as to the Bhangi who has done likewise. The second
question was:
Why do you want temple-entry for Harijans? Are not temples the lowest
thing in Hinduism?
ANSWER: I do not think so for one moment. Temples are to
Hindus what churches are to Christians. In my opinion, we are all
idolators; that in Hinduism we have images of stone or metal inside
temples makes to me no difference. Thousands of Hindus who visit
temples in simple faith derive precisely the same spiritual benefit that
Christians visiting churches in simple faith do. Deprive a Hindu of his
temple, and you deprive him of the thing he generally prizes most in
life. That superstition and even evil have grown round many Hindu
temples is but too true. That, however, is an argument for temple
reform, not for lowering their value for Harijans or any Hindu. It is
my certain conviction that temples are an integral part of Hinduism.
His third question was:
Was not your fast pure coercion?
ANSWER: If it is agreed that my fast sprang from love, then it was
coercion, only if love of parents for their children or of the latter for
the former, or love of husband for wife and wife for husband, or to
take a sweeping illustration, love of Jesus for those who own Him as
their all, is coercion. It is the implicit and sacred belief of millions of
Christians that love of Jesus keeps them from falling and that it does

226

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

so against themselves. His love bends the reason and the emotion of
thousands of His votaries to His love. I know that, in my childhood,
love of my parents kept me from sinning, and, even after fifty years of
age, love of my children and friends kept me positively from going to
perdition, which I would have done most assuredly but for the definite
and overwhelming influence of that love. And, if all this love could be
regarded as coercion, then the love that prompted my fast and,
therefore, my fast, was coercion, but it was that in no other sense.
Fasting is a great institution in Hinduism, as perhaps in no other
religion, and, though it has been abused by people not entitled to fast,
it has, on the whole, done the greatest good to Hinduism. I believe that
there is no prayer without fasting and there is no real fast without
prayer. My fast was the prayer of a soul in agony.
Harijan, 11-2-1933

328. DR. AMBEDKAR AND CASTE
The following has just been received from Dr. Ambedkar:
At the end of our conversation1 on Saturday last you asked me to send a
message for insertion in the first issue of your new weekly Harijan. I feel I
cannot give a message. For I believe it will be a most unwarranted
presumption on my part to suppose that I have sufficient worth in the eyes of
the Hindus which would make them treat any message from me with respect. I
can only speak as man to man. As such it may be desirable that the Hindus
should know my views on the momentous issue of Hindu social organization
with which you have chosen to occupy yourself. I am, therefore, sending you
the accompanying statement for publication in your Harijan.
STATEMENT
The outcaste is a bye-product of the caste system. There will be
outcastes as long as there are castes. Nothing can emancipate the outcaste
except the destruction of the caste system. Nothing can help to save Hindus
and ensure their survival in the coming struggle except the purging of the
Hindu faith of this odious and vicious dogma.

DAMODAR HALL
P AREL, B OMBAY 12

7th February, 1933
B. R. AMBEDKAR
1

Vide “Discussion with B. R. Ambedkar”, 4-2-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

227

Dr. Ambedkar is bitter. He has every reason to feel so. He has
received a liberal education. He has more than the talents of the
average educated Indian. Outside India he is received with honour and
affection, but, in India, among Hindus, at every step he is reminded
that he is one of the outcastes of Hindu society. It is nothing to his
shame, for, he has done no wrong to Hindu society. His exterior is as
clean as that of the cleanest and the proudest Brahmin. Of his interior,
the world knows as little as of that of any of us. In spite of all this, he
believes that ‘it will be a most unwarranted presumption on his part to
suppose that he has sufficient worth in the eyes of the Hindus which
would make them treat any message from him with respect’. This is
the caste Hindus’ shame, not his, but I would like him to feel that
there are today thousands of caste Hindus who would listen to his
message with the same respect and consideration that they would give
to that of any other leader and that in their estimation there is no
person high and no person low. I would like him, too, to know that
Harijan is not my weekly. So far as the proprietary rights are
concerned it belongs to the Servants of Untouchables Society and,
therefore, I would like him to feel that it is as much his as of any other
Hindu.
As to the burden of his message, the opinion he holds
about the caste system is shared by many educated Hindus. I have
not, however, been able to share that opinion. I do not believe the
caste system, even as distinguished from varnashrama, to be an
‘odious and vicious dogma’. It has its limitations and its defects, but
there is nothing sinful about it, as there is about untouchability, and, if
it is a bye-product of the caste system it is only in the same sense that
an ugly growth is of a body, or weeds of a crop. It is as wrong to
destroy caste because of the outcastes as it would be to destroy a body
because of an ugly growth in it, or a crop because of the weeds. The
outcasteness, in the sense we understand it, has, therefore, to be
destroyed altogether. It is an excess to be removed, if the whole
system is not to perish. Untouchability is the product, therefore, not of
the caste system, but of the distinction of high and low that has crept
into Hinduism and is corroding it. The attack on untouchability is
thus an attack upon this ‘high-and-low’ness. The moment
untouchability goes, the caste system itself will be purified, that is to
say, according to my dream, it will resolve itself into the true
varnadharma, the four divisions of society, each complementary of the
other and none inferior or superior to any other, each as necessary for
228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the whole body of Hinduism as any other. How it can be and what that
varnashrama is, it is not necessary to examine here. But, such being
my faith, I have always respectfully differed from those distinguished
countrymen, Dr. Ambedkar among them, who have held that
untouchability will not go without the destruction of
varnashramadharma. They have made no distinction between caste
and varna. But that is another story. At the present moment, it is the
‘untouchable’, the outcaste, with whom all Hindu reformers, whether
they believe in varnashrama or not, have agreed to deal. The
opposition to untouchability is common to both. Therefore, the
present joint fight is restricted to the removal of untouchability, and I
would invite Dr. Ambedkar and those who think with him to throw
themselves, heart and soul, into the campaign against the monster of
untouchability. It is highly likely that at the end of it we shall all find
that there is nothing to fight against in varnashrama. If however,
varnashrama even then looks an ugly thing, the whole of Hindu
society will fight it. For this campaign against untouchability is not
one of compulsion, but conversion. At the end of the chapter, I hope
that we shall all find ourselves in the same camp. Should it prove
otherwise, it will be time enough to consider how and by whom
varnashrama is to be fought.
Harijan, 11-2-1933

329. UNTOUCHABILITY
Untouchability as at present practised is the greatest blot on
Hinduism. It is (with apologies to sanatanists) against the Shastras. It is
against the fundamental principles of humanity, it is against the
dictates of reason that a man should, by mere reason of birth, be for
ever regarded as an untouchable, even unapproachable and unseeable.
These adjectives do not convey the full meaning of the thing itself. It
is a crime for certain men, women and their children to touch, or to
approach within stated distances, or to be seen by those who are called
caste Hindus. The tragedy is that millions of Hindus believe in this
institution as if it was enjoined by the Hindu religion.
Happily, Hindu reformers have recoiled with horror from this
practice. They have come to the conclusion that it has no support in
the Hindu Shastras taken as a whole. Isolated texts torn from their
context and considered by themselves can no doubt be produced in
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

229

support of this practice, as of any evil known to mankind. But there is
abundant authority in the Shastras to warrant the summary rejection,
as being un-Hindu, of anything or any practice that is manifestly
against the fundamental principles of humanity or morality, of ahimsa
or satya 1.
This movement against untouchability has been daily gathering
strength. It was in last September that leading Hindus, claiming to
represent the whole of Hindu India, met together and unanimously
passed a Resolution2, condemning untouchability and pledging
themselves to abolish it by law, if possible even during the existing
regime, and, failing that, when India had a Parliament of her own.
Among the marks of untouchability to be removed was the
prohibition against temple-entry by Harijans. In the course of the
struggle, it was discovered that the British Courts in India had
recognized this evil custom, so much so that certain acts done by
untouchables as such came to be offences under the British Indian
Penal Code. Thus, the entry by an untouchable into a Hindu temple
would be punishable as a crime under the I.P.C
Before, therefore, the movement of temple-entry can make
headway, it has become imperative to have this anomaly removed. It
is for this purpose that Sjt. Ranga Iyer has given notice of two Bills to
be introduced in the Central Legislature. After ascertaining the
opinion of the Provincial Governments, H.E. the Viceroy has
sanctioned the introduction of these Bills. But, being private Bills, they
have a poor chance of becoming the law of the land, unless the Government and the members of the Assembly refrain from obstructing its
consideration. It may be argued that, being pledged to neutrality in
matters of religion, the Government are bound to facilitate the passage
of the first Bill at any rate, inasmuch as it merely seeks to undo the
effect produced by the decisions of British Indian Courts, and this it
does by withdrawing legal recognition from untouchability.
There are practices in various religions professed by the
inhabitants of this land whose breach is not regarded as criminal,
though it would be regarded as very serious by the respective religious
codes. Thus, beef-eating by a Hindu is an offence in the eye of the
Hindu religious code, but rightly not punishable as a crime under the
1
2

230

Truth
Vide “Letter to Ramdas Gandhi”, 6-12-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Indian Penal Code. Is there, then, any reason why the common law of
India should punish a breach of the custom of untouchability? If
there are many Hindus learned in the Hindu scriptures who find
support in them for the present practice of untouchability, there are
quite a number of equally learned Hindus holding the opposite view.
Though this opinion of the pandits has already appeared in the Press,
it is reproduced elsewhere for ready reference. Let it be noted that the
signatories are all orthodox Hindus, as much lovers of their faith as
are the learned men of the opposite school. On the 25th of January
1933 was held the session of the All-India Sanatan Dharma Sabha,
presided over by Pandit Malaviyaji and attended by over one hundred
learned men. It passed a resolution to the effect that Harijans were as
much entitled to temple-entry as the rest of the Hindus.
If the Bills are not passed, it is obvious that the central part of
the reform will be hung up almost indefinitely. Neutrality in matters
of religion ought not to mean religious stagnation and hindrance to
reform.With due regard to the sanatanists, it is difficult to understand
the cry of ‘religion in danger’. Under neither Bill will a single temple
be opened against the will of the majority of temple-goers in question.
The second Bill expressly says so. The first Bill takes up a neutral
attitude. It does not help a Harijan to force his way into a temple.
The reformers do not seek to compel the opponents to their will.
They desire, by the fairest means possible, to convert the majority or
the minority, as the case may be, to their view of untouchability.
It is said that the Harijans themselves do not want temple-entry
and that they want only betterment of their economic and political
condition. The reformer, too, wants the latter, but he believes that this
betterment will be much quicker brought about, if religious equality is
attained. The reformer denies that the Harijans do not want templeentry. But it may be that they are so disgusted with caste Hindus and
Hindu religion itself as to want nothing from them. They may in
sullen discontent choose to remain outside the religious pale. Any
penance on the part of caste Hindus may be too late.
Nevertheless, the caste Hindus who recognize that untouchability
is a blot on Hinduism have to atone for the sin of untouchability.
Whether, therefore, Harijans desire temple-entry or not, caste Hindus
have to open their temples to Harijans, precisely on the same terms as
to other Hindus. For a caste Hindu with any sense of honour, temple
prohibition is a continuous breach of the pledge taken at the Bombay
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

231

meeting of September last. Those, who gave their word to the world
and to God that they would have the temples opened for the Harijans,
have to sacrifice their all, if need be, for redeeming the pledge. It may
be that they did not represent the Hindu mind. They have, then, to
own defeat and do the proper penance. Temple-entry is the one
spiritual act that would constitute the message of freedom to the
untouchables and assure them that they are not outcastes before God.
Harijan, 11-2-1933

330. TO THE READER
The English edition of Harijan is being published by and for
the Servants of Untouchables Society at my request and, therefore, in
accordance with the views I have long held regarding reform journals.
It is being published on the assumption that
1. unfortunately, the Hindi edition cannot as yet serve the South
and probably, Bengal,
2. it is necessary for the people in the different Provinces to
know the progress of the reform from week to week in the Provinces
other than their own,
3. since the movement, though essentially Hindu, has a world
wide significance and seeks the sympathy, if possible, of the whole of
humanity, it is necessary to keep the world acquainted with its implications and progress.
If these assumptions are correct, Harijan will supply a felt want
and should, therefore, become self-supporting. If it does not, it must
stop publication. If it is published at a loss, it will mean so much
money taken from the mouths of Harijans. An endeavour is being
made to expend every pice of subscription received on behalf of the
Society for the sole service of Harijans and the advance of the
movement for the removal of untouchability.
You will note that no advertisements are being taken for the
upkeep of the paper. It has to depend solely upon the subscriptions
received.
You can send the subscription for yourself or your friends,
Indian or foreign, or for institutions, such as libraries, or for poor and
deserving Harijans.
Ten thousand copies are being printed for the time being. Some
232

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

copies will be sent free, either by way of compliment or exchange, but
the list can only be limited. It is possible for you to extend it. I would
like every English-knowing Harijan student and every untouchability
worker to have a free copy on a certified application. This is possible
only through the active co-operation of the reader who can afford to
pay more than his own subscription.
The provincial organizations should send and pay for their own
copies of which they should send advice in time, accompanying it with
cheques or money orders.
So much for the financial part of this appeal.
That part of your obligation I know you will fulfil, if you are a
reformer. But the harder is the necessary consequence of your
fulfilment of that part. By paying subscriptions for yourself or others,
you buy the right of, and recognize the duty of, serving the great
cause in every legitimate manner possible for you. Thus, you can
become an active helper in spreading the message of Harijan among
those who are opposing the reform. This requires special qualifications. You need to have self-restraint. The opponents are in a state
of rage just now. Some of them believe that sanatana dharma is in
danger, as it has never been before. They imagine much more than
the reform means and, therefore, do not hesitate to ascribe motives to
reformers. You have, by your gentleness and gentlemanliness, to
disarm suspicions and enable them to understand what the reform
means.
If you will diligently study Harijan, it will equip you for the
delicate task. It will give you an epitome of the week’s doings in the
various parts of India in connection with the campaign against
untouchability. It will also tell you what the others are doing and what
the opponents are saying. It will also lay bare the weaknesses and
mistakes of workers. Will you become a fellow-worker in this
movement of liberating over forty million human beings from an
intolerable yoke and of purifying Hinduism?
But I do not despair of even some opponents subscribing to
Harijan. I am an irrepressible optimist. I have no quarrel with the
opponents. These pages will be written as much for them as for the
reformers. If Harijan stands for truth and if the reformers have
patience, the opponents of today will be the reformers of tomorrow.
Harijan, 11-2-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

233

331. WHY ‘HARIJAN’
Several correspondents have asked me why I have adopted
the name ‘Harijan’ for ‘untouchable’. Some English friends have
asked me for its meaning. It is not a name of my coining. Some years
ago, several ‘untouchable, correspondents complained that I used the
word asprishya in the pages of Navajivan1. Asprishya means literally
untouchable. I then invited them to suggest a better name and one of
the ‘untouchable, correspondents suggested the adoption of the name
‘Harijan’, on the strength of its having been used by the first known
poet-saint of Gujarat. Though the quotation he sent me did not
exactly fit the case he wanted to make out for the adoption, I thought
that it was a good word. ‘Harijan’ means ‘a man of God’. All the
religions of the world described God pre-eminently as the Friend of
the friendless, Help of the helpless and Protector of the weak. The rest
of the world apart, in India who can be more friendless, helpless or
weaker than the forty million or more Hindus of India who are
classified as untouchables? If, therefore, any body of people can be
fitly described as men of God, they are surely these helpless, friendless
and despised people. Hence, in the pages of Navajivan, since the
correspondence, I have always adopted Harijan as the name signifying
untouchables. And, when God chose to entrust me with their service
even whilst undergoing imprisonment, I could not use any other word
for describing them. I recoil with horror from that word and all it
implies. Not that the change of name brings about any change of
status, but one may at least be spared the use of a term which is itself
one of reproach. When caste Hindus have of their own inner
conviction and, therefore, voluntarily got rid of the present-day
untouchability, we shall all be called Harijans, for, according to my
humble opinion, caste Hindus will then have found favour with God
and may, therefore, be fitly described as His men.
Harijan, 11-2-1933

1

234

Vide “My Notes”, Harijana
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

332. SEEKING OR GIVING?
Several friends have written to me letters asking me in substance
the following question:
Why is it that you, who have always sworn by non-cooperation with the Government and Legislatures, are now
carrying on propaganda for the passage of untouchability Bills
by the present Legislatures, and are thus co-operating with both
the Government and the Legislatures?
Newspaper reporters also have been plying me with the same
question. I have evaded both by saying that I cannot, consistently with
my obligation as a prisoner, deal with this question as fully as I would
like to. But I can say this much, that there is no doctrine in the world
which admits of the same kind of application under every variety of
circumstance. Different circumstances evoke different applications of
the same doctrine. Thus, my love for a starving man would require me
to feed him. My love for my overfed child would require me to starve
him, even though he may be crying for food. I am today
non-co-operating with sanatanist friends, but I would like my
questioners to analyse my non-co-operation, and they will find that in
the very act of non-co-operation I am seeking their co-operation in
my campaign. Exactly in the same manner, I may non-co-operate as
much as I like with Government or any institution, but I would be a
very foolish man, if I did not know that I was non-co-operating in
order to secure co-operation from them. Thus, I am now seeking the
co-operation of the Government and the Legislatures in order to
further my purpose, which I hold to be very sacred and altogether
good. Beyond this I may not go, for the reason I have already stated
and which the reader should respect.
Harijan, 11-2-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

235

333. AN OVERDUE CIVIC REFORM
Sjt. Hiralal A. Shah writes:1
The suggestion made by Sjt. Shah is certainly worthy of
consideration as well by municipalities and local bodies as by
individuals, but particularly by the former. Corporate cleanliness can
only be ensured, if there is a corporate conscience and a corporate
insistence on cleanliness in public places. Untouchability has a great
deal to answer for the insanitation of our streets and our latrines,
whether private or public. In its inception, untouchability was a rule of
sanitation, and still is in all parts of the world outside India. That is to
say, an unclean person or thing is untouchable, but immediately his or
its uncleanliness is shed, he or it is no longer untouchable. Therefore,
a person who is to attend to scavenging, whether it is a paid Bhangi or
an unpaid mother, they are unclean until they have washed themselves
clean of their unclean work. If, instead of being regarded as
untouchable for ever, the Bhangi was treated as brother and was given
an opportunity and even made to become clean after performing an
unclean service for society, he should be as acceptable as any other
member of that society. Corporations can, therefore, lead the way in
this matter, but they will not unless the citizens insist. It is truly said
that Corporations have no souls, that is, apart from the souls of the
citizens. Whilst, therefore, commending Sjt. Shah’s suggestion to all
concerned, I would advise him to concentrate his energy upon one
single spot and there agitate, both amongst the public and their
Corporation, for the much needed reform. Let him, therefore, devote
every ounce of his spare energy to educating public opinion in
Bombay, where he has his habitation, evolve concrete suggestions and
get them accepted by the people in the different wards, and he will
soon find that his labours are crowned with success.
Harijan, 11-2-1933

1

The letter is not reproduced here. The correspondent had suggested that
sweepers should be provided facilities for becoming clean after work.

236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

334. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT
OF BOMBAY
February 11, 1933
DEAR SIR,

On the 8th instant Major Bhandari communicated to me the
information that Government had decided to withhold a letter
addressed to me by Appasaheb Patwardhan. The next morning I saw
in The Times of India a paragraph to the effect that Appasaheb had
put himself on reduced rations. Thereupon the same day I wrote 1 to
Col. Doyle inquiring about the news and asking to know the orders of
the Government of India about conservancy work in the prisons by
volunteer prisoners. Not having any reply I sent yesterday a
reminder.2 Since then I have a copy of the orders of the Government
of India, but no reply to my inquiry about Appasaheb. For me the
matter is of the gravest importance involving my honour. As a result
of the protracted correspondence between the authorities and me there
was a settlement about the subject-matter thereof and at the instance of
Col. Doyle I sent the following wire3 to Appasaheb Patwardhan on the
6th December last.
It clearly foreshadows resumption of fast by him in the event of
an unfavourable decision.
The Government will observe that any decision in this matter
that affects Appasaheb affects me equally. As I read the whole of the
transactions between December 1st and now in this matter, the
Government have recognized the correctness of my action. I hope that
they do not now intend to revise their attitude and cut me off from
Appasaheb. For the moment therefore I ask whether Appasaheb is or
very recently had been on a partial fast and whether he and his
comrades have been now permitted to do conservancy work.
Owing to the increasing tension caused by the report of
Appasaheb’s partial fast, I am requesting Major Bhandari, if he
has authority, or to request Col. Doyle, if he has not, to telegraph or
1

Vide “Letter to E. E. Doyle”, 9-2-1933
Vide “Letter to E. E. Doyle”, 10-2-1933
3
Not reproduced here; vide “Telegram to S. P. Patwardhan”, 6-12-1932
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

237

telephone to the Government the contents of the substance of this
letter and hope that the Government will end the tension by favouring
me with an early reply.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800
(40) (6), p. 329

335. LETTER TO V. M. NAWLE
February 11, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 8th instant. If you will take my advice I
say “Go slow, be patient, do not mind what Bhalakar1 says but do the
service that falls to your lot faithfully and well.”
Yours sincerely,

DR. V. M. N AWLE
444 R ASTA P ETH
P OONA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20212

336. LETTER TO JAGANNATH PANT
February 11, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter and I appreciate it. Beyond what I
have said in the columns of the Harijan, it is not possible for me to go
and yet not commit breach of faith. If. therefore the article in Harijan
“Seeking or Giving” 2, does not convince you, I can only ask you to
be patient with me and still give your whole-hearted service to the
cause of Harijans.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. J AGANNATH P ANT
R AMNAGAR
NAINITAL
From a microfilm: S.N. 20213
1
2

238

L. B. Bhopatkar, editor of a conservative Marathi journal, Bhala
Vide “Seeking or Giving”, 11-2-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

337. LETTER TO BABAN GOKHALAY
February 11, 1933
DEAR GOKHALAY1 ,

I was too glad to have your note2. I have not yet seen the
pamphlet but I shall get it in due course.
I shall be glad to see Mr. and Mrs. Wadia on Tuesday the 14th
instant, at 2 p.m. if that date is convenient, if it is not, then on Friday,
the 17th instant, at 2 p.m.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. B. GOKHALAY
GIRGAUM
From a microfilm: S.N. 20214

338. LETTER TO P. NARAYANAN NAIR
February 11, 1933
DEAR NARAYANAN,

I have seen your letter to Mahadev Desai. I have asked the
correspondent to send me cuttings from Mathrubhumi to which he
refers. As soon as I get them I shall certainly let you have them.
Meanwhile, I am glad of the assurance you have given me that
Mathrubhumi never descends to the abuse of any community.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20215

339. LETTER TO RAMANANDA CHATTERJEE
February 11, 1933
DEAR RAMANANDA BABOO,

I thank you for taking so much trouble over my letter of the
20th ultimo about the Yeravda Pact. I had read all that appeared in the
1
2

Gandhiji’s co-worker in Champaran; vide
Report of a lecture by Sophia Wadia

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

239

Modern Review1 on the Pact and I wish that I had spared you the
trouble of sending me copies by telling you that I had read them and
asking you if you had any further comments to offer on the matter in
view of the agitation set up in Bengal. I am not so bad as I used to be
out of prison. Then, I had not a moment to read even the Modern
Review let alone other magazines and papers. Inside the prison
hitherto I have had time to read the Modern Review which you have
been so kindly and punctually sending me from month to month.
The argument in your letter 2 is quite clear to me though
it does not convince me. I was surprised even when I read your note
on the Yeravda Pact. For I had heard that you had been party to the
statement made by Dr. Moonje that so far as Hindu Sabha was
concerned he was quite willing that cent per cent seats were given to
the depressed classes, and I was glad when I read the statement and
still more so when I heard that you had heartily approved of it.
My own position is fundamentally different from yours. If there
was to be any reservation at all, and I saw that there had to be, we
could not afford to give it in a niggardly spirit. We were bound to give
as many seats as Harijan representatives desired and certainly up to
their numerical strength. My action was based on absolute trust. If we
have to suffer for it no one will be to blame but ourselves. We can
never suffer if we will be only strictly just to them. We can never be
generous, for there is no danger for years to come of our giving them
too much. I wish that I can persuade every caste Hindu as to the
measure of the enormity of the wrong done by them to Harijans. Nor
do I mind many who have hitherto described themselves as caste
Hindus rushing to the registering officers to be classified as Harijans. I
do not mind because daily we must be advancing towards effacement
of the vicious distinction between caste Hindus and outcastes, so much
1

Of Octobers, 1932
Wherein the addressee had written: “My individual opinion is against the
Poona Pact, so far as it relates to Bengal . . . Reservation of seats for the depressed
will not help the really “depressed” or “untouchable” people. . . . The present
“depressed” class M.L.C.s generally oppose nationalist parties and side with the
pro-bureaucracy Mussalmans. Giving 30 seats out of 80 to the depressed castes would
mean the practical wiping out of a nationalist opposition party in the future Bengal
Council. . .” (S. N. 20155).
2

240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

so that it would be a privilege for a caste Hindu to be classified as
Harijan.
Indeed, in my opinion Bengal is in a better position than the
other Provinces, if it is true that there are very few untouchables in the
real sense of the term and I think that it is true but that many are
classed as such because they are economically depressed and are
suffering from other social disabilities than untouchability. So far as I
am concerned, let all, everywhere, who are at all economically
depressed and are suffering from any social disability get themselves
registered as Harijans, if to be registered as Harijans is an optional act.
That very fact will be a factor in the removal of untouchability instead
of, as you fear, in hardening it.
Lastly, I do not share your fear that in many elections only
those who may be called advanced Harijans will be elected. That and
many other things will undoubtedly happen if the reformer either
goes to sleep or is insincere. If he is sincere and active, untouchability
will be a dying cult and those who are lowest in the social scale and
intelligence will get their due. And if at the bottom of all your
arguments and fears there is the suspicion that the reformer is not all
that one would desire it to be, for a moment, but only for a moment, I
would be tempted to share that suspicion, but I am a born optimist. I
have faith in my sincerity and activity. Therefore I refuse to suspect
my comrades. Hence the counter arguments that I have advanced. I
would invite you to share my faith in the reform and the reformers
and believe with me that if we are true the Harijans will be true and all
will be well. If you find nothing in my letter that appeals to you I
would like you to strive with me and tear my argument to pieces. You
know the regard I have for you. If it admits of enhancement it would
only be enhanced by your frank and fearless criticism. I am anxious
that we approach the Yeravda Pact and all it means with perfect
confidence in its correctness.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R AMANANDA C HATTERJEE
C/ O ‘‘THE MODERN R EVIEW”
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20217
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

241

340. LETTER TO P. SUBBAROYAN
February 11, 1933
DEAR DR. SUBBAROYAN,

I thank you for your letter and I hope that although even your
Bill has gone to Delhi you have not ceased to interest yourself in it
and the larger measure and that both you and Mrs. Subbaroyan are
doing all you can at your end to promote the cause both generally
and particularly with reference to the Bills. My regards to both of
you.
1

Yours sincerely,

DR. P. S UBBAROYAN
F AIRLAWNS
EGMORE, M ADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20218

341. LETTER TO N. S. VARADACHARI
February 11, 1933
MY DEAR VARADACHARI,

I had your letter of the 6th instant. I am looking forward with
interest to the proceedings2 of tomorrow. If you can get me a brief
statement such as the opinion published in this week’s Harijan, do get
it for publication in the next issue. Even an endorsement of the
opinion from a well-known pandit or pandits I would like.
Yours sincerely

S JT. N. S. V ARADACHARI
A. I. S. A. KHADI VASTRALAYA
MADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20220

1

On temple-entry; vide footnote 3, “Letter to Ranchhoddas Patwari”,
11-1-1933
2
Of the meeting of pandits and important citizens who were to consider the
question of temple-entry in Vaishnava temples

242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

342. LETTER TO P. R. THAKUR
February 11, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 6th instant. I have never
believed that the problem of untouchability can be solved by mere
temple-entry. But I do believe that it can never be solved without
temple-entry on equal terms with the others, and I further believe
that the economic and educational advance can be accelerated by
temple-entry which is really the mark of the removal of
untouchability. One may be ever so educated and ever so rich and yet
be untouchable, but immediately he has got religious equality through
temple-entry, untouchability is gone. At the same time, I believe with
you that the educational and economic advance must not be neglected
nor subordinated to temple-entry. As a matter of fact, that isbeing
prosecuted [as] vigorously as it is possible to do.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P. R. T HAKUR
VICE-PRESIDENT
ALL BENGAL DEPRESSED C LASSES F EDERATION
127/1 RUSSA R OAD
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20221

343. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
February 11, 1933
CHI PRABHAVATI,

I got your letter only yesterday. It was very good. Those who
recite Gita give up any worry whatsoever. I do know that your fits are
caused by some worry or other. If you need to write every fortnight to
Jayaprakash you must write only to him and he can send me the news.
If a monthly letter is sufficient for him it will be enough if I too may
receive one in the month. Ba is again behind the bars, she is at
Sabarmati. Mirabehn too has been transferred to Sabarmati Jail as her
health was deteriorating.
Your letter to Ba I shall send to Sabarmati. You are doing well in
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

243

studies. Can you understand English well? It was excellent that you
were given the job of teaching.
Inform Kanta that I deliberately refrain from writing to her so
that she may receive the essential mail due to her without any
hindrance. Her news I continue to get through Sumangal.
Mrityunjaya and Vidyavati do not even write to me but I get the
news about Father’s health. There was no serious complaint about the
women inmates of the Ashram; anyway neither your nor Kanta’s
name was mentioned in it. My work certainly goes on increasing, but I
do have some help now that Chhaganbhai is here. Still who can share
the work that only I can do? Either it remains undone or I myself do
it somehow or other. Do see me on your release.
My health is perfect. I take milk and fruit. I take 1 lb. milk,
oranges, dates and papaya, sometimes some roasted and crushed
almonds too. The weight hovers around 103 lb. The pain in the elbow
has become chronic. It should not cause any anxiety. I can spin every
day but not much. It is about 100 rounds. Sardar, Mahadev and
Chhaganlal are all doing well. Which newspapers can you get? Would
you be allowed the Harijan that I am bringing out? Mirabehn’s letter
comes every week. She is permitted to write every week as she does
not see anyone.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU

[PS.]
If I write to you in Gujarati, will the letter be delivered to you, or
must I write only in Hindi?
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3433

344. MESSAGE TO MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE
ASSEMBLY
February 11 1933
I am hoping that all the Members, irrespective of their opinion
on the merits of the Temple-entry Bills will join in facilitating
consideration of the measures in this session itself.
The Hindu, 13-2-1933

244

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

345. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA 1
February 12, 1933
MY DEAR SATISBABU,

You will have got on Sunday a parcel of 500 Harijans. I do not know how you
will distribute them, but I suppose you can think of better ways than I can suggest
from here. From among the friends in the mofussil you will please have as many
subscribers as possible and get newsboys to do the street sales. I do not know if you
will want the Khadi Pratishthan to act as agents. But if you feel that the Pratishthan
cannot undertake the work, please try to get as many subscribers as possible and
collect the money and send a cheque for the amount and save so much money for the
Harijan. In case you would have the Pratishthan to take up the agency please let the
Manager know direct the maximum number of copies you will want.
With pranams to Hemprabhadevi,
Yours sincerely,

MAHADEV
From a photostat: G.N. 1625b

346. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
February 12, 1933
MY DEAR MARY,

I have your letters but I have also the news that you are suffering from asthma. Are you not overdoing it? You will not succeed in
bending the flesh beyond its capacity. Humbly recognize your
limitations. No one in the Ashram is expected to go beyond his or her
strength. Do not go barefoot and do not expose your head to the sun.
Do not draw water at the well. Insist on getting fruit for yourself. Let
the doctor be called in if necessary. You have chosen to be a
daughter. Now you have the opportunity of proving one and quickly
getting well by carrying out instructions. I hope you are taking warm
baths unless you are used to cold baths.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5991. Also C.W. 3316. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr
1

This was countersigned by Gandhiji.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

245

347. LETTER TO G. M. THAWARE
February 12, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. The idea of a separate
university for Harijans is attractive, but it is hardly necessary to create
a separate university. In the place of that we have Mr. David’s scheme
of which you must have already read and of which you will see a little
more in last week’s Harijan. It is elastic and economical in the sense
that every rupee obtained under the scheme goes directly for the
tuition of Harijans and it is also the quickest method of giving higher
education to selected Harijan students. If Mr. David’s scheme proves
successful, there should be no difficulty in extending it so as to cover
a further selection of students for being sent to foreign countries.
Industrial education too I should treat precisely in the same
manner as I would treat higher education.
Of cinema shows I understand but little, having never attended
any. An attempt is already being made to induce the better classes to
engage Harijans as domestic servants and I think it is coming.
As to the caste system, I would commend the last week’s issue of
Harijan to your attention for my views. I think this answers all your
questions.
I take it that you have sent a copy of your letter to the
Central Board or at least a similar letter, if not a copy.
Yours sincerely

G. M. THAWARE
ASST. G EN . S ECY.
ALL-INDIA DEPRESSED C LASSES ASSOCIATION
NAGPUR
From a microfilm: S.N. 20229

246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

348. LETTER TO N.
February 12, 1933
DEAR N.,

Kumar Diwakar Singh whom you call Devula gave me your
note.
Your way of addressing me as your son is very strange. I lost
my mother years ago. I am fast making daughters and sisters. But
mother I have not found. Age is no bar. If you can inspire me with
mother-worship towards you nothing would please me better. But let
me say that your letter before me has filled me with misgivings. It
smells of the hysteric. Your judgment of the friend whom you have
sent is not confirmed by my talks with him. He seems to me to be a
youth of unbalanced mind. He is not likely to do much in Allahabad.
But more serious still is the attack upon your character that
came to me yesterday from an unexpected source. The friend who
gave me the warning is a man of great worth and has no end to serve
by misleading me. He simply warns me against my playing into your
hands; of course the friend has no first-hand information.
But it is against my nature to keep such reports from those
of whom I have them and in whose welfare I may be interested as I am
in yours. Your first letters prepossessed me in your favour and
I thought that I could use you for the common service of Truth. This
report coupled with your latest letter have created a doubt in my
mind. I should hope that it has no solid foundation.
If you have any care for my opinion, you will lay aside all work
and without trumpet come to Poona, leave your luggage at the station
and come to me any day after 9 a.m. and let me see you face to face
and ask you some straight questions.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20041

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

247

349. LETTER TO DR. HIRALAL SHARMA
February 12, 1933
DEAR DR. SHARMA,

I was glad to have your letter.1 Amtussalaam being with you puts
me at ease. She has such great faith in your ability to cure her. I do
hope that she will be thoroughly restored to health. I hope that your
troubles will be soon over. I am glad you are preparing yourself for
the Ashram life. It will please me greatly if you could go to the
Ashram.
Yours,

BAPU
Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh, p. 18

350. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
[February] 2 12, 1933
CHI. DEVDAS,

I got your letter. Write to me when you get time and let me
know your reasons for thinking that the reforms suggested by you in
Hindi are possible. There is Dr. Sharma’s Sun-ray Hospital in Karol
Bagh. Amtussalaam has been admitted there. She has great faith in Dr.
Sharma. Find some time and get acquainted with him, and learn from
him whatever appeals to you. Give me some details about the hospital.
See Amtussalaam and inquire after her health. I hope you remember
about the small Urdu dictionary. I will remember what you have
written about Rajaji. Do not be lazy in writing to me. Send me Rajaji’s
and your comments on Harijan. Request him to write to me a few
lines.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1993
1

Amtussalaam had told the addressee that Gandhiji, being worried about the
correctness of the nature-cure treatment followed for the Ashram inmates, wanted him
to go to the Ashram and stay there for some time. The addressee had therefore written
to Gandhiji that after disposing of the work in hand he would immediately go to the
Ashram.
2
From the postmark and the reference to Harijan; the source has “12-1-33”,
which is evidently a slip.

248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

351. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
February 12, 1933
CHI RAMA,

How is this? After taking a vow to write to me every week, you
broke it the very next week. But please remember I will not leave you.
One may not give one’s word, but having given it one should keep it
even at the cost of one’s life.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5361

352. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI G. PATEL
February 12, 1933
CHI. SHIVABHAI,

I did not find your letter incomplete in any respect. I hope you
got my previous letter.
An act of expiation for violation of a vow should be directly
related to the nature of the vow. If one has been guilty of telling a lie,
the proper expiation for it should be observance of silence for some
time and not a resolution to give up drinking, for the latter is desirable
even in itself. If drinking was the cause of one’s speaking, untruth,
then of course it would be one’s duty to give it up. Similarly, if you
touched your wife’s body with impure thoughts, you should stop
going to her room or even refrain from the sight of your wife for
some days. In addition to doing this, you may give up eating sweets as
reminder to yourself of your resolution. However, you are fully awake
and conscious of your lapses. You will, therefore, be saved.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9512

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

249

353. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA N. KHARE
February 12, 1933
CHI. RAMBHAU,

This time you have signed your letter in Bengali. If you have
done all this with a proper plan, it is certainly good. It should not be a
matter for wonder that a young man should try to learn Sanskrit,
Bengali, Urdu, Tamil, Punjabi, Sindhi, Hindi, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya,
Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam and English, for of all these the really
independent languages are only three, English, Sanskrit and Tamil.
The other languages are the daughters either of Sanskrit or Tamil. But
you will be able to learn them only if you are really interested in
them.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 304. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

354. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
February 12, 1933
CHI. KAKA,

I got your letter. If we have trouble when we cut teeth, why
should we not have it also when we lose them? Do you get pure milk?
Though your experience is that a milk diet brings on weakness and
causes diarrhoea, I still think that the experiment is worth making.
Cereal foods should not be necessary for one to be able to digest
milk. The fact that you require them indicates some weakness in the
system. I cling to my belief that one can eat wheat only when one is
able to digest milk and fruits. Some people believe that solid food
helps in the digestion of milk. But in fact it is not digested, and is
retained in the body in some harmful form which gives one the
illusion of strength. If you get pure and fresh milk, it is worth while
trying the experiment of drinking it without heating it. These days I
drink such milk. It has done no harm so far, though I have not carried
on the experiment long enough to say that it has benefited me. I
started it about fifteen days ago.
You should get your knees massaged. You cannot afford to be
an old man so soon. I have been rising at three these days and find
250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Jupiter and Mars right over my head., I still indulge in my love of
watching the stars. Just when my interest had become absorbing, you
left me.1 How much I miss you! I am expecting a big telescope on
Monday.
Give me your comments on Harijan, and also write on some
subject if you think of one. Don’t be particular about writing
artistically. If you think of any questions which you think I should
discuss, send them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9493. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

355. LETTER TO BAL KALELKAR
February 12, 1933
CHI. BAL,

I got your letter.
You did a very good thing in fasting as a remedy for your fever.
An innocuous egg is one from which no chick can come out.
Personally I regard such eggs as acceptable food. From a medical
point of view, they are beneficial in a variety of conditions. They are
likely to be harmful in regard to brahmacharya, but not to persons of
weak health. There are two considerations which can be urged against
such eggs. From a religious point of view, they are an unnecessary
addition to the number of articles which we eat, and from the point of
view of vegetarianism they are as objectionable as milk. Probably it
gives a hen greater pain to carry such eggs and be caged for their sake
than it does a cow to be milked. However, such eggs are not in the
same category as meat, which we regard as forbidden. It may be
necessary in some cases to recommend innocuous eggs as medicine.
This fully sums up my view on this subject. Keep a diary and do not
neglect to spin for yajna.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 9494. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar
1

Gandhiji and Kalelkar were together in Yeravda Jail in 1930; for Gandhiji’s
articles “Watching the Heavens”, vide
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

251

356. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
February 12, 1933
I have received Panditji’s letter. It is disappointing. But I look
upon it as a gift of love. I also am wiring to him to come and see me.
If he does not come, it may be necessary for you to go there.
You should not worry about my fast. I am ascertaining
the facts. I will not take a single step without careful thought, though
I may not be able to convince you and others every time. Let
me always remain true to myself. On the day on which I am false to
myself, you may be sure that I will have fallen. “Being false to
myself” means not doing what I think to be right.
Yes, the heat which is being given to me is diathermy, but it has
not benefited me at all. The Chief Surgeon here says that the trouble
is a symptom of old age. This hypothesis does not seem to be
altogether fanciful. If it is correct, why should we be upset? The only
remedy then will be simple life and less strain on the affected parts.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 120

357. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

February 12, 1933
CHI. LILAVATI,

Your letter has delighted me. Do no allow your health to
deteriorate now that it has improved. I do not remember receiving
Gangabehn’s letter. I keep receiving news about her. Do you know
the conditions about visiting? Do come if you want to come under
those conditions.
Do keep writing.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

358. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR

February 12, 1933
CHI. PRABHUDAS

I cannot write a long letter. It does not matter whether you stay
in Khali or outside but it seems proper to me that you should so live
that you spend only what is necessary for you alone. It will be more
convenient if you live in the Ashram. Gomatibehn has in view a girl of
twenty-two. But the fact that she belongs to the Bania caste, does
present a difficulty. However if the girl is agreeable, all the conditions
stipulated by you will be fulfilled. If, therefore, you think you can
marry her, I would advise you to get married immediately. Everybody
will be pleased. If you wish, you may come and see me. Have you
calmed down now ?
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32987

359. LETTER TO MOOLCHAND AGRAWAL
February 12, 1933
BHAI MOOLCHANDJI,

I shall publish the questions and the answers1 somewhere as the
occasion permits.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 833

360. LETTER TO VIDYA HINGORANI
February 12, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

If the name Mahadev is astrologically unsuitable ask Father for
a few suitable ones and send them to me. I shall select one from
1

Vide “Letter to Moolchand Agrawal”, 29-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

253

among them. Why does not Father himself give him a name? Hope
you are both well. Blessings to Anand.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

361. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
February 12, 1933
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

I have your letters. You did right in going straight to Delhi. Now
you must remain there until you recover fully. You should come to
see me on your recovery before you go to the Ashram.
That Dr. Sharma is preparing to go to the Ashram is comforting
news to me.
You can write to me whenever you wish. It will cause me no
discomfort to write to you, but your not writing will certainly grieve
me.
Inform Kudsia that she may keep writing to me. How is she
doing at Patiala?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G. N. 276

362. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALCHARI
February 12/13, 1933
MY DEAR C. R.,

I have read your and G.’s 1 appeal to the public. Why do you
even so much as mention the fast and its possibility? You surely
undermine its spiritual value, if the fast, if it at all comes, is to be a
spiritual fast. I do not even know that the fast is a certainty if the Bills
do not pass during this session or at all. I think that you should all
dismiss it from your consideration altogether and let the public mind
work unfettered by it. When it does come it will produce its own effect
1

254

Ghanshyamdas Birla
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

if it is a spiritual act. If it is the product of a diseased or arrogant
mind, it will merely torture the body and excite pity or contempt
according to the temperament of the people who may hear of it. Do
take this advice as from an expert and act up to it to the fullest extent.
Then you have seriously to consider Pt. Malaviyaji’s attitude. 1
He is strongly against the Bills especially if they are not to be
circulated. Of course I do not share the view. I shall be writing to him.
But you should see him if you can at all spare yourself or send
Devdas alone. But on this I have no firm opinion. You will do what
appeals to you most. You know the outside atmosphere firsthand. All
my knowledge is secondhand and therefore worthless.
I had what must be described in one way as a very unsatisfactory
interview with Dr. A.2 He is irreconcilable. In another way it was
satisfactory. I know him better than I did.
Please share the letter with G. and Thakkar Bapa.
Love.
BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 20230

363. DRAFT TELEGRAM TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
[February 13, 1933] 3
C. R.
PLEASE
DO
NOT
MENTION
POSSIBILITY
FAST
ANYWHERE
ANY
ACCOUNT.
SUCH
MENTION
UNBECOMING
AND
IRRELEVANT.
BUT
TELL ALL MEMBERS ASSEMBLY ESPECIALLY HINDU MEMBERS THAT
FOR INDIA’S HONOUR IT IS NECESSARY CONSIDER UNTOUCHABILITY
BILLS THIS
SESSION. IF BOMBAY MEETING
OF
SEPTEMBER
WAS
REPRESENTATIVE HINDU OPINION HINDU MEMBERS BOUND DELIVER
GOODS
BY PUSHING
FORWARD BILLS. IF HINDU
HONOUR
MAY
ALSO
BE REGARDED
INDIA’S
HONOUR
OTHER
MEMBERS IN
MY
OPINION
BOUND
FACILITATE
DISPASSIONATE
CONSIDERATION
BILLS.
AM
CONVINCED
THAT
NONE
DESIGNED
COERCE
SINGLE
PERSON
OR
INTERFERE
WITH
ANYBODY’S
RELIGION.
EXISTING
POSITION
STIFLES CONSCIENCE.

GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 20230.a
1

For a talk, vide “A Talk”, 13-2-1933
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar
3
This telegram is found on pages 5 and 6 while the preceding letter is found on
pages 1 to 4 of the same sheaf of papers.
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

255

364. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 13, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

It is the morning of the silence day. I got up at three and have
taken up your letter to reply to it. I liked it very much indeed. You
have given me in it all that I wanted. It fully answers to my
imagination of what women can give me. What it gives seems small
and unspectacular, but is very useful to a seeker after truth. I learn
something from an objective letter like this one, and it helps me to
guide you and others.
The Ashram is indeed a dharmashala. But the word has two
meanings. It means a place where people can stay free, but it also
means a place where one can learn dharma and try to follow it. The
Ashram is a dharmashala in this second sense of the word. But dharma
means truth. The Ashram, therefore, is a place where one may know
the truth and try to follow it, that is, show agraha 1 for it, and hence it
is Satyagraha Ashram.
In our quest for truth, we wish to cultivate unity with all living
creatures. The Ashram, therefore, is an ever-growing family. But it is
something more even than that, for it is the means and dharma is the
end, and not vice versa. It is also a big school, and yet it is not so; for,
since it is a family, we cannot mechanically apply there rules of
outward behaviour such as are followed for other types of training.
The letter of the rule has to be sacrificed in order to save the spirit of
the rule.
I will now apply these observations to some specific cases. In
bringing up and educating Lakshmi, we, including you, are being
tested. What would we do to children in our own family? What would
you do to your own sister? If Lakshmi does not observe the rules, the
fault is chiefly mine, and then yours. I leave out the others. I leave out
Narandas, too, for if we hold him responsible for the behaviour of
every person in the Ashram, he will not be able to attend to his own
duties. Looking after Lakshmi is a woman’s job, and particularly of
the woman to whom it is entrusted. The fault is chiefly mine because I
am her adopted father and also mother. I did my duty as a father but
1

256

Firmness
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not as a mother, because I remained away from the Ashram most of
the time. I feel now that I should not have accepted Lakshmi at all.
But who was I to decide? I am but a servant of God. I did not seek
Lakshmi. God sent her. Let Him, then, look after her. She was under
the charge of Ba first, then of Santok, then of Gangabehn, and now
she is under your charge. None of you asked to have charge of her. It
was time and circumstances which put her under the charge of these
persons one after another. You should now do the best that you can.
Whenever necessary, you may consult me. Do not get tired of your
charge or despair. Have faith and bathe her with your love. God will
ultimately solve the problem. She has come to us as a representative of
Harijans to claim payment of the debt which we owe to them. If she is
full of shortcomings and is indolent, the responsibility for that lies on
you, me and on the caste Hindus. We reap as we sow. I am trying to
get her married off. I have written to Lakshmidas and inquired about
Maruti. I have also written to Dudabhai.
You need not get upset because more boys and girls are coming
to the Ashram. They will benefit to the extent that they observe the
rules. We may let them stay as long as we tolerate their laxity, and ask
them to leave when we can do so no longer. People do not stay in a
dharmashala permanently. Even near relations do not stay
permanently. Those of them who can accommodate themselves to the
discipline of the Ashram will stay, and the others will leave. Why
should we care either way? Moreover, we cannot adopt any other
policy in the present circumstances. As long as we can do so, we
should admit people who come unasked and who seem deserving.
Most of them will leave on their own. Our rules themselves will drive
them away. Everybody who comes must do physical work. They
should clean lavatories and eat simple food in the same manner as we
swallow medicine. They will not get jaggery, nor wheat as often as
they might wish. If we can daily demonstrate more and more clearly
by our manner of life that the Ashram is a representative of the
starving poor, we shall always be safe and happy. This means that
there should be increasing simplicity in our life in the Ashram and the
rules should be observed more and more strictly. If fire preserves its
nature, creatures which cannot endure it simply cannot live near it.
That is the virtue of fire and not its defect. It is because, unlike fire, we
are not true to ourselves that all the problems arise. My suggestion
about simplicity and strictness in observing the rules concerns
ourselves. We should cultivate them in ever greater degree. We seek
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

257

,protection for ourselves in our inner selves and not outside of us
“we” here means all of us who voluntarily stay in the Ashram, you, I
and everybody else. And one should not observe only as many rules
as the other inmates do. One must observe every rule as strictly as one
can. In this lies the secret of the progress of the Ashram. The rule
should be, a liberal attitude towards others and strictness towards
oneself. Even so, we shall preserve some minimum decency in our
attitude to ourselves, for very often our liberal attitude towards others
will not be sincere and our strictness towards ourselves will be so only
in appearance.
The ideal for girls is a life of inviolate brahmacharya. Training
for it includes training for ideal married life. Boys and girls do not
require to be instructed as to what married life means. That relation is
a part of the animal nature of men and women. The institution of
marriage was devised as a means of exercising some control on that
nature. Its perfect control means brahmacharya. Anybody who can
observe this perfect control will also be able to observe the limited
control of marriage. But those who regard marriage itself as their ideal
will not understand the real purpose even of marriage. What training
does one require for lust? It will grow of itself. However, the girl who
has accepted complete brahmacharya as her ideal must learn how to
manage a home. She must learn something about child-care. She will
not be a nun living in a cave. An unmarried woman marries the whole
world, makes herself a mother and a daughter to all people and
thereby becomes fit to manage the affairs of the whole society. May
be there has been no such unmarried woman. Nevertheless that is the
ideal. For all girls, therefore, the training should be the same. I think I
have explained the idea clearly. If I have not done so, ask me to
explain it again.
This will explain your duty towards that Muslim woman.
The real cause of fainting fits and similar ailments in girls lies in
our own shortcomings. If we have made fairly satisfactory progress,
even the presence of young people among us will not be dangerous to
the Ashram. But whenever we see such danger, we should ask the
young man or woman to leave. If you wish to stop admitting other
young men or women, you may do so.
All my hopes rest on Narandas. If Narandas who is the secretary
of the Ashram is the Narandas as I imagine him to be, everything will
be well. My faith in him is daily increasing. If he is defeated, some
258

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

other old inmate of the Ashram will grow and advance, and I am sure,
therefore, that everything will be well. There are many residents in the
Ashram but only a few inmates. That is why we do not get sufficient
workers. In these very imperfect conditions, all of you should do the
best that you can.
The Ashram is the measuring rod by which people can judge
me. I take it with me wherever I go. Wherever my body may be, my
soul is always in the Ashram. All the shortcomings found in the
Ashram must be present, visibly or invisibly, in me too. If I have made
a mistake in understanding you all, the blame must be mine and
nobody else’s. If, however, I do not know myself, how can I sit in
judgment over all of you? When I think of particular persons, I see
that I did not invite anybody except Chhaganlal and Maganlal. All the
others were sent to me by God to test me or to help me.
And now another matter. You made a mistake in not going to
Dr. Patel yourself. You cannot ask a doctor’s advice through a note.
Observe complete silence. Show your throat to the doctor and follow
his advice. You should not be obstinate in this matter.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10326

365. LETTER TO HINDU CENTRAL COMMITTEE
February 13, 1933
DEAR FRIENDS,

1. In continuation of my letter acknowledging yours of 4th
instant I have now to say that I have read the statement of the Hindu
Central Committee with much attention and when after reading the
statement I saw the names of distinguished lawyers amongst other
notabilities as the original members of the Committee I was filled with
sorrow.
2. Take this assertion in the statement:
We feel that there is no question of inferiority complex in the divisions of Hindu society and least of all, no sin has been committed all these
centuries by the orthodox Hindus who have been following the traditions
established by all the merciful humanitarian sages of this land.

Is this assertion borne out by the evidence of the senses? If the
Committee were to contend that there is in the Hindu Shastras no
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

259

inferiority or superiority I should at once agree. But untouchability as
it is practised today with the attendant system of locations and
deprivation practically of all the amenities of life for the so-called
untouchables is surely proof of their inferiority. These disabilities
have been often enumerated in the public Press. The precept of
equality therefore seems to have been systematically and cruelly
disregarded by modern Hindu society. Is the Committee able to point
out any act on the part of what it calls the orthodox Hindus for the
amelioration of the economic and material condition of the depressed
classes? And is not the very existence of a class called “depressed”
sufficient contradiction of the above-quoted assertion?
3. The Committee then proceeds and says:
There are also in many places in the country large sections of the
population amongst caste Hindus who are worse than Panchamas both
economically and culturally.

I am unaware of any sections of caste Hindus who are both
economically and culturally worse than Panchamas, and if there are I
should very much like to know their names.
4. The third statement of the Committee to which I would invite
attention is:
It will be a travesty of truth to suggest that the orthodox Hindus have
not been generous in their dealings with the Panchamas or Harijans in the
villages.

Is it a sign of generosity on the part of caste Hindus to give
leavings of their dishes to Harijans, to force their labour against a
starvation wage, to deny to them the services of physicians,
schoolmasters, barbers and practically all the other services to which
they, the caste Hindus, are used?
5. Another statement of the Committee is:
Except in the higher classes today, there is no unemployment problem
in the country.

Surely, this is a sweeping statement at complete variance with
known facts as found in historical and Government records.
6. The Committee then proceeds:
The first creed of the orthodox Hindu is always the gift of food to the
hungry and he has always felt it as a religious duty and his first prayer has been
to the Lord to vouchsafe happiness to all human beings.

The creed is undoubtedly there. Has the Committee any
260

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

evidence to show any corresponding action on the part of the
orthodox Hindus in connection with Harijans?
7. Then the Committee goes on to say:
It cannot be suggested for one moment that though the Congress has
thrown itself whole-heartedly in favour of this agitation for the removal of
untouchability and for temple-entry after the announcement of the fast of Mr.
Gandhi, it has done any appreciable service for the economic and material
uplift of the depressed classes.

The Committee should know that it is not possible for the
Congress “to throw itself whole-heartedly into the agitation”. It is
being carried on by the general Hindu population organized by the
recently formed Servants of Untouchables Society. That Society
invites all without distinction of party to help it to remove
untouchability. This Society has planned a wide constructive
programme. In so far as the Congress itself is concerned, its Hindu
members have a record for the service of Harijans which is second to
that of no other similar organization.
8. But the Committee goes on:
If the call to join the movement for such uplift comes from persons
who are pledged to temple-entry, the orthodox Hindus on their part cannot but
view it with suspicion, especially when it is preceded by Gandhi’s cry of
“Leave the temple-entry to me”.

I fail to see why the orthodox Hindus should view with suspicion
the call for joining the movement for uplift because it comes from
persons who are openly advocating temple-entry, not by compulsion
but by conversion. And what can be the meaning of emphasis on my
statement “Leave the temple-entry to me”? I am charitable enough to
assume that the Committee framed that sentence without knowing the
context in which ‘‘Leave the temple-entry to me” was first used. It
was said in answer to correspondents who were impatient to offer
satyagraha and adopt energetic measures for opening other temples.
In order to keep the movement within fixed limits and in order to
confine direct action by way of fast for the present at least to Sjt.
Kelappan and myself I said to the correspondents, “Leave the templeentry to me and go on with the other constructive programme of
economic and educational uplift”. The Committee can easily verify
this from my writings. I hope therefore that the Committee will
disabuse their minds of the prejudice betrayed against me in the
sentence quoted.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

261

9. The next sentence in the Committee’s statement runs:
If Mr. Gandhi and his followers will give an undertaking to save
temples and other religious institutions from interference by the mixed
legislatures of the land, we are willing to whole-heartedly co-operate with
them.

I have shown repeatedly that the two Bills before the Legislative
Assembly imply no interference with temples or other religious
institutions. They seek to restore the status quo existing before certain
decisions of law-courts, well known to the legal members of the
Committee. I can give the assurance on my behalf and on behalf of
my co-workers that we have no desire whatsoever to invoke
interference by the legislatures in matters of religion and if only the
Committee will co-operate in the prosecution of the general
movement for the removal of untouchability, not of the desirable type
such as is mentioned in the Shastras in the interests of sanitation, but
of the—in my opinion—undesirable type as is being practised today,
the Committee will soon discover that there is no cause whatsoever for
alarm or suspicion and that if there is anything in the two Bills that
can be shown to be an interference with religious liberty, the defect
can undoubtedly be remedied without difficulty.
10. With the sentiment expressed in the last two sentences of the
statement of the Committee I can whole-heartedly agree, for so far as I
am concerned there is no desire indiscriminately “to import Western
ideals of society, civilization and equality”. Perhaps, no one has
written, and endeavoured as much as possible to act in accordance
with the writing, against Western civilization and I have not the
slightest desire to destroy the foundations of Hindu caste system, if by
that is meant varnashramadharma. The movement against untouchability is on that very account deliberately circumscribed and restricted
to the very things described by the Committee except temple-entry,
and as to this last, it can be shown conclusively that there is no desire
whatsoever to force temple-entry but by proper disciplined agitation
to bring about a change in Hindu public opinion, a change not
inconsistent with the spirit of the Shastras.
11. If the Committee will dispassionately read my analysis of the
statement, I am not without hope that it will see that whoever has
framed the statement has committed the members of the Committee to
assertions which cannot be supported by existing facts. The statement
though sent to me is merely a copy of what has already been sent to
262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the Press, but on reading the statement I discovered that according to
the Committee’s admissions there was a great deal that was common
between the Committee and the reformers and that the assertions
which were made in order to emphasize differences were mostly if not
wholly imaginary and not capable of proof. I felt that I would point
out to the Committee in a private communication the glaring flaws in
the statement and see if there was not any possibility of meeting on a
common platform.
12. If the Committee however considers that all the assertions
made in the statement can be supported and that I am labouring under
self-delusion, I would be glad to be corrected. If the Committee sees
any good in my letter, I invite it to send one or more representatives to
confer with me with a view to exploring possibilities of common
action or at least of understanding the real differences in matters of
principle. Pending your reply, I am not sending this letter to the Press,
but if the Committee finds it to be hopeless, it is at liberty to publish it.
Yours sincerely,

THE HON . S ECRETARIES
HINDU C ENTRAL C OMMITTEE
459 M INT S TREET
P.T., M ADRA S
From a microfilm: S.N. 20232

366. LETTER TO RAMJI
February 13, 1933
BHAISHRI RAMJI,

I got your wire. Swarupbehn’s name in her husband’s house is
Vijayalakshmi. Her address at Bombay is Meher Mansion, Laburnum
Road, Gamdevi. I have sent her your wire and your suggestions. See
that after coming there, she does not have to bear the expense.
Arrange interviews with the Raja and Ranis. Introduce her to some
courteous sanatanist, if there is such a one. Do not let her run up and
down too much.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XX

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

263

367. LETTER TO M. S. ANEY
February 13, 1933
I am no more a general. I am as good as dead. I have ceased to
be a general as I am dead in the civil sense. Not only that, but I am not
even a pawn. All your generals and pawns are out. In reply to those
who had doubts I quoted a well-known Sanskrit saying 1. Who could
make it clearer? The Government has correctly interpreted my words.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 141

368. LETTER TO URMILADEVI
February 13, 1933
No one has a right to physical rest. Spiritual rest is always
possible. One must have the will power. This will be anasaktiyoga2.
Those who work with non-attachment, never tire physically; if they do,
they will soon go to sleep and have all the rest. In the absence of
attachment the atman will surely be at peace.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 141

369. A LETTER
February 13, 1933
I hope you must have dismissed the idea of employing a
Pathan,3 haven’t you? If one gets beating from one’s wife and yet
would not be angry, one should dance [with joy]. While among
husbands there would be quite a few for every hundred who are given
1

“He who pursues an insecure object leaving the secure ones loseth the latter,
the former being as good as lost.”
2
Performing actions without attachment to their outcome
3
The addressee, harassed by his wife, wanted to employ a Pathan so that the
hirelings of his wife may not annoy his girl friends and two other girls who were
accommodated in his house.

264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to beating their wives, the proportion for wives who beat their
husbands may not be one in ten thousand. . . .1 They may belong to a
very small class. Make use of the knowledge you have acquired.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III p. 141

370. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS2
February 13, 1933
Asked if permission was given to Appasaheb as a special case, Mr. Gandhi
declined to answer. But it is learnt that the new orders of the Government of India,
while permitting high-caste Hindus to do voluntary conservancy work, leave it
entirely to the discretion of the Jail Superintendent to permit or not to permit a
particular prisoner to do this.
Asked why he attached such importance to this subject, Mr. Gandhi replied
that untouchability had to go everywhere, and more so in jails. Untouchability could
not exist in jails where prisoners could not insist on high-class and low-class
distinctions, and where they must be willing to perform all services, including those
imposed on the so-called low castes.
Asked if he would advise high castes outside also to do conservancy work, Mr.
Gandhi replied:

I would most decidedly expect high-caste men to render
voluntarily all useful services which today are reserved to certain
classes. The idea that the most necessary service in the world will be
considered degrading or should carry any sin with it is abhorrent to
me. Our villages will wear a different appearance altogether when
sanitary services begin to be classed among the honourable
occupations, nor will the streets of our cities be so dangerously dirty
as they are today, when we have ceased to consider it degrading to
take a brush, bucket and broom in order to do the necessary
cleansing.
The Hindu, 14-2-1933

1

Omission as in the source
Gandhiji was interviewed after he had received information of the breaking of
partial fast by Appasaheb Patwardhan in Ratnagiri Jail when he was permitted to do
conservancy work as a volunteer.
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

265

371. TELEGRAM TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
February 14, 1933
YOUR

LETTER.

IMPORTANT
SIONS.

(I)

(I)

SUGGEST

QUESTIONS
CONSIDER

(THE)

BOMBAY

BUT

THEY

YOUR

BEFORE

BILLS

PLEDGE.

ABSOLUTELY

THEY

RESTORE

COMING

COMING
DO

FREEDOM

HERE

(TO)

DEFINITE

NECESSARY

NOT
OF

(TO)

IN

DISCUSS
CONCLU-

TERMS

OF

CONSTITUTE

COMPULSION,

CONSCIENCE.

NEWSPAPERS

PUBLISH INFORMATION THAT YOU HAVE WRITTEN ME OPPOSING BILLS. DO YOU
DESIRE
THIS

STAGE?

PUBLICATION
AWAITING

(OF)
WIRE.

YOUR

LETTER

(AT)

1

GANDHI

Harijan, 18-2-1933

372. LETTER TO SRIPRAKASA
February 14, 1933
MY DEAR SHRIPRAKASH,

Though doleful, the receipt of your letter was a matter of joy for
me. I have no doubt whatsoever that in the quiet of the village
surroundings you will soon recover your lost health and repair your
broken spirits. You are not an old man but being a man of emotion
and possessing a sensitive nature, you imagine all sorts of evil. You
have many years of active. life and service in front of you. Many
people have gone through much more distress of the body than you
have and yet I see them today in possession of sound health and
bright spirits. Mens sana in corpore sano you learnt in your youth
and as soon as the body becomes healthy, the mind is bound to react.
Meanwhile therefore your first and the last care is to regain your
health and not to worry about the future of the family, the country or
the world. You cannot be the architect of any of these but you can
contribute your own share to the advancement of all the three. In a
true scheme of life the real advancement of one conduces to the
advancement of all.
You may not write anything of your experiences of the events
1

For the addressee’s reply, vide “Telegram from Madan Mohan Malaviya”,
15-2-1933

266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

happening around you. That must be a sealed book to me except what
I can gather through the papers that I am permitted to receive; nor,
constituted as I am by nature, have I the slightest desire to know them.
A prisoner is civilly dead to the outside world, and that is right. If he
hankers after peeping into the forbidden land he is like the departed
ghost which according to our belief misbehaves itself if it hankers
after establishing communication with the world he was made by the
Angel of Death to leave. A prisoner who misbehaves like the ghost
fails to establish real communication with the world he has left and in
the vain pursuit loses the pleasure, such as it may be, which falls to the
lot even of the prisoner. Realizing this beautiful truth I have never
misbehaved like the ghost.
I shall remember what you say about the spelling of your
name.1 It was Father who gave me the idea that you were a stickler for
the right spelling of your name. You have now repaid him in his own
coin and retort that he is a stickler, not you. I have thrown the apple of
discord between father and son. You will now fight it out amongst
yourselves. I do not mind because I am out of harm’s way, and since I
have your permission I shall continue to spell your name after my
own fashion.
But if I am not concerned about your health I am much
concerned about Shivaprasad’s. I now understand why he is silent
after having promised that he would send me weekly report about his
health. I am deeply distressed. I will write to him, but in any case you
will continue to give me such news as you may receive, and though
you may not give me the news of the outside world you must continue
to write to me about your own progress.
Remember me to the children and give them the love of us all
and accept the same for yourself.
BAPU
Sriprakasa Papers, File No. G-2. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

1

Vide also “Letter to Bhagwandas”, 31-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

267

373. LETTER TO P. N. RAJBHOJ
February 14, 1933
MY DEAR RAJBHOJ,

I have your letter. I see that you are in a hurry. I have thought
over your scheme and I have conferred with Sheth Jamnalalji also. I
think that at the present moment you should concentrate your
attention upon your Hostel. That will certainly absorb much of your
time if you are to make it an ideal home for students and then you
will want some leisure from that routine work for public engagements.
If you took up the responsibility of conducting an Ashram you will
have to devote yourself entirely to it and then possess qualifications
which you might not have today. In any case, seeing that you have
that high ambition, I would like you, when you can spare yourself, to
pass at least three months at the Ashram and try to live the Ashram
life. That will certainly be of use to you in every one of your
activities.
I am quite sure that you should give up the idea of reviving
Dalit Bandhoo. As to the Marathi edition of Harijan, I am
considering the thing myself. You have seen how it is a rule with me
not to issue any paper that does not become self-supporting. It is to
me a test of its being wanted by the public. It is only in rare cases that
a paper may be issued in the first instance at a loss.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. P. N. R AJBHOJ
207 GHORPADE P ETH
P OONA 2
From a photostat: G.N. 789

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

374. LETTER TO T. K. S. RAJAN
February 14, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I am glad you have already taken the work
among Harijans. You would report to me a fortnight hence the results
of your activity, and I will say what more can be done.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. T. K. S. R AJAN
S ALEM
From a microfilm: S.N. 20241

375. LETTER TO K. V. RADHAKRISHNA SHASTRI
February 14, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. 1 I am afraid, however, that I cannot
adopt the advice you give me.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R. V. R ADHAKRISHNA S HASTRI
VEPERY
MADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20242

376. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
February 14, 1933
DEAR MR. JAYAKAR,

I thank you very much indeed for sending me a prompt reply,
and I am glad that you have written to the Viceroy2. I have no doubt
that it will have its weight. I thank you also for two copies of the Bill
1

The addressee had written: “You will do well to secure your release from jail. .
. [and] . . . work for swadeshi.”
2
On the question of procedure to be followed in regard to the Untouchability
Bills in the Assembly
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

269

which you had sought to introduce into the Legislative Assembly, and
as you have very considerately given me two copies of the Bill, I am
promptly sending one to Rajagopalachariar for such use as he may
want to make of it. I shall very probably make use of it for the
ensuing number of Harijan.1 I hope you got a copy of the first issue.
If you had the time to go through it, I would value your criticism and
your opinion for publication on the interpretation of the Shastras on
untouchability. As that of a Sanskrit scholar and jurist your opinion
will have great value if you can at all find time to give it.
Yours sincerely,

M. R. J AYAKAR , E SQ.
ASHRAM
WINTER R OAD
MALABAR HILL
BOMBAY 6
From a microfilm: S.N. 20243

377. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
February 14, 1933
MY DEAR C. R.,

Herewith a copy of the Bill that Mr. Jayakar sought to introduce
into the Legislative Assembly of his time, and of his letter. The text of
his Bill might be of use to you.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20249

1

270

Vide “Sjt. Jayakar on Untouchability”, 18-2-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

378. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
February 14, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter. 1 I understand the situation. We can but do
whatever is possible and await the result. It is beyond the control of
man. I have a long letter from Malaviyaji in which he opposes the
introduction of the Bills altogether and in any case insists upon their
circulation. I am suggesting to him that he should come over here and
discuss the whole thing with me before coming to a conclusion. I have
suggested to Rajaji2 that he should go to him or send Devdas. I do not
know whether it is worth while your going. I leave the thing to you.
About Bengal, I hope you saw my letter 3 to Ramanand Baboo.
And now Dr. Ambedkar appears on the scene,
I have written to Rajaji and also telegraphed4 him as to what I
feel about exploiting the possibility of my fast. I think that it should
not be done. The fast must be dismissed out of consideration
altogether. This exploiting robs it of any spiritual value it might
possess. The knowledge that it is a possibility may colour your action
but you may not use it to affect the actions of others. That would
amount to illegitimate pressure. I wish you will not henceforth
mention it anywhere.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20244

1

The addressee had written: “The Bill could be introduced with a Select
committee appointed in this session and can be passed in the Simla session only if
the Government help. If the Government obstruct, then of course the Bill may not be
introduced even in this session. But from what I see, I hope hey will at least help the
introduction of the Bill in this session, but they would not be prepared to go beyond
that. They would insist on the Bill being circulated. . . .”
2
Vide “Letter to C. Rajagopalachari”, 12/13-2-1933
3
Vide “Letter to Ramananda Chatterjee”, 11-2-1933
4
Vide “Draft Telegram to C. Rajagopalchari”, 13-2-1933
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

271

379. LETTER TO RANCHHODDAS PATWARI
February 14, 1933
I got your postcard. You had said in it that you would write a
long letter. I waited for it, but since none came I am writing this.
Ceaseless efforts are being made to persuade Harijans to follow the
rules of cleanliness and hygiene. Others may not distinguish between
the different aspects of my work for Harijans, but why don’t you do
so, and help me in regard to those which you accept? I hope you
don’t doubt my intention or ability to adhere to a decision firmly
made. It was my elders who joined themselves in a mutual bond with
the Patwari family and, following in their foot-steps, I became
personally indebted to you and have, therefore, always looked upon
you as a respected elder. How can I give up this respectful attitude and
why do you try to make me give it up? What does it matter if there are
differences of opinion between us? Haven’t I such a difference with
my sister too? But she does not cease to be my elder sister for that
reason. My family has had the same kind of bond with the Patwari
family for half a century and I, for my part, will not break it.
My pranams to Chhaganbhai.
Pranams from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 20239

380. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
February 14, 1933
CHI. PURUSHOTTAM,

I got your postcard. Do not be impatient but learn as much
from the Yogashram as you can. I have seen many who thought that
they had learnt much in a short time, but repented afterwards. You
should not, therefore, be impatient. You need not try Madan’s
treatments, but it would be worthwhile to see whether his institution is
actually running and how. Come here at 12 noon on Saturday.
Mathuradas also may accompany you if he wants. Others also who
272

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have secured permission and wish to come may do so. I have no letter
from anyone about his coming.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati. C.W. 908. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

381. LETTER TO G. R. ABHYANKAR
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

February 14, 1933
MY DEAR ABHYANKAR,

I thank you for your letter. Enclosed you will find copies of
correspondence between Sjt. Athavale and myself. You will now do
the needful. I am sorry to have troubled you in the matter, but I know
you will not mind it.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: G. R. Abhyankar Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

382. LETTER TO R. D. ATHAVALE
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

February 14, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of 11th instant. I referred to Sjt.
Gangadharrao and he says: “So far as I can remember I do not think
that you had given any authority to Mr. Chhapkhane or to anybody
else to use the money as he liked. It was understood that the amount
collected at the meeting should be sent either to me or to you. The
amount collected in the tour was to be applied to khadi.”
Your letter appears to be positive. I myself have no recollection
whatsoever but it is most unusual for me when I am touring for a
specific purpose and with a responsible man like Sjt. Gangadharrao
Deshpande to leave any collections with anybody and that too without
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

273

any instructions whatsoever as to its use. I would therefore like a letter
from Sjt. Chhapkhane himself as to what he knows about it.
I must dissent from the proposition you have laid down that a
person has no control over the monies entrusted by him to another for
disposal even when the amount is unspent. But the first thing to
determine is what was actually intended by me when the money was
left with you. I take it that from now you will not make any use of the
money till the matter is finally settled as to its control and disposal.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R. D. A THAVALE
S HRI R AM S TORES
S ANGLI
From a copy: G. R. Abhyankar Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

383. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
February 14, 1933
I have most carefully read Dr. Ambedkar’s statement1 for which
I cannot conceal my sorrow, but I must also confess he has a perfect
right to make a statement as he has done. Harijans have laboured
under grievous wrongs for ages, and Dr. Ambedkar and other
educated Harijans are fully conscious of these wrongs. The marvel to
me is that they are not more bitter and more resentful than they are.
Having therefore excused their position, I cannot travel the same
length that Dr. Ambedkar would have me do. He has asked me a
straight question, and is entitled to an equally straight answer from
me.
I have described myself as a Harijan by adoption and in
order to qualify myself for the privilege that it is to me, I have
endeavoured to enter the very depths of their feelings. I have lived
with them, dined with them, and they have always claimed the first
place in my thoughts and my prayers. I have done so not to do any
favour to them, but as a matter of religious duty.
I am a Hindu not merely because I was born in the Hindu fold,
1

274

Vide “B. R. Ambedkar’s Statement”, 13-2-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

but I am one by conviction and choice. As I know it and interpret it, it
gives me all the solace I need, both here and hereafter. It solves for me
many riddles of life. But it also contains, as it is practised today, the
big blot of untouchability in the sense in which it is understood today,
that is, distinction between man and man, one occupying the topmost
rung of the ladder and another the lowest. If this doctrine of utmost
superiority and utmost inferiority, descending from father to son for
eternity, is an integral part of Hinduism without the slightest prospect
of a change, then I no more want to belong to it than does Dr.
Ambedkar. But I am convinced that this doctrine of eternal damnation
is a thing utterly foreign to the spirit of Hinduism and the Shastras as I
have understood them. There is no superiority or inferiority in the
Hinduism of my conception. Therefore I should go the whole length
with Dr. Ambedkar in fighting the arrogation of superiority on the
part of any individual or class over any other. My fight against
untouchability is a fight against this horrid doctrine. If untouchability
goes from the heart of Hindus, superiority and inferiority are also
gone.
But when Dr. Ambedkar wants to fight varnashrama itself I
cannot be in his camp, because I believe varnashrama to be an integral
part of Hinduism. It is quite evident that the varnashrama of Dr.
Ambedkar’s conception is being practised today, but that is not my
conception of varnashrama. In my opinion, at present both
varnadharma and ashramadharma are in abeyance, and if I were asked
what varna is in operation at present, I would say Shudra varna, not
because it is the lowest, but because it is the only thing that remains,
for the divine knowledge, the power behind it and wealth for the
support of this knowledge and power are gone. Knowledge, power
and wealth there certainly are in a way. But in the religious conception
of varnadharma, these three have to be used not for personal ends, but
for spiritual and social advance. The only thing that remains open for
all today is service, also included in the scheme of
varnashramadharma, for a spiritual end. Out of that spirit of service, it
is possible to revive spiritual knowledge, the power to defend it and
the wealth to sustain both. Then, those who are in possession of that
knowledge, and will use it for society will be Brahmins, those who use
that power for the benefit of society will be Kshatriyas, and those who
gain wealth and use wealth, also for society, are Vaishyas. They will
all depend for their very existence on Shudras, the embodiments of
real service. For me that is true varnashrama, and there is no question
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

275

of superiority or inferiority in this conception.
The Shudra is as necessary for society as the Brahmin. Each will
have, more or less, all the qualities and privileges of the rest, but
people belonging to particular varnas will perform the special service
assigned to them. There is then, in this conception, no question of
privilege, but only duty and service.
I invite Dr. Ambedkar to shed his bitterness and anger and try to
learn the beauties of the faith of his forefathers. Let him curse the
caste Hindus as much as he likes but let him not curse Hinduism
without making an unbiassed study of it, and if it fails to sustain him
in the hour of need, by all means let him forsake it.
Coming to the question of temple-entry, I entirely agree with
him that Harijans cannot be and must not be beggars for it. It is for
the caste Hindus to open temples whole-heartedly or not at all. I
would repeat that the opening of temples is one of the duties that caste
Hindus owe to Harijans. I hope Dr. Ambedkar’s statement is not
intended to convey the meaning that Harijans do not feel the
deprivation of the right to temple-entry, for I know from personal
knowledge that for thousands of them, it is a serious deprivation. The
betterment of their economic and educational conditions is
undoubtedly required. But no betterment of those conditions will give
religious equality. That can be attained only by admission into
temples and all the religious consolation to which caste Hindus are
today entitled. This religious equality cannot be attained even by
statute, but only when the heart of the caste Hindus is changed. The
Bills before the Assembly are not intended to force open the temples
to Harijans, but only to make it possible for the caste Hindus to throw
them open when the hearts of the majority are changed.
Dr. Ambedkar has confined himself to the criticism of the
second Bill (Temple-entry Bill on the model of Dr. Subbaroyan’s
Bill). In my opinion, this Bill is designed to test caste Hindu feelings.
When the hearts of the majority are changed, temples would be thrown
open. Surely, Dr. Ambedkar does not want forcible opening of
temples. I do not, for one moment, hold the opinion, which he does,
that the majority of caste Hindus today are not prepared to open
temples to Harijans. Evidence of the Guruvayur referendum, despite
Dr. Ambedkar’s belittling, is undoubtedly in favour of a change of
heart on the part of caste Hindus. The referendum in Madura too,
recently published, points in the same direction. There will be time
276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

enough to show dissatisfaction and disappointment when caste Hindus
had been given an opportunity of expressing their opinion. Dr.
Ambedkar, I observe, has remained silent about the first Bill
(Untouchability Bill). It withdraws the recognition of secular law from
the recognition of religious belief. I hope he has no objection to this
Bill, but whether he has or not, caste Hindus have a duty to perform,
that is, to secure the passage of the Bills with the utmost despatch.
The Hindu, 15-2-1933; also The Hindustan Times, 15-2-1933

384. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
February 15, 1933
DEAR MAJOR BHANDARI,

There are two matters that I have discussed with you, with which
you have told me you have no authority to deal.
The first matter relates to the supply of newspapers to me in
terms of the orders of the Government of India, giving me special
facilities about untouchability propaganda. Somehow or other
hitherto I have managed to cope with my work in spite of restrictions
that you have been exercising about newspapers addressed to me. I
have already drawn your attention to very important matters escaping
my notice owing to the non-delivery of these papers. However careful
your staff may be, they cannot always be sure of having all the
cuttings relating to untouchability in the papers received. Some papers
such as Dr. Ambedkar’s I have to look through fully and carefully.
So far as I read the Government of India orders they contemplate no
restrictions on the prompt receipt by me of correspondence and
newspapers. It is obvious that I cannot carry on propaganda if I do
not get such things in proper time. I therefore ask that all the
newspapers received for me and which do not come under the
heading of “prohibited literature” should be delivered to me as they
arrive. Of course they may be taken away from me as soon as I have
used them. I need hardly repeat the assurance that I have no use for
them save for the one purpose to which all my energy and attention
are being exclusively directed. I shall therefore thank you to obtain
necessary and early instructions in the matter.
The second matter is about the new weekly Harijan which
is being published in Poona in the interest of the Servants of
Untouchables Society. Its policy is naturally being controlled by me
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

277

as it has been published at my instance. It has therefore to deal
exclusively with questions relating to untouchability only and
therefore it is a purely socio-religious weekly. I ask you whether
copies could be sent to my associates and fellow-prisoners whether
belonging to ‘B’ class or ‘C’ class. I would thank you if you will
kindly ask for Government’s instructions on my request. I may draw
the attention of the Government to the fact that in 1922 when I was
admitted into this Prison as a convicted prisoner and when in all other
matters except food and sanitary conveniences I had no facilities
given to me except what were permitted to other prisoners, there never
was any difficulty about my getting newspapers of a purely
socio-religious character. I hope, therefore, there will be none this
time about the giving of Harijan to my friends, the fellow-prisoners.
Lastly, will you please convey my thanks to the Government for
their very prompt attention to my letters 1 about Shrimati Mirabehn
(Slade) and Appasaheb Patwardhan.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800
(40) (4), Pt. II, p. 123

385. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
February 15, 1933
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

In the hope of giving you a good letter against your splendid
letter I have been postponing writing to you. But I can do so no
longer. Daily the work is increasing. I must therefore write now and
do the best I can. I wonder if you are allowed an innocent paper like
Harijan. I am sending it in the hope that you will get it. If you do,
you will please let me have your opinion. The fight against sanatanists
is becoming more and more interesting if also increasingly difficult.
The one good thing is that they have been awakened from long
lethargy. The abuses they are hurling at me are wonderfully
refreshing. I am all that is bad and corrupt on this earth. But the storm
2

1

Vide “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay”, 6-2-1933 and
“Letter to Home Secretary, Government of Bombay”, 11-2-1933
2
Vide “Letter from Jawaharlal Nehru”, 5-1-1933

278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will subside. For I apply the sovereign remedy of
ahimsanon-retaliation. The more I ignore the abuses, the fiercer they
are becoming. But it is the death dance of the moth round a lamp.
Poor Rajagopalachari and Devdas! They are also in for it. They are
dragging out the engagement with Lakshmi and weaving round it foul
charges. Thus is untouchability being supported!
Sarup and Krishna 1 saw me the other day about untouchability
and Indu 2 as part of the domestic interview. Indu was in excellent
health and seemed to be quite happy. Sarup is having a brief tour in
Kathiawar and Gujarat for anti-untouchability and Krishna was to
have gone to Allahabad. Devdas is in Delhi helping Raja who is
moving the M.L.A.s for the anti-untouchability Bills. Our time is
being wholly occupied by the untouchability work. Sardar
Vallabhbhai contributes all the envelopes for the ever-increasing
number of outgoing letters. He is the diligent newspaper reader who
digs out odd bits of information on untouchability and what not. He is
also a factory for the inexhaustible supply of mirth. The inspection
day is just the same to him as any other day. He never has any request
to make. With me never a day passes but I have some request to make.
But I do not know which is the happier. Why may I not be as happy as
he, if I can take my defeats without pulling a long face!
We all envy your solitude and your studies. It is true that our
burdens are of our own making or more accurately of my making. I
have dashed to pieces all Vallabhbhai’s hope of becoming a good
Sanskrit scholar. He can’t concentrate on his studies in the midst of
the excitement of Harijan work and the daily dish of spiced criticism
which he enjoys like the Bengal footballers their game. Mahadev
continues to be what Shaukat described him to be—the hamal3 of the
party. No work is too much for him or beyond him. Chhaganlal Joshi
is still finding his feet. But he is flourishing. With the spring now well
on us, he cannot fail to blossom out. We are not a bad assortment. We
observe the rules of the game and so make a fairly decent family
strictly regulated by the code of varnashrama which between Dr.
Ambedkar and me will soon provide a new sensation for the
sanatanists. More trouble for me but none of my seeking, I assure
1
2
3

Krishna Hutheesing
Indira Gandhi
Porter

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

279

you. I have now only space and time enough to say we all hope your
progress all round continues steadily.
Love from us all.
BAPU

A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 109-10

386. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
February 15, 1933
MY DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

I have your letter of the 9th instant, regarding Travancore
Christian Pulayas. If they are unapproachable I don’t know that we
can exclude them from our service. After all, what is the service? The
admission to schools we may not refuse to Christian unapproachables,
or to wells. Again we may not refuse to share the wells with them. The
line has to be drawn at the temples of course. Therefore you can say
that Christian unapproachables would be entitled to the same civic
services as the other unapproachables. When it comes to the question
of giving individual scholarships, there may be a difficulty. But I am
not inclined to anticipate and provide against it now. When it comes,
we shall deal with it. All this, however, is my individual view and you
should take it for what it is worth.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 1110

387. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
February 15, 1933
DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

With reference to your letter of the 11th instant, Mr. Simon’s 1
letter cannot be disregarded. He should be definitely asked whether he
and the young men who would work under his supervision can
conscientiously work amongst the untouchables purely with a view to
1
M. R. Simon, a representative of the Children’s Special Service Mission in
London. He had requested the addressee to accept some people from his Mission for
the untouchability work.

280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

‘service’ and without the slightest mental reservation as to making
them Christians. Their ambition should be to make them better
Hindus and better members of society. You should tell Mr. Simon
plainly that unless we have that guarantee, we may not make the
experiment of employing non-Hindu agencies. If Mr. Simon
undertakes work under those conditions he should be entrusted with it
and called upon not only to render at least a fortnightly report to you
but to keep himself in touch with the local branch of the Society. You
should also find out through Christian friends from St. Stephen’s
College what they can say about Mr. Simon.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: G.N. 1111; also S.N. 20252

388. LETTER TO HARDAYAL NAG
February 15, 1933
DEAR HARDAYAL BABOO,

I have your cheery letter. I hope you are combating the disease1
for all you are worth and that though you are the oldest member of
the family you have still vigour enough to fight it.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20255

389. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 15, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I send with this letters for Jethabhai, Jivaram and Budhabhai. I
also send the letter written by Jivaram. It should be shown to all the
inmates. It reveals his sincerity and the devotion with which he is
working in Orissa. The letter need not be returned.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./1

1

Of untouchability

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

281

390. LETTER TO JANAKIDEVI BAJAJ
February 15, 1933
CHI. JANAKIBEHN,

It is Jamnalal’s definite opinion that Om 1 should be separated.
His next suggestion is that Om should be placed with Varutai. She will
look after her carefully. If, however, you have any objection to this,
she may be put either in the Ashram or in Sharda Mandir according
as you wish. You should now select one of the three places, make the
necessary arrangements without delay and inform me what you have
done. Jamnalal thinks that you will prefer the Varutai proposal to the
others, and he himself likes it most.
As for Kesarbehn, Jamnalal intends to make arrangements for
separation as soon as he is released.
You should not delay in taking the necessary steps in such
matters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2910

391. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
February 15, 1933
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

I got your telegram. I did not mean Saruprani, Jawaharlal’s
mother, but meant Sarupbehn, his sister, wife of Ranjit Pandit, who is
in Bombay. As Pandit belongs to Rajkot, Sarupbehn can be regarded
as a Kathiawari. The name given to her by her husband’s family is
Vijayalakshmi. She will reach Bhavnagar on 19th. Consult Ramjibhai
and fix up your programme. Sarupbehn’s address is: Meher Villa,
Laburnum Road, Gamdevi, Bombay. If you can, send a weekly report
of the progress of work in Gujarat for publication in Harijan.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3962
1

282

Addressee’s daughter Uma
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

392. LETTER TO RUKMINIDEVI AND
BENARSILAL BAJAJ
February 15, 1933
CHI. RUKMINI,

I forgot to reply to one question which you had asked in your
postcard. If the yarn spun by a person as contribution to the Spinners,
Association is removed from the spindle and wound into a hank by
somebody else, there will certainly be no violation of the yajna.
However, the porridge will be sweet in proportion to the quantity of
jaggery which you mix with it. Similarly, the yajna will be perfect in
proportion to the labour which one puts in for spinning and
producing yarn. If the spinning-wheel is got ready by one person, the
yarn is moistened by somebody else, the length is measured by a third
person and the yarn is wound into a hank by a fourth person and I
only spin, I shall have done the yajna but shall deserve only pass
marks. Radhika’s ship of health is certainly weak. One cannot say
whether it will reach the shore safely.
CHI. BENARSILAL,

Jamnalal is quite well. Janakidevi was here on a visit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9153

393. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
January 15, 1933
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

Your letter has reached me today after a long time. I hope you
received the special letter I wrote four days back. I wrote it on
learning of your fits. But your letter contains no mention of the fits. I
gave the details of my food, etc., in that letter. Blessings to Kanta.
Keep writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3432

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

283

394. LETTER TO TEJ BAHADUR SAPRU
February 16, 1933
DEAR DR. SAPRU,

I thank you for both your letters1 and your telegram. I am
approaching the members of the Assembly in my own way. Though I
have written to the Viceroy, 2 there is no reply from him.
Rajagopalachari and Ghanshyamdas are both doing their utmost to
consolidate the opinion of the members of the Assembly. I see that
you have considered only one Bill3. I would like you to consider the
other also. It is a very short Bill. That also is before the Assembly and
it is the first of the two to receive sanction for introduction. Therefore
I take it that it would be the first to be considered by the current
session of the Assembly, if it is to be considered at all.
For ready reference I am sending you Rajagopalachari’s
booklet containing both the Bills. If it does not come into your hands
at the same time that this letter does, you will perhaps not mind
sending for the first Bill from the Leader office.
I would suggest your writing to the Viceroy. Mr. Jayakar has
written at my request.
Thank you for your enquiry about my health. I am keeping
quite fit and well.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: G.N. 7588. Also Gandhi-Sapru Correspondence. Courtesy:
National Library of Calcutta

1

Dated February 2 and 11. In his letter dated February 2, 1933, the addressee
had expressed his sympathy and support for the campaign against untouchability and
stated: “. . . that even a moderate measure of this character has not much of a chance in
the Assembly as it is constituted. . . . Meanwhile, my advice is that you should, over
your own signature, address a communication to the members of the Legislature
asking them to push forward this legislation. I fear an attempt will be made to secure
the circulation of this Bill, which, in my opinion, will be tantamount to shelving it
for the time being. orthodox opinion may well be presumed to be hostile to it. It
seems to me a clash with that opinion is inevitable.” For extracts from his letter dated
February 11, vide “Dr. Sapru on Untouchability Bills”, 25-2-1933.
2
Vide “Letter to Private Secretary to Viceroy”, 1-2-1933
3
Ranga Iyer’s Bill on untouchability

284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

395. LETTER TO L. R. PANGARKAR
February 16, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I endeavoured to send you as full a reply as
the time at my disposal would permit me to send.
I entirely endorse your suggestion that just as others learn from
the Gods and the scriptures what they want to, so must I. Some people
learn only by making blunders. I have often found myself doing so,
but I don’t regret for the simple reason that at the time I made the
blunders I was wholly unconscious of them. I try to be cautious, but
however cautious I may be, unless I become a perfect man, I cannot
become proof against unconscious errors. But so long as I retain the
capacity to own them frankly and fully as soon as I become
conscious, it is well with me and well even with those who may be
affected by my errors. If by fear of blunder I hesitated to act at all I
should never succeed in reaching truth.
I must persist in saying that the Bills before the Assembly are in
no way intended to compel anybody to act contrary to his conscience.
I quite see your own viewpoint. It is my misfortune that I cannot make
you see mine. I can therefore only ask you to be patient with me.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. L. R. P ANGARKAR
NASIK C ITY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20262

396. LETTER TO DUNCAN GREENLEES
February 16, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I was wondering what had happened to my letter 1 when
I received yours of the 10th instant. Of course there can be no pledge
1

Vide “Letter to Duncan Greenless”, 1-2-1933.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

285

till you know those with whom you have to work and they know you.1
I hope you have got your box. I shall await your arrival.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20263

397. LETTER TO B. R. AMBEDKAR
February 16, 1933
DEAR DR. AMBEDKAR,

I thank you for your letter of the 12th instant enclosing your
statement. I did not receive anything from the Associated Press, but I
saw it in the daily Press. I hope you saw my reply 2. I wish that you
could appreciate my viewpoint.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20265

398. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
February 16, 1933
Commenting on the statement in the News Chronicle that untouchability is an
evil extraordinarily difficult to uproot by legislation alone, Mr. Gandhi said:

I am not surprised at the ignorance betrayed by the writer in the
News Chronicle when we have in India itself obstinate refusal on the
part of many people to see that there is nothing at all in the two Bills
in the shape of compulsion. I could understand the difficulty, if there
was a measure to abolish untouchability by law.
Again, the writer asks whether the Government ought to regard
the abolition of untouchability as a duty imposed on it by considerations of humanity such as compelled it to abolish suttee. Surely, a
comparison between the Suttee Suppression Law and the present Bills
is most misleading. The practice of suttee is a penal offence, whereas
the present Bill merely withholds legal recognition from untouchability. In my opinion, the Government is morally bound to help the
reformers to adopt reforms wherever public opinion is ripe for it.
1

The addressee had welcomed the opportunity of going to the Ashram provided
it was treated by both as an experiment, with no pledge as to the future on either side.
2
Vide “Interview to Associated Press”, 14-2-1933

286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

British journalists should recognize the correctness of the reformers’
position. They do not seek to bring about reforms by compulsion.
Not to pass these measures will be a block on the progress of reform,
which is being prosecuted by reformers against heavy odds.
Asked if he was doing anything to persuade the members of the Assembly to
facilitate the passage of the Bills, Mr. Gandhi said that he had adopted the most
effective step in sending Mr. Rajagopalachariar there to present his case and seek the
assistance of every member, Hindu members for supporting the Bills, and non-Hindus
for facilitating consideration of the Bills in this session itself.

The Hindu, 17-2-1933

399. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
February 17, 1933
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I had written a postcard to you. I had not much expected to
receive a reply, since, if you wrote to everybody, you would soon
exhaust the number of letters which you were entitled to write.
However, I got news about you from time to time. When you are out
of jail, write to me an account of how you passed your time. My
companions and I are quite well. But you will know all about that
from my letter1 to Mira.
I regularly write to the women prisoners here.
Blessings, from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8796. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

400. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
February 17, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

I begin this at 3.15 a.m. on Friday. It seems that now I shall get
your weekly letter not on Wednesday morning but on Thursday
afternoon. It suits me better. For I have no time for personal letters
on Wednesdays and Thursdays, both the days being required for
Harijan. Everything must go out of my hands by 6 p.m. on
1

Vide the following item.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

287

Thursday. Hence though I must write on other days as well for
Harijan, I must devote Wednesdays and Thursdays entirely to it. This
is almost as before.
The extra note that I thought I might have to write I did not and
could not have written with but extraordinary effort.
I gather from your letter that you are not locked for the night.
You must take the fullest advantage of that liberty. The best food you
want is the freshest air all day and all night. Therefore you should
work outdoor during the day, if, as I learn, you have many neem trees
in your yard. You should sleep all night directly under the sky—not
even the shade of the trees—dew or no dew. The most direct contact
with the stars is absolutely essential. Dew causes no mischief so long as
you are well covered from toe to neck and the head also if necessary
and so long as your lips are tightly closed and you are sure that you
are breathing only through the nose—to ensure this at the time of
retiring you should take a few deep breaths through the nose whilst
you are lying flat on your back with legs fully stretched. You should
set apart certain fixed time, say, five minutes each time for taking
these breaths. Then you will acquire the habit of always breathing
through the nose. Those who, without practice, think that they
naturally breathe through the nose, are not always right. They do not
know when they breathe through the mouth. Unfortunately in the
majority of cases correct breathing is an acquired habit. Tuberculosis
is an impossibility with one who takes freshest air, drinks pure water,
eats properly the proper quantity of the proper food and has proper
exercise.
I have thanked the Government for removing you from Arthur
Road. They have done it promptly and well. It is true that I had
definitely asked for transfer to Yeravda. But they must have their
good reasons for not transferring you there. Sabarmati is undoubtedly
the next best, knowing you as I do—Sabarmati should be the best if
you realized that though my body dwells in Yeravda, my spirit is to be
found in Sabarmati. The body without the spirit is like the Taj without
Shahjehan a tomb!
You should have reported all about the glands to the Surgeon at
Arthur Road. We may not ask for transfers but we are bound to report
our condition. For the authorities hold our bodies in the expectation
that we shall report all about their condition to them. If we do not, we
commit at least a technical, if not a full breach, of prison discipline.
288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You will therefore report every irregularity to the Superintendent who
the Government tell me is an I. M. S. officer and therefore a fully
qualified physician. You should try to make your body 100 per cent
proof against disease.
It is a great joy to me that you have Ba with you and Gangabehn
and Kusum. Have you no access to the others?
Tell Gangabehn 1 and Kusum that I wrote to both of them. I
enclose letters for them and Ba. You will hand them, if they are
entitled or permitted to have them. There is nothing in them but
welfare news.
My weight and food continue as usual and so also the elbows.
With love from us all,
BAPU

[PS.]
Have just heard from Verrier that Verrier is to marry Mary
Gillett on Thursday during Easter week, i.e., 13th April.
[PPS.]
Of course all the instructions I have given in this letter are
subject to revision by the Superintendent.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6263. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9729

401. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
February 17, 1933
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

I hope you have been receiving my letters regularly. Herewith
Dr. Ambedkar’s statement and my reply2. The rest you have in
Harijan. I also want you to read the statements of the two Harijan
leaders Rajan and Deorukhkar.
I have now heard from the Viceroy 3 in reply to my letter 4. The
trend of it is that he insists upon circulating the Bills, and in the
Assembly too there is little hope of a majority resisting circulation. I
1

Gangabehn Vaidya; for the letter to her, vide the preceding item.
Vide “Interview to Associated Press”, 14-2-1933
3
Vide “Letter from Government of India”, 17-2-1933
4
Vide “Letter to Private Secretary to Viceroy”, 1-2-1933
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

289

don’t mind. It simply shows against what odds one has to fight, and
on the top of that has come Malaviyaji’s disagreement. This legal
difficulty is an unexpected thunderbolt, but one has to deal with such
difficulties also. I had expected that the Government would not help
to impede the progress of reform. God will show me the way. You
must not worry.
Love from us all.
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 980; also S.N. 20269

402. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
February 17, 1933
MY DEAR AGATHA,

I have your letter with the two enclosures which you dug out of
Andrews’s pocket.
Now that I give you a long letter in the shape of Harijan, you
must not expect personal letters except rarely.
I know that you are working full speed and that is all we can do.
The results are controlled by the Infinite Power, and hence we may
not worry.
I have enclosed a number of important cuttings with Andrews’s
letter. Do get them all and read them.
Love from us both.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1461

403. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
February 17, 1933
MY DEAR MARY,

You have dried up after your misbehaviour in getting asthma. I
understand that you are better. That is not enough. You have to be
thoroughly restored. I hope your food is all right. Dal is not light
food. You should eschew it. Bread, greens, milk and fruit is your diet.
290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Do please tell me all about your experiences.1 Was Father Lash
comfortable there?
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5992. Also C.W. 3317. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

404. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
February 17, 1933
MY DEAR CHILD,

Nowadays my time is more than fully occupied. Two clear days
have to be given to Harijan to the exclusion of every other work.
Therefore brief as they were, my love-letters have to be briefer still.
But there is some compensation in that you have my general letter in
the form of Harijan.
I know quite well what my visit to London meant to you. We do
not know God’s hidden ways. If we only submit to Him, He makes us
do many things even unconsciously to ourselves. It will be such a joy
to me if you never find yourself in the Valley of Despair, for, to be
there even for one moment means lack of faith in a living God.
I enclose herewith a letter2 for Jack Hansen3.
Mahadev was delighted to have Tangai’s sweet letter.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: No. 119. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also My
Dear Child, p. 99

405. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
February 17, 1933
MY DEAR MARGARETE,

I have your letter. I hope you have been receiving all my letters.
You should not think of coming here in the hope of getting a
professorship or something of that kind so as to enable you to support
1

The addressee was staying at the Sabarmati Ashram at this time. Father Lash
also stayed there for some time; vide “Letter to Bill Lash”, 5-2-1933
2
This is not available.
3
“John Hoyland” in My Dear Child
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

291

your mother. You will only come when the way is perfectly clear for
you. Surely, it is possible for you to love India even from where
you are and to do many acts of service. You have plenty of years
before you. Go through the necessary training, keep India your goal,
and some day you will gravitate here. Of course you are like Lakshmi
to me or Mira. But you must also realize that it is a hard yoke to bear.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

406. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
February 17, 1933
DEAR SATISBABOO,

Your telegram was received yesterday. A reply was sent most
hurriedly. I forgot therefore to give you my opinion of the name of
the Bengali edition. Why should it not be identical with the title of the
English weekly, simply ‘Harijan’? You will publish the Bengali
edition as of the original, but you need not give and it should be
wrong to give whole translation of everything that may appear in the
English weekly. You should give only a condensed translation of
whatever appears in the English edition. You will even omit certain
things which may not be necessary for the Bengali reader and put in
many other things, but nothing inconsistent with the tenor of the
English edition. You will therefore personally supervise every line that
appears in it. You will send me also for the English weekly whatever
news you may have about the progress of the movement in Bengal.
Perhaps you have replied to the Manager of the Harijan as to
the number of copies you want per week.
How is your work in the bastis1 progressing, and how are you
keeping yourself?
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20272

1

292

Localities inhabited by the poor
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

407. LETTER TO STUDENTS OF SEVA SADAN
HIGH SCHOOL
February 17, 1933
DEAR YOUNG FRIENDS,

I have your letter. I shall be glad to see you all on Monday next,
the 20th instant, at 2.30 p.m. You will not take more than 30 minutes
and if you will come with questions prepared beforehand, we should
be able to go through a lot of work in 30 minutes.
Yours sincerely,

THE S ECRETARY
S TANDARD VI
S EVA S ADAN HIGH S CHOOL
P OONA C ITY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20271

408. LETTER TO MANIBEHN N. PARIKH
February 17, 1933
CHI. MANIBEHN,

You should not regard anything I write as a rebuke to you. If
you do that, I shall be able to write nothing which may help you. What
I wrote certainly does not apply to you alone. It applies to all, not
excluding even myself. We must know what an ideal mother should
be. I don’t think that you have enough knowledge to be an ideal
mother. Hard work may certainly help a woman to make up for part
of the deficiency, but the original deficiency can be removed only by
realizing it and taking the necessary steps to overcome it. The practice
of making the children brush their teeth before going to bed is a good
one. Massage the gums vigorously with your fingers. The babool stick
is not so efficacious.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5974

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

293

409. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 17, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

Wednesdays and Thursdays are devoted wholly to Harijan. I
cannot, therefore, write any letters on those days. Amina’s problem
seems to have been solved for the present. How painful that a Muslim
boy or girl cannot be admitted in a Hindu institution? Of course
Chandulal1 or Nanabhai2 are in no way to blame. They could not have
given any other reply.
I don’t think you read the letter written by Suresh. It is a long
one. Let me know how you found him. Mahavir wrote to me from
Bombay. He wants a letter of recommendation. I don’t wish to give
him one. Krishnamaiyadevi does not wish at all to work. I intend to
write to her.
You will find with this a letter from Maruti. In view of what he
says in it, it is best that they should be married as soon as possible. If
Dudabhai or Lakshmi rejects the proposal, we will refuse further
responsibility for getting her married. Read the accompanying letters.
Blessings from

BAPU

[Letters:] Narahari, Suresh, Manibehn, Maruti’s to Lakshmidas,
Marybehn 3, Lakshmi, Dudabhai, Amina.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

410. LETTER TO CHHOTALAL K. MEHTA
February 17, 1933
CHI NAPOLEON,

I was very happy when I read your letter. I did not receive the
one written from Navasari. It was good that you went to Visapur. What
is Somabhai suffering from?
Your handwriting is certainly better than it was. But it should
improve still further. How many boys are there in your class? Give me
1
2
3

294

Chandulal Kashiram Dave, Principal of Sharda Mandir, Ahmedabad
Narsinhprasad Kalidas Bhatt
F. Mary Barr
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

details about what you are learning.
Sardar, Mahadevbhai and Chhaganlal send their blessings to
you. Where is Kunvarji? How is he?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have written this letter with the left hand to give rest to the right
hand.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2694

411. LETTER TO BHAILAL MOTIRAM PATEL
February 17, 1933
BHAI BHAILAL,

Thanks for sending me Lord William Bentinck’s views on
suttee.
Regards from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3298

412. LETTER TO AMINA QURESHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

February 17, 1933
CHI. AMINA,

So after all you could not go to Sharda Sadan1. If you are
satisfied with what you can get in the Ashram you will get everything
from it. You should have the desire for that. You must find time for
reading and writing. I have already written to you regarding the
children. Learn to write the Urdu characters correctly. It is in your
hand to do that. It will be enough if you write to me in Urdu once
every week. If you write every day, it will be the daily lesson.
Quietlyadjust your work so as to find time for reading and writing and
be a good teacher to the children.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 10794. Courtesy: Gulam Rasul Qureshi
1

Slip for ‘Mandir’; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 17-2-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

295

413. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI 1
February 17, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. You will see from Harijan that I do not see
any particular need to go to Panditji now. It is all to the good that the
secret is out.
I can meet Ambedkar any number of times. But nothing can be
done against his will. His nature also should be understood.
In most cases, there is no cause to get frightened by children’s
fever.
You must get rid of your cold. Coughing is also the result of
cold, is it not? Come whenever you feel like it except on Wednesday
and Thursday. Send your comments on Harijan.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
53 M INT R OAD
F ORT, B OMBAY
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

414. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
February 17, 1933
CHI HEMPRABHA,

I have your letter. Do whatever khadi work you can but with a
carefree attitude even though the work prospers but a little. If our
faith is sustained to the end, khadi and Daridranarayana are bound to
emerge victorious.
When it becomes possible you can come here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1698
1

An extract from this letter appears in “Letter to Mathuradas Trikumji”,
17-2-1933

296

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

415. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
February 17, 1933
CHI. BRIJKISAN,

Your letter. That you two are together is to my liking. 1 Both
must be keeping fit. Yes, you will have to give up the attachment to
Mother and the brothers. By our attachment we give them cause for
hope and they are grieved when we cannot later fulfil their hope.
When they are made to understand clearly, they no longer harbour
hope but acquire a healthy attitude.
We are all well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2398

416. LETTER TO RAMADEVI CHOWDHARY
February 17, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I have your letter. You have not introduced yourself nor given
your proper address. Give me a weekly account of your work. Who
are the other ladies working there and what exactly are they doing?
To what extent do the townspeople co-operate with you?
Blessings from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
S MT. R AMADEVI2
HARJAN S EVIKA
C/ O HARIJAN S EVA S ANGH
C UTTACK
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2789

1
2

The addressee was under detention in the Delhi jail.
Wife of Gopabandhu Chowdhary, a prominent khadi worker of Orissa

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

297

417. AN APPEAL TO M. L. A.S
A valued friend suggests1 that I should send personal letters to
the members of the Assembly bespeaking their support to the
consideration, during the current session, of Sjt. Ranga Iyer’s two Bills
on untouchability. I hope there is no false pride in me. Having made
up my mind, or, as critics would say, deceived myself into the belief,
that in spite of my non-co-operation there was nothing wrong in
asking the members to do what was right, I would not hesitate, if I was
free, to go to them personally and show to them why it was necessary
for all the members to allow the Bills to be considered without delay
and for the Hindu members to back them for the sake of the purity of
their religion. But I am not free and I have found in Sjt. C.
Rajagopalachariar a better lobbyist than myself and perhaps better
also at the art of wooing obstinate members. He is, therefore, in Delhi
as my duly authorized agent to plead my cause. The public know
what confidence I have in him as an exponent of and believer in
whatever philosophy there may be in me. Therefore, it would be
superfluous, and if it was any other agent, even discourteous to him, if
I was to write directly to the members who, I hope, will regard
Rajagopalachari’s appeal to them as much more than a letter to them
individually.
Harijan, 18-2-1933

418. SJT. JAYAKAR ON UNTOUCHABILITY
The foregoing 2 is the text kindly sent to me by Sjt. Jayakar of
the Bill on untouchability which he had sought to introduce into the
Assembly while he was a member. It is important for three reasons:
Firstly, it shows that he, as a distinguished lawyer and an equally
distinguished Sanskrit scholar, considers that his Bill merely seeks to
remove “obstacles”, created by British Indian courts’ decisions, in
the way of the abolition, even by the people concerned, of customs
which they may consider contrary to their welfare, morals or
conscience. Secondly, it is in substance a combination of the two Bills
now before the Assembly and the country; and thirdly, it shows that
1
2

298

Vide “Letter to Tej Bahadur Sapru”, 16-2-1933
Not reproduced here
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the matter has been before the country for several years and is in no
sense new. The British Indian courts’ decisions and rulings referred to
by Sjt. Jayakar have acted on the Hindu society as a deadweight which
has stopped its healthy growth. The two Bills, like Sjt. Jayakar’s
combination, seek merely to remove the deadweight.
Harijan, 18-2-1933

419. WORK IN CALCUTTA BASTIS
Sjt. Vasantlal Morarka writes from Calcutta:
We have already commenced to do work amongst the Harijans. We have
taken charge of 20 night and day schools in the bastis. Nearly 500 boys and
girls are receiving instruction in these schools, and we are tackling the
problem of having water-pipes laid, sanitary conveniences supplied and of
carrying on propaganda for the eradication of the drink evil and other evil
habits. Moreover, we had a meeting and sports organized under the
chairmanship of Shrimati Saruprani Nehru. Marwadi, Harijan and other boys
freely mixed together. Men and women also did likewise. There was absence of
all artificiality about this gathering. Nevertheless, I must confess to you that
the work in the bastis is very difficult.

I know what the work in the bastis is like. Sjt. Satis Chandra Das
Gupta of Khadi Pratishthan has already described to me in graphic
and heart-rending terms the condition of the Harijans living in the
bastis. These difficulties may not daunt workers. If removal of
untouchability was an easy job, we would have achieved it long ago. It
is only now that we are having a foretaste of these difficulties. But
patience and perseverance will overcome even an Everest of them.
Harijan, 18-2-1933

420. IS THIS BROTHERLINESS?
As sanatanists persist in their statement that untouchability, as we
know it, is not a blot upon Hinduism and that Harijans are well treated
and are a happy and contented lot, and as I know that some of them, if
not many, honestly believe in that statement, it becomes necessary to
demonstrate the fallacy of that belief and show that the treatment
actually received by Harijans cannot possibly be worse. Such
demonstration will also give the reformer an idea of the work that is in
front of him. Even when sanatanists and reformers join hands, as they
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

299

undoubtedly will one day, there will be work enough and to spare for
several thousand volunteers. Though I have written and I shall
continue to write with vigour about the necessity of admission of
Harijans to temples, I have never given and shall never give a back seat
to the constructive work. But what I am certain about is that admission
of Harijans to temples will automatically quadruple the pace of
constructive reform.
Here is, then, a free translation of a letter from a Gujarati worker
among Harijans in parts of Gujarat near Ahmedabad:
Harijans suffer great hardships from the so-called higher
classes. In some villages they are not allowed to build verandahs
for their houses. They may not build houses with an upper
storey. They may not wear decent clothing, nor ride horses.
There can, therefore, be no question in these villages of Harijan
children receiving any education or having a decent recreation
ground. The high-class people will not even tolerate any
discussion about reform. The Harijans cannot take advantage of
the Government instructions that they should have access to
public places on the same terms as other Hindus. And now there
have sprung among them false sadhus and bavas1 who under all
kinds of pretences cheat them. Then, there is the vicious habit
they have copied from higher classes of having infant marriages
and incurring expenses in connection with these marriages.
They do not hesitate to pay 30% interest on two or three
hundred rupees that they must spend on the marriage of their
children, and it often happens that these little children die before
they come of age and so the whole of the expense becomes a
complete waste. These customs have resulted in a perpetuity of
debts which continue to increase without the prospect of ever
being discharged. And, of course, they have untouchability
amongst themselves. The result is that those who are considered
the lowest have to exist on what dirty water they can collect from
anywhere.
This is from one of the latest letters. The following is taken from
a letter received by Sjt. Amritlal Thakkar from one Mr. Simon, M. A.,
who is a missionary for Children’s Special Service in the West
Godavari District.2 He writes from Narsapur and says:
1
2

300

Mendicants
Vide “Letter to Amritlal V. Thakkar”, 15-2-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The principal untouchables are Malas and Madigas who live on the
outskirts of the main village, far from the habitations of the caste Hindus, and
are the worst untouchables in the sense that they live in an appalling
environment of dirt and squalour. The boys and girls live in huts under the
most insanitary conditions and are ragged and dirty, as they have never
understood or experienced the joy of being clean. Their parents themselves are
careless of the cleanliness and the education of their children, not to say of
their morality.
I believe that such a condition is due to their poverty on the one hand,
and the dirt to which they have become habituated from ages. The Malapalem
and the Madiga gudem are on the borders of the caste Hindus’ village, hemmed
in, on all sides, by the encroachments of the paddy field owners. The Malas are
a coolie class employed only for field work and the Madigas are shoemakers.
The latter class eat the meat of dead animals. So, they live outside the pale of
decent society, caged like wild animals, treated worse than the most uncared
for village dogs.

It is not possible for me to reject any of these two pieces of
evidence as exaggerated, because I have been an eye-witness to such
things in other places. Nor am I disposed to underrate Mr. Simon’s
evidence because of his being a foreigner, for the simple reason that
his letter has been written for the sake of doing some service through
the Servants of Untouchables Society and, therefore, incurs the risk of
being utterly discredited if he made an exaggerated report. Even from
the most selfish point of view, it can be shown that this criminal
neglect of the manpower of the country is an economic waste which
can never be exaggerated. The same people, if they were made
honourable and equal members of Hindu society, will add to the
material and moral resources of the country to an extent it is difficult
to conceive. At the present moment they are a burden upon society.
For, they discredit Hinduism, and the depression of 40 million human
beings cannot but drag down the other 260 millions with them.
Harijan, 18-2-1933

421. WHEN IS IT POSSIBLE?
I observe that Sjt. C. Rajagopalachariar and Sheth
Ghanshyamdas Birla have, in a statement issued by them, referred to
the possibility of another fast by me. If these two friends have thus not
hesitated to exploit such a possibility, it is not unlikely that others are
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

301

doing likewise without my knowing it. I have already sent a wire1 to
the two friends urging them not to repeat the mistake. And hereby I
warn all friends against copying their example.
Such exploitation robs a spiritual act of all its value. The
dreaded event may never come to pass. All I know is that there is, so
far as I am aware, no present possibility of its coming.
Pandit Malaviyaji, whom I regard as an elder brother, has sent
me a loving message of which the following is the substance:
You are in a hurry. You must go slow. Take care that
pride of tapasya does not corrupt you. Tapasya without
humility is of no avail and may even be harmful. There should
be no more fasting.
I prize this warning. I know that pride of merit damages a soul
like a heinous sin. I hope I am not consciously proud. What I am,
unconsciously and in spite of myself, God only knows fully and, to
some extent, those who surround me. I am not impatient with anyone.
I am, however, impatient of untouchability. But I know that its
destruction is no one man’s work. God has suffered the evil to exist
all these long years and He will remove it in His own good time.
Nevertheless, He expects all Hindus to do their duty. Suffering
even unto death and, therefore, even through a perpetual fast is the last
weapon of a satyagrahi. That is the last duty which it is open to him to
perform. Therefore, fast is a part of my being as, I hold, it has been, to
a large or small extent, of every seeker of Truth. I am making an
experiment in ahimsa on a scale perhaps unknown in history. That I
may be wholly wrong is quite possible, but quite irrelevant to the
present purpose. So long as I am not conscious of the error, but, on
the contrary, am sure, as far as it is humanly possible to be, of being in
the right, I must go on with my pursuit to the farthest end. And in this
manner, but in no other, a fast or a series of fasts are always a
possibility in my life. I have undergone many before now since
childhood. There should be no alarm felt if they are undertaken for
public causes. Nor must anyone exploit them in anticipation. When
they come, they will produce their own effect and result, whether anybody wills or no. But it is wrong to speculate over the contingency.
I, therefore, implore the public to dismiss from their minds, and
be unaffected by, the remote possibility of another fast by me in this
1

302

Vide “Draft Telegram to C. Rajagopalchari”, 13-2-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

campaign against untouchability and to accept my assurance that, if
such a fast does come, it will have come in obedience to the call of
Truth which is God. I will not be a traitor to God to please the whole
world.
Harijan, 18-2-1933

422. AGREEING TO DIFFER
There are some whose friendship and co-operation I prize
beyond measure. One of such men is Pandit Malaviyaji, whom from
the time that we first met I have recognized as an elder brother.
Nevertheless, it has been often my misfortune to disagree with him.
Our disagreement, however, has never in the slightest degree diminished our mutual affection.
The correspondence published below1 will show the reader how
we have again found it necessary to differ. Conscience is a hard
taskmaster.
I do not propose to deal with all the points covered in the
correspondence. I would confine myself to the vital matter referred to
in it, viz., the interpretation of the Bombay Resolutions. In my
opinion, with all the deference that I owe to Malaviyaji, I feel that the
Bombay Resolution2 which I give below has only one meaning. Under
it, responsible Hindus are bound to give to the Harijans through law
that which only law can give. This they are bound to do now, if at all
possible, and wait for the swaraj Parliament only if the legal relief
becomes an impossibility now. It cannot be considered an impossibility till all effort humanly possible has been made.
My duty and that of the Hindus who accept my interpretation is
quite clear. We must ask all the members of the Assembly, and
especially the Hindu members, to help us to fulfil the pledge given,
not merely to Dr. Ambedkar and cultured Harijans like him, but to the
dumb and suffering forty millions whom they seek to represent, and
whom it should be the duty and privilege of every caste Hindu to
represent equally with the leaders of the Harijans. Let me repeat for
1

Not reproduced here; vide “Letter to Madan Mohan Malaviya”, 20-1-1933,
“Telegram to Madan Mohan Malaviya”, 14-2-1933 and “Statement by Madan Mohan
Malaviya”, 19-1-1933
2
Not reproduced here; for the text of the Resolution, vide”Statement on
Viceroy’s Decision”, 24-1-1933
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

303

the hundredth time that there is a legal bar against temple-entry which
cannot be removed by any agreement on the part of all the Hindus
combined. A legal bar can only be removed by a legislative act. What
an agreement amongst Hindus can do is to move the Government to
give effect to it as was done in connection with the political part of the
Yeravda Pact. Those caste Hindus who strained themselves to ensure
recognition of the political part of the Yeravda Pact are now doubly
bound to give effect to the other resolutions which were the direct and
natural consequence of the Yeravda Pact; and since in the course of
complying with those resolutions it has been discovered that there is a
legal difficulty which was not foreseen then, that difficulty has got to
be removed at the earliest possible moment. Hence the two Bills.
But, says Malaviyaji, temple-entry, the opening of wells, etc., had
to be done by persuasion, not by compulsion. I quite agree, but to
remove a legal bar is not to do the desired thing by compulsion.
There is the Madura temple. If I am correctly informed, the trustees of
that temple are elected by the Hindu voters. They are pledged to open
the temple. By an overwhelming majority, the Hindu voters have
desired the opening of the temple. But, because of the legal bar, the
trustees cannot open the temple to the Harijans. Will it be compulsion
to have that legal bar removed by law? I can cite several other
instances where willing trustees of public temples are powerless to give
effect to the public demand and their own wishes. I venture, therefore,
to think that there is no escape from permissive and corrective
legislation. If the Bills are defective, the defect can be remedied. I
have submitted the Bills to two eminent lawyers for their opinion. Sjt.
Jayakar’s the public will learn from another column of this issue of
Harijan.1 I have also approached Dr. Sapru, 2 and I betray no
confidence when I inform the public that he has already expressed his
opinion in emphatic terms in favour of the second Bill, i.e., the
Temple-entry Bill, to which Malaviyaji has taken strong exception. Dr.
Sapru sees no compulsion in it. I have invited him to examine the first
Bill also. Every legitimate difficulty can be easily met if the principle
of securing immediate relief from the legal obstacle is admitted.
Therefore, in my opinion, the way before the reformer is quite clear.
He must invite the Government to facilitate consideration of the Bills
1

Vide “Sjt. Jayakar on Untouchability”, 18-2-1933
Vide”Letter to Tej Bahadur Sapru”, 26-1-1933; for Sapru’s opinion, vide “Dr.
Sapru on Untouchability Bills”, 25-2-1933.
2

304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

during the current session, and appeal to the members also to give that
facility. Success or failure is not his concern. But earnest and ceaseless
effort is his concern and is under his control, and he must not flinch,
whether he is one or many.
Malaviyaji suggests that the Bills be circulated. I have not been
able to follow his reasoning. If the Bills were of a compulsory
character, I should not only support circulation, but perhaps I should
oppose their introduction altogether. But the Bills are purely of a
permissive character. They pave the way for ascertaining Hindu
opinion in accor-dance with rules laid down in the law itself. I should
be prepared to accept any amendment that would make it impossible
to force the opening of a single public temple against the will of those
who have been hitherto entitled to offer worship in the particular
temple. After all, what is wanted is not removal of untouchability by
law. If the Hindu heart harbours untouchability, it will be there,
whether the law recog-nizes it or not. But the aid of law cannot be
invoked to regulate religious belief, as it was invoked by sanatanists
when the court decisi-ons referred to by Sjt. Jayakar were obtained.
Legal interference, therefore, was invoked by the very people who are
today stoutly opposing the introduction of the Bills, which seek not to
impose any compulsion, but to remove the existing compulsion, that
makes impo-ssible a due fulfilment of the pledge embodied in the
Bombay Resolutions.
Harijan, 18-2-1933

423. TEMPLE-ENTRY AND VARNASHRAMA
It is to be hoped that the reader has read Dr. Ambedkar’s
statement and my reply1 on the temple-entry question and there-anent
on varnashramadharma. I had intended to republish them in Harijan,
but I see that it is not possible to do so without enlarging the size of a
journal which is just entering upon the second week of its existence. I
have, therefore, relied upon the reader having read both Dr.
Ambedkar’s statement and my reply.
Let the reader understand that Dr. Ambedkar does want
temple-entry, but he wants something more. Very rightly, he would
not beg for it. Quite wrongly, he would not even help caste Hindus to
1

Vide “Interview to Associated Press”, 14-2-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

305

do the correct thing. The more that he wants is complete destruction
of varnashramadharma of his imagination. Varnashrama to him
means the essence of superiority and inferiority. I admit that today
varnashrama does mean that, if it also means much more, but the evil
of high-and-low-ness is represented by untouchability. When,
therefore, the latter is demolished, varnashrama will be purged of the
very thing for which Dr. Ambedkar abhors it.
Varnashrama of my conception is a wholly different thing. It
exists only in name today. Let the reader, therefore, be not led astray
from the main purpose. It will be time enough to look after
varnashrama when the doctrine of high and low is demolished.
It is necessary, too, not to be disturbed over my definition of
varnashrama. I am aware that it will shock sanatanist friends, but they
will permit me to act according to my reading of the Shastras and the
whole spirit of Hinduism. The letters that I receive from sanatanists do
not tell me that they believe in the doctrine of high and low. On the
contrary, they protest against my statement that caste Hindus have
regarded Harijans as inferiors, always to be kept at a distance.
Therefore, they should join hands in purging Hinduism of the
doctrine of inequality of status, irrespective of their conception of
varnashrama. After all, only that conception which the masses accept
will hold the field. The scope of the present campaign against
untouchability is strictly limited. It will be a great pity to befog the
public mind by raising before it the cry of ‘Varnashrama in danger’.
I am convinced that it is more in danger from those who will be blind
to what is going on in Hinduism today than from Dr. Ambedkar who
courageouly says: ‘I shall have nothing to do with varnashrama that
would keep me and mine for ever at the bottom of the social scale.’ If
we would find room for such as him in Hinduism, let us show him by
our acts that varnashrama is not a vertical line but that it is a horizontal
plane on which all the children of God occupy absolutely the same
status, though they may be engaged in different pursuits of life and
though they may have different qualities and different tastes.1
Harijan, 18-2-1933
1

For a discussion on varnashramadharma, vide “Talk with Mathuradas”,
18-2-1933

306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

424. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
February 18, 1933
DEAR MOTI BABOO,

I had expected to hear from you after your visit to Allahabad.
Please make up the defect now.
I expect your criticism of Harijan. You should also ask some
responsible people to get subscribers and send me a weekly report of
the actual constructive work done by the members of the Sangh1
among Harijans. The report should be unvarnished.
Please tell Panchanan Shastri Tarkaratna that he has keenly
disappointed me. Nothing pains me so much as a breach of promise.
He promised to prosecute his search for a meeting-ground between
sanatanists and reformers.2 I have heard nothing from him on the
point. He promised twice that he would send his son or someone
equally learned to put before me his own view and to answer my
questions and help me generally to understand the sanatanists,
standpoint. Is he still going to send some such person?
Again, his son was one of the pandits who were to have
seen me. I was grieved that he should have been amongst those who,
in my opinion, behaved in a manner unworthy of learned men.3 I had
to exercise great self-restraint in drawing the curtain over the events of
that painful day. They were painful because those who should be
repositories of the real Shastras seemed to be so wanting in dignity
and ordinary courtesies of life. This is the very first occasion when I
have put my pen to paper in order to characterize the conduct of the
learned men on that day, and I have done so because of my regard for
Panchanan Shastri, and because his son was one of those Shastris. If I
accept anything from Panchanan Shastri, he should know exactly
where I stand, and he should know what I think of those to whom he
lent the weight of his name and the services of his son.
You will either send this very extract to him or its translation or
go over to him and personally tell him what I have written to you.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20283
1

Pravartak Sangh
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 30-12-1932
3
Vide“Note to Deonayakacharya”, 12-1-1933
Rajagopalachari”, 13-1-1933
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

and

“Letter

to

C.

307

425. LETTER TO LOKANATH MISRA
February 18, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your very touching letter, but you must not be bewildered
nor be pained. My reply was in Gujarati, but the translation you have
read is fairly correct. What I have said1 in answer to the questions put
by the ex-Dewan of Morvi I have said repeatedly in my writings. It
could not have escaped you if you had followed my writings
carefully. Nor is it inconsistent with the law of heredity. The law
cannot be changed but if we know the law we will suit our actions in
accordance with it and that is precisely what my answer means.
Essential qualities are transmitted from father to son. If parties having
like qualities marry, they carry out the law of heredity and therefore
also the law of varna. Such marriages have taken place in Hindu
society ever since the establishment of varnashrama. This ought to
give you satisfaction. You do not expect me to give you a detailed
reply to the conundrums you have raised. You will believe me when I
tell you that I have not even the time for doing it. If you will carefully
follow the pages of Harijan, all your doubts will be solved But if they
are not, you should dismiss me from your consideration. The cause is
far superior to me. You and I live for the cause and work for it. If I
err in the common prosecution of the common cause, you will leave
me and march forward towards the goal. The limits of untouchability
work are well defined. Never mind my views of extraneous matters,
such as caste and varna, intermarriage and interdining. I am not
presenting my views on these matters for public acceptance at the
present moment. I give those views for the satisfaction of enquirers,
for I would have my friends and the public to know me as I am and
not picture me as something they fancy but has no likeness to me. If
even this does not give you satisfaction, you must find time to come to
me and discuss the whole thing with me till you have full satisfaction.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. L OKANATH MISRA, M. A., B. L.
S ECRETARY, A NTI -UNTOUCHABILITY C OMMITTEE
P URI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20284

1

308

Vide “Letter to Ranchhoddas Partwari”,11-1-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

426. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
February 18, 1933
MY DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

You have sent me draft of constitution and rules of the Society.
Four people have been at it. All of us four feel that it is to be
re-drafted altogether. Shastri is at it just now. You will please forgive
me if I am not ready with my suggestions yet for some time. It does
not matter if it takes a little time, but whatever we give must be
thoroughly sound and perfectly readable.
About the Harijan Day, I think that the announcement should
come from you officially. I will then support it. It might be as well if a
Harijan Day is desired to be proclaimed now and again to fix a day in
the month or a day every two months so that people automatically
know and it becomes a kind of a monthly or six-weekly or
bi-monthly religious observance. You will now do whatever you think
is necessary.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20281

427. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
February 18, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

Lest you might have forgotten all about the contribution to the
Aaj through Baboo Bhagwandas, on account of his publishing the
learned opinions by way of supplement to the Aaj, if you have not
already sent anything, please do so now.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a copy: C.W. 7928. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

309

428. LETTER TO BHAGWANDAS
February 18, 1933
DEAR BABOOJI

I have your letter of 13th instant. The reversion to the longer
style of addressing was purely mechanical without thinking that I had
taken to the more homely style. You will please keep me to it if in the
hurry of dictating correspondence I repeat the mistake.
I have already written 1 to Ghanshyamdas about his promised
contribution. I have no doubt that it will come if it has not already. He
might have forgotten it. I will no longer belabour the point about the
necessity of newspapers being self-supporting. I observe that you have
sterilized my argument through your great soul theory;2 only this soul
had no greatness thrust upon him when he developed and reduced to
practice the proposition.
I am deeply grieved to have the disturbing news about
Shivaprasad’s3 health and the death of his grandson through accident.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: S.N. 20274

429. LETTER TO B. N. SASMAL
February 18, 1933
MY DEAR SASMAL,

I was delighted to have your letter. I suppose we have various
editions of the Kaviraj all over India. I hope you are getting your
copy of Harijan and that if you are not reduced to utter poverty, as I
see you are not, you will straightaway send your own subscription and
subscriptions and names on behalf of others.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: S.N. 20279
1

Vide the preceding item.
The addressee had written: “The Aaj has, so far. been carried on by the charity
of its sole proprietor, Shivaprasadji. . . . Young India has realized the ideal you
describe, yet this has been possible because a ‘Great Soul’ was its editor, and it costs
Providence and whole nations many crores of rupees—if the matter must be treated in
terms of finance—to evolve such a Great Soul”.
3
A leading Congressman and philanthropist of Varanasi and the founder of
Aaj, a Hindi daily
2

310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

430. LETTER TO M. M. ANANTA RAU
February 18, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have before me your two letters dated 8th and 14th February
respectively. I would now ask you to cry a halt. I esteem the great
pains you are bestowing upon your compositions, but I must tell you
that your arguments produce no effect on my mind. Some of them I
cannot follow at all. Some of them are wholly irrelevant to the issue.
You often beg the question and equally often make assertions as if
they were axioms. In my opinion that is not the way in which you will
drive the truth home to anybody. I believe that I am very pervious to
argument and that I have the capacity for seeing my critics’
standpoint. You have prepossessed me in your favour by your
courteous language and by your quietly accepting and acting up to
my suggestion about the ornamentation of your letter-paper. I
therefore approach your letter[s] with a desire to find substantial help
from them, but you will excuse me for saying that I do not find any. I
would therefore now ask you to close this correspondence. I would be
guilty of discourtesy towards you if I left you under the impression
that your argument was at all going home and that therefore you
could continue your correspondence.
Yours sincerely

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: C.W. 9576. Courtesy: Government of Mysore

431. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
February 18, 1933
MY DEAR MARY,

Our letters crossed with each other. You are living up to the
failing ascribed to your sex. The Ashram has been made to rid each
sex of its failings. Will you get rid of yours and learn to give in your
letters the things that should be there. You have omitted to mention
your asthma. I hope it has left you entirely. Puniam is usually spelt
punyam. You should learn the Devanagari script. You will take no
more than a week giving one hour daily. Then you will know why
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

311

you cannot express the original by puniam. Even the ‘n’ does not
give the original sound. There are five nasal sounds in Sanskrit.
‘Narandas’ is quite enough. But the bad habit of attaching
‘bhai’ or ‘ji’ has been the vogue and takes the place of ‘Mr.’.
Strangers would use only the other suffix. But you may omit either, if
you are older than Narandas. If you are younger, ‘bhai’ becomes
necessary as a member of the family. Being daughter to me, you are
as sister to Narandas and every other member in the Ashram. ‘Bhai’
means brother as ‘behn’ means sister. Here endeth the first lesson.
You must not be impatient with yourself, if you pick up new
things slowly. They will all become easy and natural by determined
practice.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5993. Also C.W. 3318. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

432. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 18, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I am sending a friend to you. His name is Duncan Greenlees. He
is a B. A. of oxford University. He was a teacher in a school in
U. P. He has also been in jail. He intends to devote himself to Harijan
work. I have advised him to stay in the Ashram for some time and see
how he feels there. If we and he find that he will be able to work with
us, we may assign him some work. So let him stay there and give him
some work. He should also do spinning and weaving. He may be
given teaching work too. He is a man of simple habits and is a
vegetarian. Ascertain his requirements. I am sure that he will not be a
burden on you. Give him the expenses of his journey from Poona to
Ahmedabad, or credit the amount to his name. It is likely to be
between Rs. 10 and 12.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

433. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
February 18, 1933
CHI. RAMA,

I got your letter. If you come on a Friday or Saturday and
inform us in advance, you will be able to meet me. It is not necessary
to write to anybody in advance to get an interview with me. It will be
enough if you inform me about the date. People can see me between
12 and 1.30. I will fix up about Joshi after you let me know the date.
Since Vimu does not want me to call her silly, I hope she has
given up her tantrums.
BAPU

[PS.]
I just learn that Chhaganlal wishes that you should not come just
now, but may come after three months. If you want to, you may write
to me about this.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5342

434. LETTER TO VIMALA JOSHI
February 18, 1933
CHI. VIMU,

I got your letter, and also the peahen sent by you. But what is
the use of a peahen who does not speak at all? And your handwriting
is no better than your peahen, and, moreover, the letter is written in
pencil. This will not do.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5309

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

313

435. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 18, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. I have already written to you about . . . 1. You
did right in writing to Harjivan. I am afraid . . .2 will not live in
Bombay. He has still not become straightforward. . . . 3 seems to be
deceiving us. She does not at all wish to do any work. We, however,
should support her as long as we can afford. If, therefore, your
suggestions have been acted upon and are working, continue the
arrangement. Read the letters to Marybehn and pass them on to her.
Did Father Lash make any suggestions? Did you cultivate his
acquaintance?
What happened about that Muslim lady? How is she?
BAPU

[PS.]
Letters for Mary, Rama and Vimu enclosed.
From a microfilm of Gujarati: M.M.U./I

436. LETTER TO GANGABEHN B. JHAVERI
February 18, 1933
CHI. GANGABEHN,

Your letter was welcome. I had been waiting for it. Come and
see me next Tuesday. I am not writing more here as we shall meet
soon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3952

1
2

314

The names have been omitted.
ibid

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

437. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
February 18, 1933
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

It is not necessary to arrange a tour programme for Sarupbehn
in Gujarat. I was never keen about it. My suggestion was only that you
should take advantage of her presence if you thought it necessary.
I am in correspondence with Bhai Jaisukhlal about Gujarati
Harijan.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3993

438. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
February 18, 1933
CHI. HARIBHAU,

I got your letter. When it is no longer necessary for you to go to
the hospital for dressing and you have regained sufficient strength,
you may come and see me provided you wish to discuss with me
anything connected with the problem of untouchability. There has
been no harm in your having got yourself operated upon. But
otherwise your explanation as to the cause of the trouble is correct. It
has its origin in the stomach. The only remedy, therefore, is fasting
followed by a period of light diet. For some time you should live on
milk and fruits. What you have written about ahimsa is right. I was
pained to read about Rohit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 6076. Courtesy: Haribhau Upadhyaya

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

315

439. LETTER TO SARALADEVI SARABHAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

February 18, 1933
DEAR SISTER,

I have your telegram. I desisted from writing directly to you lest
what I desired or suggested became a burden to you. I made the
suggestion to Ramjibhai thinking that you would decline without
hesitation if you had not still recovered fully. In my foolishness I
assumed that he would not use my name in writing to you. You were
quite right to decline. Send Vidyabehn1 or Sharadabehn 2 if you think
it fit. I shall not insist. I must say you have taken very long to recover.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
S UPERINTENDENT
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON
P OONA
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11137. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

440. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
February 18, 1933
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

I have your letter. Think no more of Kudsia3. After all, only her
father has the right to decide her future. Our duty is to perform with
heart and soul whatever job falls to our lot. The result rests with God. I
hope Dr. Sharma’s daughter4 is all right. What was the treatment? I am
very happy to learn that you are making all-round progress. What
1

Vidyagauri Nilkanth and her sister Sharadabehn Mehta
ibid
3
Addressee’s niece who, upon her return from the Ashram, had again become
absorbed in the home atmosphere while the addressee had different hopes for her
4
Who was suffering from smallpox
2

316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

treatment is given to you? what do you eat? Tell me everything. I have
written quite a few letters to you. I am keeping count of them. I shall
certainly keep on writing.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 277

441. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
BISAMILLAH1

February 18, 1933
DEAR DAUGHTER RAIHANA,

I have your letter. I have always expected you. Why should you
depend on Padmaja to bring you? Can you not use some other car?
Remember to avoid Wednesdays or Thursdays as both are reserved for
the Harijan. Your hand is all right, I hope. When you are completely
free of fever you may be prepared for a kiss.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: S.N. 9660

442. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR AND B. D. KALELKAR
February 19, 1933
CHI. KAKA,

I got your letter.
If milk, when taken without any other food, is not digested, it
does no harm, but the milk which seems to be digested with the help
of other food is not really digested but mixes with the food, and
remaining in the body in the form of poison, it harms the gums, etc.
This is the view held by more and more doctors and seems to be
correct. You can have with milk oranges, grapes, pineapples,
pomegranates and other juicy fruits. They will prevent milk from
causing constipation. You should, therefore, start the experiment of
milk-diet as soon as possible and accustom your body really to digest
it. I make no distinction between milk and curds. Some doctors,
1

Literally, ‘by the name of God’

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

317

probably most, believe that curds are more easily digested. The curds
should not taste sour at all—the curds which we used to make by
adding drops of lemon juice to milk would be the best. You should
not drink the milk but sip it slowly. It would be better to take a
spoonful at a time. To start with, you should take a quarter pound
every hour. Do not mind if you get diarrhoea. It will stop in a few
days. You may drink the fruit juice separately at any convenient time.
In fruit juice, you should have the juice of six mosambis or of one
pound of fresh grapes in two parts. You should take about four
pounds of milk or curds, and mix with it as much butter as may be
necessary. If you take milk in sufficient quantity, I doubt the necessity
of butter. But it will do no harm if it can be digested even in the
absence of other food. Doctors believe that, like milk, butter too does
no harm if taken by itself. See how I have described the benefits of
milk. But I have no choice. I can find no plant or herb which can
equal milk in food value. There is certainly some truth in the belief
that milk is a wholesome food even for yogis. It is the only substitute
for meat. Only our vaids1 could have discovered a vegetable substitute
for milk, but, lacking zeal for dharma, they made no such attempt. I
have failed in my search and given it up. We do not know if anybody
else will take it up and succeed. Perhaps in the West they may succeed.
Among us there is no one who possesses the necessary medicinal
knowledge to make such a discovery. We do not regard it as our
dharma to acquire such knowledge and to make experiments with that
aim. Anybody who wishes to undertake the task should be inspired
with zeal for the welfare of the cow. He should be convinced that no
milk other than the mother’s milk can be the proper food of a human
being. Such a person should then study medicine. We do not have at
present men with such a spirit. If India is destined to discover such a
substitute, God will send among us a person with the necessary gifts.
Till then, let us sing praises of milk and do the duty which lies before
us. I hope you will feel satisfied that I have replied to your question in
greater detail than you had expected. I also hope that you will
understand the relative importance of the issues involved. Think over
all this and do what seems right to you, for even in such matters the
final decision should be one’s own. What I have said is true only
about people with weak health. Those who are healthy will eat normal
food and may even be able to digest it. If you want to experiment with
1,

318

Physicians practising Ayurvedic system of medicine
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

milk-diet in a scientific manner, you can do so only in the Ashram or
in the neighbourhood of a dairy where we have a right of entry; it is
only then that we can get fresh milk. I suppose you know that yogis
mix crushed neem leaves in milk before drinking it.
Write something for Harijan when you feel like doing so. I
think innocent eggs are laid by hen without having been inseminated
by a cock. You will get more information from the friend at Sangli.
An innocent egg is one from which no chick can be born.
Personally, I very much liked the design for the title page of
Harijan. It was entirely my choice. At first we had thought of getting
a block made. But I liked the design better after it was printed and so
the idea of getting a block made was dropped.
Shastra does not mean the pronouncements of men of spiritual
experience in the past. It means the words of living men today who
have had first-hand spiritual experience, that is, who have realized
the Brahman. Shastra is something which is daily embodied in
somebody’s life. What exists only in books and is not followed in life
may be philosophy, or it may be foolish chatter or mere hypocrisy.
Shastra must be immediately capable of realization in experience,
it must spring from the living experience of the person who utters it. It
is only in this sense that the Veda is eternal. All else is not Veda, but
theorizing about Veda.
If . . .1 is resolved to marry . . . he should ignore our opposition
and do so. There is no harm in doing that. The Gita verse, “What can
self-control avail2”, applies in this case. But then the couple should
have courage and confidence in themselves. If the people ultimately
see that they lead a life of self-control, the world will forgive the
couple. It is such action which forsakes the rule of Shastra. 3 If it is
inspired by a pure and noble ideal, it is ultimately condoned. But just
now such conduct will be and ought to be disapproved. Our duty,
therefore, is clear. We should not directly or indirectly give our
consent to his marriage to . . . . If, however, he does marry her and if
the people ultimately approve the marriage, we also will join in the
applause. I think . . . is now forgetting . . . .
Blessings from

BAPU

5 a.m.
[PS.]
1

The names are omitted in the source
ibid
3
A reference to the Gita , XVII. 5-6.
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

319

I wrote this letter between 3 and 5 and in the morning,
excluding the time spent in prayer. I did not intend to give so much
time to you I cannot afford to do so. But ?
CHI. BAL1 ,

Since children emulate their elders, the latter also should follow
a child’s praiseworthy example. Hence I follow yours. The news
about Shankar2 is certainly good. But I will try and know more. Since
I have given too much time to Kaka, I will not write more than this for
you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9495. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar

443. LETTER TO HOME SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
February 19, 1933
To
THE S ECRETARY
HOME DEPARTMENT
DELHI
DEAR SIR,

I thank you for the reply 3 to my letter 4 addressed to the Private
Secretary to the Viceroy dated the 1st instant. There are two things
about which I would like to make brief observations.
The Government have assumed without just cause that
“education and the provision of the normal facilities of life” are not
considered by me as the vital part of the Resolution referred to
therein. It was wholly irrelevant to the purpose of my letter to the
Private Secretary to the Viceroy to state what was being done by me or
through me in connection with these things. Indeed I have shown in
my writings being published in the course of the controversy that
education and the like were being prosecuted with all the vigour
possible and that the pace would be quadrupled by the temples being
1

Balkrishna D. Kalelkar
Satish D. Kalelkar
3
Vide “Letter from Government of India”, 17-2-1933
4
Vide “Letter to Private Secretary to Viceroy”, 1-2-1933
2

320

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

opened to the Harijans.
As to the two measures now before the legislature, I may be
permitted to point out that they are not intended to affect religious
“customs and usages of the Hindu community”. They are specially
designed to leave that question to the community itself. The law as it
stands makes impossible the operation of the Hindu mind on certain
religious customs and usages, and the measures are designed to release
the Hindu mind from those fetters. I would submit that it is the duty
of the Government, which is pledged to neutrality in religious matters,
to free the reformers from the shackles of, not of religious custom, but
of the law. For, had it not been for the law, it would have been open
to the trustees, with the consent of the temple-goers, to change the
custom. Nor may it be forgotten that the Bills have come before
the legislature as a result of the formation of a very strong body of
public opinion in favour of the change of custom.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Home Department, Political, File No. 50/II/33, p. 40. Courtesy: .National
Archives of India. Also G.N. 7587

444. LETTER TO TEJ BAHADUR SAPRU
February 19, 1933
DEAR DR. SAPRU,

I thank you for your prompt telegram in reply to mine. I do
need at the present moment all the legitimate support I can get.
I send you herewith a copy of the Government’s reply to my
letter and my reply 1 there to. I send you also a copy of my letter of
the Ist instant to which you will find the reference in the
Government’s reply.
If you have not already covered the ground in the letter
promised in your wire, will you please supplement your reply with
such remarks as you may think necessary in view of the enclosures,
without of course referring to the correspondence in your
supplement?
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: G.N. 7586. Also Gandhi-Sapru Correspondence. Courtesy:
National Library, Calcutta
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

321

445. LETTER TO PERIN CAPTAIN
February 19, 1933
I must dictate if I am to overtake my correspondence. I was
delighted to see the familiar writing and signature. You and Gosibehn
and Kamalabehn shall come on Friday next at 2 p.m. Mathuradas told
me that you were none the worse for your life in Bijapur Mandir
except that you had left there a few pounds of your weight.
With love to you all from us all.
P ERIN C APTAIN
ORIENT C LUB BUILDING
C HOWPATTY, B OMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20287

446. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
February 19, 1933
DEAR MR. JAYAKAR,

I was glad to hear that at the instance of Seth Bhagoji Kir you
were going to open two temples in Ratnagiri to Harijans on the 22nd
instant. I hope that both caste Hindus and Harijans will appreciate this
religious act of Seth Bhagoji Kir and that Harijans will take advantage
of the opportunity they have now got of offering worship in these two
temples.
I have no doubt that you will remind Harijan brothers and sisters
that it is necessary in order to gain the full advantage of worship to
conform to the obligations that lie upon all worshippers to observe the
law of cleanliness, such as daily individual bath, wearing of unpolluted
clothing and offering individual worship in the home, and abstain
from carrion and beef eating and intoxicating liquors.
I am posting a copy of this to reach you at Ratnagiri lest this
should reach Bombay after your departure for Ratnagiri.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20288

322

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

447. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
February 19, 1933
DEAR MR. JAYAKAR,

I enclose herewith a copy of the reply received from the
Government and my reply1 thereto.
In view of this, could you not send me for publication as
early as you can your opinion, if you can give it, that neither of the
Bills contains any element of compulsion or constitutes any
interference with religious observance and generally supporting, if
you can do so, my argument in my reply to the Government letter,
without of course making any reference to that letter?
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20289

448. LETTER TO CHARU CHANDRA MITRA
February 19, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I have not yet got your pamphlet2. When I do,
I shall certainly go through it carefully and answer your argument if
necessary even through the columns of the Harijan. You may depend
upon it that speaking for myself personally, not even a single
argument of the sanatanists has escaped me, or, so far as it was
possible for me to do, remained unanswered.
I did enquire about the meeting 3 in Calcutta that you have
referred to, and the information that I received was that the statements
made were gross exaggerations. I do not know if you have or can
produce any proof for the charges made. I would at once ask my
friends for a reply. For me this is purely a religious struggle in which
neither untruth nor violence can have any place whatsoever.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. C HARU C HANDRA MITRA
5 HASTINGS S TREET
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S. N. 20291
1

Vide “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of India”, 19-2-1933
Untouchability and Temple-entry, embodying the viewpoints of the
sanatanists
3
A protest meeting, presided over by Bipin Behari Ghosh, ex-judge of the
Calcutta High Court, which was broken up allegedly by the reformers
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

323

449. LETTER TO DR.. B. C. ROY
February 19, 1933
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,

Could you send me for publication in the Harijan a resume of
all the constructive activities on behalf of Harijans that will come
under your observation in Bengal?
I hope you are getting your copy.
I dare not ask you to send me subscribers, for I know that your
time is otherwise fully occupied. But I must make the paper
self-supporting, and I can ask you to send subscriptions on behalf of
the Provincial organization for a certain number of copies for free
distribution amongst those who should have the copies but whom you
do not expect to pay.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20293

450. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
February 19, 1933
MY DEAR C. R.,

You are not going to worry over the reference to the fast. Such
errors come out of the depths of love—but love gone mad. I mended
the error by magnifying it a hundred fold and driving a rich lesson
home to people. I know that neither you nor Ghanshyamdas will
repeat the error. Where is the cause for it? We simply work away.
Your reading of the Gita is perfect so far.
The A.P.I. news about 27 members did not disturb me in the
slightest degree. You are there delivering the message to everybody
who will listen. What does it matter now if nobody listens? As it is you
have made considerable progress.
Nor has Malaviyaji’s bombshell1 disturbed me. It was bound to
come. We have to have him with all his limitations as we consider them
to be. But his so-called limitations are also his strength. It may be wise
not to worry him now by sending Devdas and Shankerlal.
1

324

Vide “Telegram from Madan Mohan Malaviya”, 15-2-1933

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I send you herewith a copy of the Government’s reply to me
and my reply1 to them. You will share all this with Ghanshyamdas.
I see you have in giving me your address struck off the names
‘Lakshmi’ and ‘Narayan’ and ‘near Clock Tower’. Therefore the
address is merely C/o Seth Gadodia, Delhi. What is the significance of
the omission? Do you thereby get the letters delivered earlier?
I hope absence of any mention of Devdas’s cold means he is all
right.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20296

451. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
February 19, 1933
MY DEAR SATISBABOO,

I have your letter of the 15th instant. The description you give
of smallpox in the bastis makes painful reading. I do not know how
far that faith in Sitala Devi2 is to be admired, and if it is to be admired,
why should we undermine it? It seems to me that by patience and
perseverance we have to undermine this blind faith and show to the
people that smallpox is like every other disease caused by irregular
living and that it is amenable like every other disease to proper
treatment.
I do not know how far you are justified in avoiding vaccina-tion
and perhaps encouraging co-workers to do likewise. Of course I
myself am a fanatic about some of these matters. But I never like
people to copy fanaticism. A fanatic has his own justifi-cation. He
may never be copied. Fanaticism must be instinctive. It may be almost
compared to the blind faith of the people whom you have described
and who recklessly touch and mingle with smallpox patients. But just
as you and I cannot copy their blind faith with any prospect of
success, so also may nobody copy anybody else’s fanaticism; and
since you have such occular demonstration of the success of
vaccination, unless you have your own independent faith and
conviction that vaccination is bad you ought to be vaccinated and you
should encourage your co-workers to do likewise. Anyway, I have
1
2

Vide“Letter to Home Secretary, Government of India”, 19-2-1933
Goddess believed to be cause of smallpox

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

325

washed myself clean of any responsibility for your daring experiment,
if it is an experiment, and if it is a faith like mine, I have nothing to
say. For it is not merely vaccination, but the whole of the serum
treatment which to me appears as another species of superstition, not
far removed from that of basti Harijans.
You should send me from week to week, if there is anything to
be sent, a report of constructive work actually done in connection with
Harijans in your part of the world, whether by you or others. If Suresh
or anybody connected with him is doing this work, please pass on this
message to them also.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20300

452. LETTER TO SURESH CHANDRA BANERJEE
February 19, 1933
MY DEAR SURESH,

I have been thinking of you almost every day, and not having
heard from you for a long time, in my despair I dictated a message,
quite selfish, to you, in my letter to Satisbaboo, and immediately I had
finished that letter, Mahadev put your letter of 15th instant in my
hands. You can better imagine my joy than I can describe it.
I see you have been near death’s door again. It is better perhaps
to realize that we are always near death’s door, the healthy-looking
people no less than the ill-looking. I know many bed-ridden people
surviving the loss of dear ones who had looked pictures of health and
who they had thought were bound to survive them.
Pray, do not become impatient. Understand thoroughly the
distinction I have drawn between caste and varnashrama. Caste is a
touch-me-not institution. If untouchability goes, you will find that
touch-me-not-ism will go. According to my meaning of it
varnashrama has not the slightest tinge of touch-me-not-ism. It is a
spiritual law just as valid as any physical law, whether we recognize its
existence or whether we do not. He who recognizes the existence of
this law profits by his knowledge, even as a scientist, knowing the
properties of a drop of water and the laws which are responsible for
those properties, makes railway trains to move at a speed our ancestors
had never thought of. So also if we recognize the law of varnashrama

326

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and give effect to it, we can do away with many ills of life. I can
understand Dr. Ambedkar in his rage against caste Hindus refusing to
see the wood for the trees, but you have no excuse whatsoever for not
understanding the very clear distinction I have pointed out. 1 In any
case I am convinced that to precipitate a fight on varnashrama today is
to do a great disservice to the cause of the removal of untouchability.
I must not worry you any more.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S URESH C HANDRA BANERJEE
88-G CORPORATION S TREET
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20298

453. LETTER TO PARASHURAM MEHROTRA
February 19, 1933
CHI. PARASRAM,

I got your letter. You should acquire equal facility in both
styles, so that you can use either as the occasion may require. We will
use both also when we have an opportunity to revive Navajivan.
Work hard to help Duncan Greenlees as you have been doing to
help Marybehn. It is desirable that he should learn Hindi as soon as
possible. Let us pray to God to give peace to Father.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7514

454. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI N. PATEL
February 19, 1933
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

It seems that you have not got the letter I wrote to you some
time ago about Lalita. However, it is likely that you received it after
you wrote your letter, as it is dated the second. Now there is no
1

The addressee had endorsed the statement of Dr. Ambedkar explaining his
objections to Mr. Ranga Iyer’s Temple-entry Bill, and written: “The untoucha-bility
problem will never be effectively solved until and unless the caste distinction is
removed from the Hindu society.”

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

327

immediate problem. In two years’ time, Lalita will probably decide
for herself. The solution should be such as will not shock Nathabhai
and as will safeguard the interests of Lalita. We should have faith that
we shall be able to find such a solution when the time comes.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8999

455. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 19, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

I am determined not to make this a long letter.
If you can win over Maitri and all the three sisters improve, I will
certainly regard that as your and Ashram’s victory. Narandas has tried
the way of love. See if you succeed.
You must have realized that Lakshmi must be married off now,
or else she should leave the Ashram. I do not think any of you should
be burdened any longer with her responsibility. Maruti is an
exceptional young man. Lakshmidas also has had a hand in his
training. You have found that what Moti had told you about him was
not correct.
The arrangements which you have made about the girls seem to
be all right. I liked your suggestion about Nirmala. I have not yet
been able to discuss it with Mahadev, though. I also understand what
you say about Prithuraj. I am eager to know more details about the
Muslim lady. Cultivate the acquaintance of the English friend1 whom I
have sent there. He has impressed me as a man inclined to a life of
renunciation. Look after his needs.
To which aspect of my behaviour, when you came to see me
with Sushila, did your question refer? I do not remember anything. If
you ask this question again, I will try to answer it.
I understand what you say about doctors. Once we have put
ourselves in a doctor’s hand, we should get from him whatever he can
give. Otherwise we shall not do him justice, and may do harm to
ourselves. We must admit that doctors do succeed in some cases,
though it is also well known that they spoil many others through
1

328

Duncan Greenlees

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

negligence or ignorance. I would certainly respect a person who takes
a vow not to consult doctors any time. Millions of people cannot
consult them at all. But I think that such self-denial is beyond the
capacity of the inmates of the Ashram. We may, therefore, consult
doctors who are reputed to be intelligent. You may certainly seek the
advice of Kisan’s uncle.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10327

456. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA N. SHARE
February 19, 1933
CHI. RAMACHANDRA,

I got your letter. You should always write what you do after
careful thought. Anybody who wants to be scrupulously truthful
would not utter or write even one word without care fully weighing it.
I had got confused by what you wrote. Now everything is clear.
You write Jai Jai to Sardar and Pranams to Mahadevbhai and
Chhaganbhai. Explain the difference between the two. What does
Jai Jai mean? Does it mean the same thing as Jaya Jaya? A person
like me can afford to make a mistake in spelling a word. You boys
and girls should always write correct Gujarati.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 305. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn N. Khare

457. LETTER TO DAHYABHAI M. PATEL
February 19, 1933
BHAI DAHYABHAI,

I got your letter. It is beautiful. I have not received the books as
yet. They will arrive by and by. Your introduction is so good that I
will read the books with interest. Write to me and let me know about
the discoveries which you may make concerning Harijans.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 2701. Courtesy: Dahyabhai M. Patel

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

329

458. LETTER TO VIMALCHANDRA V. DESAI
February 19, 1933
CHI. NANU,

I got your letter. Your handwriting still leaves much to be
desired. If you understand that one should write each letter as
carefully as one draws a figure, your handwriting will be beautiful.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5757. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

459. LETTER TO SUDARSHAN V. DESAI
February 19, 1933
CHI. MAVO,

I got your letter. Do you go out daily for a walk? I have
preserved coloured slips for children like you. Which colour do you
like?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 5761. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

460. LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
February 19, 1933
CHI. VALJI,

I had got your letter. I did not reply immediately because I was
waiting for the book 1. I have got the copies now. I am distributing
them among friends. I request everyone to whom I send a copy to let
me have his comments. How many copies have been sold? I hope you
get copies of the Harijan. Send me your comments. If you feel
inspired to write something, do so. I hope your health is improving.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7447. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai
1

330

“Life of Jesus”

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

461. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
February 19, 1933
BOYS AND GIRLS,

I got your letters. It is not wise to keep on changing the
volunteers or, shall we say, the organizers. You may if you wish keep a
number of them for a certain period for the sake of giving them
experience but it should not be for less than six months. There would
be order only if you saw that no one left on account of quarrels or
because they felt offended. Do you keep a record of your activities?
You should have a few rules for your organization and then cling to
them. If you do this, your progress will be speeded up.
Pay more attention to farming. You should eat, and you will like
to eat, vegetables produced by you all and by you only.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

462. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[February 19/20, 1933] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

Is the cost of milk, etc., which you send for Ba and Mirabehn
paid by the jail authorities or is it borne by us?
I follow what you say regarding the weight of Rambhau, Jekore
and others. I feel relieved. We should take care and see that the
children do not feel the burden of the Ashram life. What you say
about Chhotubhai is correct. Keep me informed about Liladhar.
Duncan Greenlees will have arrived there and have been one of you
by the time you get this letter. He will give you a letter which I have
sent with him. He has produced a good impression on me. Make some
arrangement to help him to learn Hindi. I hope you are not taken by
surprise when I send somebody in this manner without previous
warning. I could have written to you about D[uncan] G[reenlees] five
days earlier, but I forgot to do so and he arrived suddenly yesterday. I
knew that he might arrive any day. If, therefore, I had written to you
1

From the reference in the letter to the arrival of Duncan Greenlees in Poona;
vide also “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 18-2-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

331

at the same time when I decided to write to him, you would have got
five days, or at least three days, notice. If you think that it is improper
for me to send people like this without previous intimation, tell me so.
I will not then do it again. Give him clothes and other things which he
may require. Supply him the required utensils too. Ask him not to
keep any money or costly article with him. I forgot to do that.
If the digging of wells is about to be completed, write to
Soniramji for money. Does Ranchhodbhai1 visit the Ashram
occasionally? I wonder because I have had no letter from him at all.
Let all those to whom Hariyomal has written describe to him in plain
words the bitter experiences they have had. He seems to be an honest
man and, therefore, such frank letters are likely to produce an effect
on him. Persons like Hariyomal learn only from bitter experience.
I felt depressed after reading . . . ’s letter. You must have read it.
It is likely that . . . beat her, as she says he did. Inquire and find out
the truth. Ask . . . . Who writes the letters for. . .? or is her own
handwriting well-formed and firm? Where is . . . now?2
Read what I have written to Kusum about sun-bath. Tell Dr.
Talwalkar about it. If he approves of my suggestion, put up a sort of
wall of hay or hessian or any other suitable material round the place
where Kusum sits. The wall should be such as can be removed every
day. Or you may select some other suitable place in consultation with
the doctor and put up such a wall there and let her have sun-bath in
that enclosure. If necessary, she may be carried there in a cot. Find
out whether it is necessary to obtain Government’s permission for
putting up such temporary wall on agricultural land. Patients like
Kusum are known to have recovered by only taking sun-bath with
their bodies completely uncovered.
Some boys ask me in their letters to write “Blessings from” at
least when I write to them. Please remind all that in order to save time
and spare the hand unnecessary work I don’t say it in words but leave
it to be understood by the addressee. Everybody, therefore, should
supply the phrase in his or her letter.
4 o’clock, Monday [February 20, 1933]
Prakash complains that the inmates of the Ashram do not like
looking after a sick person. If there is any truth in this criticism, we
1
2

332

Ranchhodlal Amritlal Shodhan, a mill-owner of Ahmedabad
The names in this paragraph have been omitted.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should hang our heads in shame. Do not misunderstand Prakash’s
criticism. All of us should examine our hearts and reform ourselves in
whatever respects may be necessary.
Write to . . .1 also what you wrote to me about him. Don’t mind
if he feels a little hurt. He is childish, but not dishonest.
BAPU

[PS.]
I had got the soap sent by Panditji. Why has he coloured it?
There are 36 letters in all, tied with a string.
From a microfilm of Gujarati: M. M. U./I

463. LETTER TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE
February 20, 1933
DEAR GURUDEV,

At the instance of Seth Ghanshyamdas you sent a poem2 for the
Harijan of which I hope you received the first issue. Harijans are your
special care. I am therefore not going to be satisfied with that message
only. If you can send something occasionally it will be a source of
strength to me personally and a help to the readers of Harijan in the
midst of so much that is going on to undermine their faith.
I hope you are keeping well.
With love from us all.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 4637

464. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL K. MEHTA
February 20, 1933
MY DEAR JAISUKHLAL,

If it is at all possible, I would like you to get the opinion
of some legal friends on the following points. I have already asked
Sjt. Jayakar to help me, but he will do so both as lawyer and politician
1
2

The name has been omitted.
Vide “The Cleanser”

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

333

perhaps. But if we can get four or five signatures from well-known
lawyers with his amongst them, I should value the thing all the more. I
do not know that, it is necessary to go through the stiff course of
solicitors preparing a brief and submitting it to several advocates for
their opinion. I would like it to be a considered opinion of lawyers as
public men applying their knowledge of law to a question of great
importance. The points to which I would like them to address
themselves are these:
1. Is there any element of compulsion in any of the two Bills?
2. Is there any interference with any person’s religious practice
or conscience?
3. In spite of the willingness of the trustees as well as the
worshippers of a particular public Hindu temple, is not one of the two
Bills at least or a measure like them necessary before it is possible for
a public Hindu temple to be opened in view of the English Law of
Trusts and known decisions of the High Courts in India?
You should approach Mr. Bahadurji on this matter. But I do not
insist; you know better what to do and how to do it.
You should attend to this as early as you possibly can.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. J AISUKHLAL MEHTA
“THE R ECLUSE”
MURZBAN R OAD
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20302

465. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
February 20, 1933
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

Milk should not be drunk, but eaten. Take it with papaw. Have
no doubt that, if one does not get strength with milk, the strength
given by other foods is likely to be illusory. Don’t mind if you have
to spare some time, but take hip-bath every day. Do go in sunshine, so
that you do not feel cold at all.
We need not worry about Mahavir. Even if he is forced to resort
to begging or stealing, ultimately he will come to good if it is so
334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

decreed. In the Ashram his soul was being degraded, for his life was
not true there. Harilal will one day reform himself, though he drinks
and goes after immoral pleasures. If, however, I had kept him in the
Ashram and somehow found him the money which he wanted, he
would have let his thoughts run after immoral pleasures and would
have been deceiving himself and the world.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 24376

466. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
February 20, 1933
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

Your desire is noble and your efforts are wonderful. You have
put your discoveries before Narandas and me. Now listen to what
Narandas says and go on doing your work with single-minded devotion. Others also will follow your example and all shortcomings will
disappear.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 352. Courtesy: Bhagwanji P. Pandya

467. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
February 20, 1933
CHI. JAMNA,

Purushottam came and saw me. He has acquired fairly good
knowledge on the subject. I have asked him to stay there for some
time longer still and learn more. He now hopes, and so do I, that he
will be all right. I hope you are progressing satisfactorily.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 872. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

335

468. LETTER TO BHOGILAL
February 20, 1933
BHAI BHOGILAL,

We can acquire “full and perfect knowledge” by observing the
yamaniyamas1.
The true aim of education is spiritual development. One should,
therefore, go in for such kind of education as will bring it about. It
need not be of one fixed type. Hence it is not necessary to say
anything on that subject. One should lead a life of self-control.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4752

469. LETTER TO NANALAL K. JASANI
February 20, 1933
BHAI NANALAL,

I had received your invitation. I had sent my blessings to Indira
directly. She claimed an old connection with me. However, convey my
blessings to both the brides and both the bridegrooms, and also my
hope that they will lead a pure life and continually grow in the spirit
of service.
You must have heard everything about the divisions. Chhagan is
there. I have discussed the matter with Ratubhai. Do meet him. If
Chhagan agrees, we may proceed further. Lilavati also has promised.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9629

1

336

Rules and regulations of conduct for a spiritual aspirant

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

470. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
February 20, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

You wrote to me after a long time. Write regularly from now on.
It is not good for Premabehn to get angry with you. But a boy or girl
who is eager to learn will not mind the teacher getting angry and will
learn attentively.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9637 Courtesy : Ravindra R. Patel

471. LETTER TO K. NATARAJAN
February 21, 1933
DEAR MR. NATARAJAN,

I thank you for your letter. 1 I can never take amiss any
intervention from you. On the contrary, I have always welcomed it.
You will perhaps be interested to learn that the original draft of the
Resolution on Temple-entry and the like was also framed by me and
handed to Sjts. Purushottamdas and Ghanshyamdas Birla. The
Resolution as passed at the Bombay meeting is undoubtedly different
from the one I had worded. The essential features of my Resolution
have however been kept in the Bombay Resolution. Nevertheless I
must apply to it the same canon of interpretation as we apply to
Government’s ordinary laws and the like. The intention of the author
is irrelevant to the interpretation of his work if that intention is not
carried out in his language. I have therefore mentioned the fact of my
authorship of the original text as a mere matter of historical interest. If
you will read the first Resolution2 you will find the following:
This right shall have statutory recognition at the first opportunity, and
shall be one of the earliest acts of swaraj Parliament, if it shall not have
received such recognition before that time.
1

The addressee had referred to the Bombay Resolution of September 25, 1932
and written: “Of course, the Pact itself was largely your doing and you are the best
authority as to what it was intended to mean. But the Bombay Conference, of which I
was a member, did not intend more than Malaviyaji says. Perhaps, less.”
2
Vide “Statement on Viceroy’s Decision”, 24-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

337

Therefore, the legislative aid was clearly contemplated by the
resolution. But I go a step further. The meeting further agreed
by every legitimate and peaceful means to secure an early removal of all social
disabilities . . . including the bar in respect of admission to temples.

In the course of the conduct of the campaign one discovered
that there was a legal obstacle in the path of the progress towards
reform. Surely, it is up to the caste Hindus to remove the obstacles at
the earliest possible moment. Every lawyer to whom I have referred
the matter has assured me that even when the trustees and
temple-goers desire a particular temple to be opened, it cannot be
done because of the state of the law. So far as the defects in any of the
Bills are concerned, they can surely be easily remedied. If you have
any doubt about the position I have taken up, I would like you, if you
at all can, to come over to Yeravda and discuss the position before you
differ. If, however, you have no doubt whatsoever about your view of
the matter, I must not trouble you to come merely for my pleasure.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K. NATARAJAN
KAMAKSHI HOUSE
BANDRA , B OMBAY 20
From a microfilm: S.N. 20310

472. LETTER TO KESHAV
February 21, 1933
MY DEAR KESHAV,

I never thought that you wanted me to say anything in
connection with your appeal, or if you did and I promised to do
anything, I forgot all about it to the extent that I cannot now recall the
contents of the appeal which was destroyed after I had read it. Please
therefore send me a copy and I shall see what can be done with
reference to it.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K ESHAV
C HRIST S EVA S ANGHA ASHRAM
AUNDH , N EAR KIRKEE
From a microfilm: S.N. 20312

338

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

473. LETTER TO S. GANESAN
February 21, 1933
MY DEAR GANESAN,

I have your letter1. It is not possible to send you proofs before
Friday mail, because the last article does not lave me before Thursday
evening, and it will be dangerous to send you anything from day to
day, because there is no certainty of what I write appearing in the issue
for which it is written, nor of its appearing in the form in which it is
written in the first instance. I can therefore only send you proofs of
what is actually to go in and in the form in which it is to go in. That is
determined only on Fridays.
You and your wife can certainly come and see me any time you
like, except on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Sundays,
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. G ANESAN
C/ O “SWATHANTHRA S ANGU ”2
TRIPLICANE, M ADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20313

474. LETTER TO PARESHNATH BHATTACHARYYA
February 21, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of 15th instant for which I thank you.
I endeavour to be as precise as I possibly can about anything I
write and therefore when I am confronted with anything as having
been said by me, in justice to me I should have the very words that I
have said. You will understand what I mean when I tell you what
distinction there is between what you think I have said and what I have
actually said.
I do not consider “the Gita to be the only scripture of
1
The addressee wanted to publish a supplement in Tamil and Telugu every
Monday containing Gandhiji’s articles in Harijan and had therefore requested for
advance proofs which he wanted to reach him on Friday or Saturday.
2
A Tamil tri-weekly

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

339

unquestionable authority which alone should be our true guide”.
What I have said and what I still hold is that for me in view of the
multitude of books claimed to be scriptural and [of] conflicting texts,
Gita is the only safe guide, because it contains the concentrated
essence of all that the Hindu scriptures have to teach and that I would
unhesitatingly reject anything that is in conflict with the spirit of the
Gita. Thus I would test the validity of every religious precept or code
of conduct on the anvil of that teaching.
Thus you will see that I exclude nothing. I take in all the
scriptures, but I use the Gita to unlock their meaning.
I quite agree with your view of the Samhitas, but my difficulty
in applying them to daily conduct arises from the fact that there are
conflicting statements in the same Samhita and there is conflict
among the different Samhitas. There again I summon the Gita to my
aid.
Whilst I agree also that rules of conduct will show variation from
the ideal and even between man and man, to be true to the ideal they
should conform to it and enable one to make a progressive approach
to it. They must not take one away progressively further from it.
Examined thus, untouchability, as it is practised today, in my
opinion, is clearly contrary to the Hindu scriptures. As I read your
several propositions, untouchability stands condemned by them.
As to the referendum, you have evidently missed the strict
limitations placed upon its scope. If I had believed that current
untouchability had its roots in Hinduism and that untouchables were
clearly prohibited from entering temples, there would be no question
whatsoever of referendum. But since there are two schools of opinion,
why should not the people decide to which school they will belong?
Who will decide for the people whether they should belong to the
Shaivite sect or Vaishnavite, if not they themselves? Is that not what
the Hindus have done all through their great history?1
Yours sincerely,

P ANDIT P ARESHNATH BHATTACHARYYA,
VEDANTARATNA
C OOCH BEHAR (BENGAL )

M. A.

From a microfilm: S.N. 20315

1

340

Vide also ‘‘A Sanatanist’s Conclusions”, “A Sanatanist’s Conclursions”

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

475. LETTER TO GAJANAN BHARADWAJA
February 21, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 19th instant. I can only advise
you patiently to follow the columns of Harijan. Perchance you will
find some answer in them to your questions 1. As you yourself admit
in effect that varnashrama is irrelevant to the issue that is agitating the
public mind, I must conserve the energy of myself and the public by
not saying more than is necessary on varnashrama, not that there is
anything to conceal; as a matter of fact, what I may say hereafter can
be gleaned by a patient reader from my writings. Only I have
observed repeatedly that not until a particular question has become a
live issue have readers of my writings concentrated upon what I have
said upon that issue before it became a live issue. You may depend
upon it that Dr. Ambedkar himself will not let me off as easily as you
will. You will perhaps allow yourself to be put off, not Dr. Ambedkar
quite so easily. Therefore you will please hold yourself in patience.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. G AJANAN BHARADWAJA
LONAVLA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20316

476. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
February 21, 1933
One cannot say that there is coercion even in the second Bill.
How can we say that there is coercion if a majority of the Hindus are
ready? Moreover, it will also be possible to implement the
compromise which I have suggested. Even so, if the first Bill is
1
The addressee had asked: ‘‘How would you determine the varna or the ashram
of an individual at the time of reconstruction of the present Hindu society and when
that reconstruction is to commence? What about the intermarriage and interdining
amongst the four varnas? At what age would the varna be determined? Who would
supervise and be responsible for the maintenance of the order of varnashrama? If
marriage or dining is immaterial, how would your varnashrama differ from the
Western order of society?”

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

341

accepted I am not at all keen about the second. The second has been
brought forward to satisfy the sanatanists. I think Malaviyaji does not
like the first Bill. But if you think you can persuade him to accept it,
certainly try to do so. . . .1 If you wish to discuss the Bill further and
understand its implications, come and see me.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 121

477. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVLEKAR
February 21, 1933
BHAI SATAVLEKAR,

I did not answer your postcard expecting to see
Lakshmanshastri any day. Now I do not know when I shall see him.
But I shall write more when I do see him. I am aware that Hindi or
English are not useful for Maharashtra.2
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 4773. Courtesy: S. D. Satavlekar

478. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
February 21, 1933
BISMILLAH
DEAR DAUGHTER RAIHANA,

Your letter. You must not attempt to visit me while you are still
weak. It will be enough if you send a card regularly. Tell your sister
not to come to me. She must not worry about it but devote herself
even more to Harijan service. You do get the Harijan I hope.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: S.N. 9659

1

Omission as in the source
The reference here is to the possibility of bringing out a journal in Marathi
on the subject of untouchability; vide also “Letter to S. D. Satavlekar”, 3-2-1933
2

342

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

479. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
February 22, 1933
MY DEAR C. R.,

You must not take to heart what I have said about the mention
of the fast by you. 1 I could not drive the lesson home unless I drew
pointed attention to your mention. I have certainly forgotten all about
it. Will you do likewise? Nor must you take to heart Dr. Ambedkar’s
explosion2, the Government’s decision 3, or Malaviyaji’s opposition 4.
These are all in the day’s happenings. Somehow or other not one of
the three things has shaken me, possibly because I was prepared for all
the three. Our satisfaction must lie in our having done the very best
that we are capable of doing. You have certainly. You are not going to
worry therefore in any shape or form. I know that you have left no
stone unturned to have the Bills passed during this very session. No
one could have done more.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20321

480. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
February 22, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your two letters. I do not understand the intricacies of
Assembly procedure. I have said and written as I have felt and having
done that I should leave things to work themselves out. Circulation as
I have understood from M. L. A.s means much more than you seem
to think it does,5 but if it merely means consideration of the Bills at the
1

Vide “Letter to C. Rajagopalachari”, 12/13-2-1933
Vide “B. R. Ambedkar’s Statement”
3
Vide “Letter from Government of India”, 17-2-1933.
4
Vide “Telegram from Madan Mohan Malaviya”, 15-2-1933
5
In his letter dated February 18, the addressee had written: “If we are to
command a greater measure of support from the M. L. A.s we should not try to rush the
measure through the House and so we have to reconcile ourselves to the circulation
course. I know you do not agree with this, but personally I feel that for all practical
purposes there is no difference between the circulation and the appointment of a
Select Committee. Even if a Select Committee is appointed, nothing could be done
before the Simla session and even if the Bill is circulated with a specific time-limit
the Select Committee could be appointed in the Simla session and the Bill may then
be taken into consideration. Thus in reconciling ourselves to the circulation course,
we are not wasting any more time than would be wasted in any case. . . .”
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

343

next session, there may not be much harm; but I do not know. You
will now do whatever you all think proper,
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20329

481. WHY ‘HARIJAN’ 1
Many people have asked me why I have used the name
‘Harijans’ for people whom we commit the sin of regarding as
untouchables. Years ago a Kathiawadi Antyaja had written to me that
names like Antyaja, achhoot, asprishya hurt his community. I could
appreciate their feelings. For me they were neither Antyajas nor
untouchables. It was this correspondent who had pointed out to me
that the poet-devotee Narasinh Mehta in one of his bhajans had
referred to the Antyajas as ‘Harijans’. In my view the bhajan he had
sent to me to support his contention did not yield the meaning which
he thought it did. All the same I liked the name ‘Harijan’ immensely.
‘Harijan’ means a devotee of God, beloved of God. It is God’s
promise that He is the Protector of the oppressed, an ocean of
compassion, the strength of the weak, the Refuge of the helpless, the
Support of the lame and the Eye of the blind. One may therefore
expect Him to bestow especial grace on the oppressed. Looked at
from this point of view, I am sure the name ‘Harijan’ is appropriate in
every way for the Antyaja brethren.
Some argue that the Antyajas became untouchables because of
their actions in their previous birth. Still others say: ‘Let us suppose
for a moment that we regard four crores of our brethren as
untouchables. But what special miseries do they have to suffer that the
other crores of people do not? The miseries that they suffer because
of untouchability must be only mental and there is no remedy for it.
Being the fruit of a previous birth, it must be regarded as a divine
dispensation. The privations which the Antyajas suffer because of
their poverty and destitute condition are the common lot of all the
people of India with the exception of two or three crores of people.
Why then should not all of them be called Harijans?’ This argument is
utterly absurd. Untouchability as we observe today is neither the result
of actions of previous births nor of God’s making. The
1

Gandhiji wrote under the same title in the English Harijan, vide “Why
‘Harijan’ ”, “Why Harijan”, 11-2-1933.

344

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

untouchability prevalent at the present time is man’s doing. The caste
Hindus are responsible for it. No one can escape the fruit of his
action. But by accepting the law of karma, we acquire no right to put
the blame on others. The way of karma is indeed inscrutable. No one
knows what karma will bear what fruit. We are all laden with one or
other shortcoming, hence we have no right whatever to judge the
shortcomings or sins of others. Our right and duty is only to help one
another get rid of such shortcomings. Compassion is incompa-tible
with untouchability whether predestined or unavoidable. Four crores
of Hindus have to face unparalleled hardships because we treat them
as untouchables. They do not get even food or a place to live in as
others do, even though they have the money as well as other means.
They have no temples, or dharmsalas or hospitals or schools for them
as other people have. We have crushed them so much that they have
almost forgotten that they are human beings. These four crore
brethren have not even the will to rise from this abject and abominable
situation.
There is no exaggeration in my account of Harijans. It may be
there in one respect. No one knows the exact number of Harijans. I
have accepted the figure given by Shri Amritlal Thakkar. Thakkar
Bapa is himself not very sure about the figure After thorough survey
all that can be said is that the number of Harijans cannot be more than
four crores. But irrespective of the fact whether there are four crore
Harijans or one, the guilt on the part of the caste Hindus remains the
same. If there is any fault in my description of Harijans it may be one
of understatement and certainly not of exaggeration.1 If this
oppressed class were not to have God’s grace or mercy the world
would cease to have faith in God.
The truth is that He exists and He is an ocean of compassion, the
Protector of the oppressed, and the Feeder of the hungry. Therefore,
in India, those who are most unhappy deserve to be called Harijans.
And it is my firm belief that if we do not remove the untouchability
practised against the Harijans and did not treat them as our brethren,
Hindu society would perish under their curse.
As Tulsidas says,
1

A Gujarati version of this article which appeared in Harijanbandhu,
12-3-1933, has the following additional sentences: “Whatever I have written can be
substantiated. The facts therefore must be worse than what I have described.”

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

345

The sighs of the weak never go waste,
Bellows of carcase-hide turn iron to dust.

[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 23-2-1933

482. LETTER TO VERRIER ELWIN
February 23, 1933
MY DEAREST SON,

Son you have become of your own choice. I have accepted the
responsible position. And son you shall remain to the end of time.
The tie between you and me is much thicker and tougher than blood.
It is the burning love of Truth at any cost. Therefore whatever you
may do will not disappoint me. But I was sad.
I am not thinking of superiority of celibacy over marriage. I am
thinking of what you had intended, almost pledged yourself to be. But
I know that you had to be true to yourself and appear as you were.
I showed your letter to Jamnalalji and he too felt the same as I
did.
But whilst I was trying to make time to write to you, in came Ala,
tears dropping from her eyes. She put into my hands your letter and
said, “How can I bear this? It was agreed between us that we were both
to remain single, or if we could not, we were to marry each other.” I
consoled her and advised her to send you her blessings. I do not know
what she has done or written. You will tell me what understanding
there was between you and her.
But taking it for granted that your word was never given to Ala
as she imagines it was, you and Mary1 have my blessings. I have met
her. I have a vivid recollection that the innocence of her face stamped
itself upon my mind. I know that your joint life will be one of
complete dedication to service. But if there is the slightest possibility
of a breach (moral) of word given to Ala, you must both—you and
Mary—be prepared to bear what will be the heaviest cross and
sacrifice your cherished hope on the altar of Truth which is God. If
there is a trace of suspicion of breach, you certainly and Mary and
Ala—the latter two if they have the same living faith in Truth as I have
1

346

Mary Gillett

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

credited you with—have to live single lives in spite of yourselves.
Your love of Truth will transmute your desire for exclusive marriage
into the universal marriage with Truth. For this divine marriage we
men and women are all women and Truth is the only Lord, Master
and Husband.
I need say no more. My letter is not satisfactory because it is
written in ignorance of facts. But it need not be unsatisfactory as
being between father and son. You can fill in the gaps. Of this you
have my assurance that whatever you do, I am certain, will have been
done out of obedience to Truth as it might reveal itself to you. More
than that no man can do.
May God guide you and Mary.
With my deep love to you and Mary,
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
This was written just after the morning prayer—4.30 a.m.
23-2-33.
From a microfilm: S.N. 20351

483. LETTER TO ELLEN HORUP
February 23, 1933
MY DEAR ELLEN,

I was delighted to hear from you. I appreciate all your affection.
I have gone up hills but I have never walked along them all day long
but I do know however what you mean by the mountains reaching the
horizon.
The knowledge that I am a guiding varde to some friends
humbles me and makes me more and more conscious of the
tremendous burden that I carry on my shoulders. I have to watch
myself and incessantly pray to the God of Truth that I may not prove
a false guide to anybody.
Yours sincerely,

MISS ELLEN HORUP
GENEVA
From a photostat: S.N. 20335

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

347

484. LETTER TO H. V. GLASENAPP
February 23, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have just got your letter addressed to the Secretary of the
Ashram at Sabarmati. I have no knowledge of the book called India
by Luciano Magrini. I have not read the book. I do not know Italian
and I have never given any opinion on the book to anybody, and so
far as my knowledge goes, I have seen no notice of the book in the
Indian newspapers.
Yours sincerely,

H. V. GLASENAPP, E SQ.
P ROFESSOR OF S ANSKRIT
KOENIGSBERG UNIVERSITY (GERMANY )
From a photostat: S.N. 20336

485. LETTER TO K. R. CHHAPKHANE
February 23, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

Perhaps you know the correspondence I have been having with
Sjt. Athavale. As he refers me to you and perhaps rightly, I approach
you and would ask you kindly to let me know under what conditions
and terms I handed over to you the collections I had made in Sangli
during my visit1.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. C HHAPKHANE
S ANGLI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20337

1

348

In November, 1920

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

486. LETTER TO K. SANTANAM
February 23, 1933
MY DEAR SANTANAM,

I must dictate my letter to you to save time. I was delighted to
see your old familiar hand but sorry to learn that you had not been
keeping well. You must not put on fat. Though I am a quack, I am a
quack who has tried experiments on himself and therefore can speak
with some authority. You ought to take plenty of exercise. Walking is
the prince of exercises, and you should give up all prepared fat, such
as, oil or ghee, and take as little milk as possible and live on juicy fruit
and brown bread without butter. In a month’s time you will find
yourself a changed man. You may take green, non-starchy vegetables
simply boiled. We do not realize how we become prey to disease by
criminal ignorance of the right dietary and the absolute necessity of
exercises in the fresh air. I shall keep a letter with this for Krishna.
I know that you will do all you can for Harijan newspaper and
the Harijan cause in general.
Yours sincerely,

P T. K. S ANTANAM
7 R ACE C OURSE R OAD , L AHORE
From a photostat: S.N. 20338

487. LETTER TO BAJI KRISHNA RAO
February 23, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your telegram, as also your interesting letter.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. B AJI KRISHNA R AO , P LEADER
IST C HETMI BAZAAR
S ECUNDERABAD
From a microfilm: S.N. 20345

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

349

488. LETTER TO TANGAI MENON
February 23, 1933
MY DEAR TANGAI1 ,

You have sent me a note not written by you. Therefore you
cannot complain if I sent you a reply not written by me.
I know that Uncle Charlie eats much salt, but you must not copy
bad habits of elderly people, and eating much salt is a bad habit, and
much salt spoils the original flavour of things with which it is mixed.
Uncle Charlie has also a habit of spoiling little children by
giving them too many sweets. Therefore, if I were you, I should
distribute sweets amongst lots of poorer children and I should feel
happy at the thought of sharing with them gifts received from friends.
Love and kisses from us both.
BAPU

My Dear Child, p. 119

489. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
February 23, 1933
MY DEAR CHILD,

Having dictated this letter2, it has got to go to Tangai, though it
is going to cost 2_ annas to the Harijan cause. Let us hope that both
Nan and Tangai will make up for the loss a thousandfold and more.
Love.
BAPU

My Dear Child, p. 119

1
2

350

Daughter of Esther Menon
Vide the preceding item.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

490. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
February 23, 1933
MY DEAR MARY,

Your Hindi letter is extraordinarily good. We all admired your
very clear handwriting.
God has many definitions: as many as there are men and women
on this earth.
are also among them, they may be rendered
as Truth, Knowledge and Bliss. They are interlaced.
The selection of morning verses is designed to satisfy all wants.
Every verse represents a power or powers of God the Infinite and the
Indescribable.
Yes, I had a letter from Verrier. It surprised me, it did not
disappoint me. I believe with Paul that men should marry rather than
burn. Celibacy is good for those whose mind co-operates with the
body. I do remember Mary Gillett well. Her innocent face impressed
itself on me the very first time I saw her.
I am glad you are getting on well there. And now you have
Duncan Greenlees to care for. You will please see to his comforts and
know him too.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
You should sleep under the sky and you will feel cool
throughout the night. I have your letter about Kashmir. Of course you
should go and stay there till June if the climate agrees and then come
down. But the duration will depend upon circumstances.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5994. Also C.W. 3319. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

351

491. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 23, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got the large packet of letters sent by you. You will find with
this a letter1 for Mary and one for Greenlees. Lakshmidas and Anandi
have come here. Anandi has been having fever and the temperature
remains at 99. It even rises by one or two points in the course of the
day. It does not fall below 99. But I am completely hopeful that we
shall be able to cure her fever here. For one thing, the climate of the
place is excellent.
When Dudabhai comes there, have a talk with him and come to a
definite decision. If he agrees, let the marriage take place as soon as
possible. If he does not give his willing consent, tell him that we shall
not be able to look after Lakshmi any longer. If your own experience
is contrary to my inference and if you feel inclined to let her stay, you
may ignore my opinion.
Impart to Amina as much as you can. It would be good if she
daily practises the Urdu script. What happened about Parvati? Is
Ranchhodbhai in difficulty about anything? I worry about him as I
have had no letter from him. Parnerkar’s scheme which all of you
have approved is an old one, though it is certainly good. Ask him to
write to me. What arrangement do you propose to make for selling
milk? I follow what you say regarding the land at Bidaj. Let me know
how you find Duncan. If the impression which he has produced on
me turns out to be correct, he is likely to prove a fine worker.
What is the composition of the plaster applied to Kanu? By
whom was it recommended? In all such cases of injury, complete rest
for the injured part is the most important thing. Some times the injury
is to such a part that, in order to give rest to it, it is necessary to rest the
whole body. But this is the quickest remedy for curing the pain. Have
a talk with Prabhudas and try to help him to overcome his restlessness.
If Bhagwanji devotes himself whole-heartedly to his new job, he
can do excellent work. Has Dhiru’s health improved? I am not happy
that he has stopped writing to me altogether. I hope you had a talk
1

352

Vide thee preceding item.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with Motibehn. Have any people there enlisted themselves as
subscribers of Harijan? Or do any people buy retail copies? Do you
get any visitors?
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

492. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
February 23, 1933
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have your letter. I know I can comfort you if I can meet you.
But the path of truth is like the edge of a sword. Service of the
untouchables must not be used as a pretext. You can visit me if you
are sincere about it. Be patient. Therein lies your good. Write to me to
your heart’s content. We shall meet when God wills. Is it a small
comfort that we can exchange letters? Keep writing. I shall promptly
reply. It is good news that you have given up tea and your health is
good.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

493. LETTER TO DEVIDUTT SHUKLA
February 23, 1933
1

BHAI DEVIDUTTJI ,

I have your letter. I am aware of the service rendered by Pandit
Mahavir Prasadji2 to the Hindi language. Sarasvati was known to me
even in South Africa. I may also be allowed to join in congratulating
him on the occasion of his 70th birthday and I hope that we shall have
the benefit of his literary services for many more years and that
Sarasvati will continue to progress.
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI,
From Hindi: C.W. 9666. Courtesy: Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag
1
2

Then editor of Sarasvati, a monthly journal
Mahavir Prasad Dwivedi, founder-editor of Sarasvati

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

353

494. TELEGRAM TO RAGHAVENDRA RAO
February 24, 1933
HON . R AGHAVENDRA R AO
HOME MEMBER
NAGPUR
JUST

HEARD

SETH

NOT

KNOW

REASON.

KNOW

WHETHER

POONAMCHAND
WILL

REPORT

RANKA

YOU

TRUE,

SEONI

PLEASE

AND

IF

JAIL

INQUIRE

SO,

CAUSE

FASTING.
AND

OF

DO

LET

ME

FASTING.

GANDHI
Home Department, Political, File No. 31/108, 1932, p. 59. Courtesy:
National Archives of India. Also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department,
Special Branch, File No. 800 (40) (3) A, p. 3

495. TELEGRAM TO CHHAGANLAL P. MEHTA
February 24, 1933
C HHAGANLAL MEHTA
NASIK VILLA
P ARSIVADA
R AJKOT
HOPE
LAL

MARRIAGE
PADMA.

WILL

HOPE

BE

YOU

SIMPLEST

AND

POSSIBLE.

CHILDREN

QUITE

MY

BLESSINGS

KANTI-

WELL.

BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 7173. Also C.W. 4667. Courtesy: Chhaganlal P.
Mehta

496. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
February 24, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

This is Friday morning 3.30 a.m. No letter from you as yet for
this week! I wrote to you regularly last week. That was on Friday as
yours was received Thursday afternoon. I take it your new abode and
new keepers mean a temporary disturbance in the routine. I shall wait

354

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and pray and take to heart the message of Gita Mata. She is a
wonderful mother. I suppose you know that she is called Mother.
‘Gita’ means ‘song’. It is used as an adjective applied to Upanishad
which is in the feminine gender. It has been likened to the sacred cow,
the giver of all desires. Hence Mother. Well, that immortal Mother
gives all the milk we need for spiritual sustenance, if we would but
approach her as babes seeking and sucking it from her. She is capable
of yielding milk to her millions of babes from her exhaustless udder.
In doing the Harijan work in the midst of calumny,
misrepresentations and apparent disappointments, her lap comforts me
and keeps me from falling into the Slough of Despond.
So you find me laughing and free from care. My weight has
become steady at 103 and the diet also the same in quantity and kind.
For the time being unboiled fresh milk goes on without doing any
harm. Writing for Harijan occupies most of my time and Mahadev’s.
Chhaganlal too is kept fairly busy.
No more this time. I must wake up the others for prayer now.
Love to you and the others from us all.
BAPU

[PS.]
I send you by registered book post religious postcards which
Princess Aristarchie sends almost every week with carefully selected
verses at the back of each. Do you know that Verrier intends to marry
Mary Gillett in April!
Mahadev reminds me that I wrote to you last week about
Verrier.1
I have just got your letter. But no time to deal with it today.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6264. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9730

1

Vide “Letter to C. F. Andrews”, 17-2-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

355

497. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
[February 24, 1933] 1
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

I have your letter. You know what is happening to the Bills. It is
unfortunate and it is bad. The Government have taken up, in my
opinion, not an attitude of neutrality but one of partiality. I do not
know if you have caught the central point of my argument. It would
be partiality to the reformers and would also be interference with
religion if the Government gave facilities for the consideration of a
measure compelling temple-entry. It is partiality to orthodoxy in that
the Government will not remove the legal bar to temple-entry created
by decisions of courts of law, decisions not based on statutory law but
on religious usage, thus making untouchability a crime as if it was part
of the Penal Code. The Government to be neutral should lift this bar
and say to either party. ‘We cannot take sides in religious matters.
Untouchability may be for some of you a breach of your religion, but
there is no breach in it of common law and therefore there can be no
punishment under the common law.’ There are innumerable religious
practices in Hinduism not even [as] offensive to the moral sense of the
world as untouchability undoubtedly is, and yet their breach is not
penal under the common law. All that the reformers want is
opportunity for progress, opportunity for converting public opinion,
and when and where it is converted, opportunity for giving effect to
that conversion. Today even if cent per cent of Hindus entitled to
worship in a particular temple desired the admission of Harijans to
that temple, they could not carry out their wish because of the
decisions I have referred to. The two Bills are designed to remove this
anomaly. I watch, wait and pray.
Love.
MOHAN
From a photostat: G.N. 979; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800 (40) (3), Pt. IV, p. 113

1

356

From Bombay Secret Abstracts

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

498. LETTER TO S. GANESAN
February 24, 1933
MY DEAR GANESAN,

I have your letter of 20th instant, but as I have anticipated you
and told you that advance copies1 can be sent to you on Fridays and
not before,2 I need not say anything more.
Mahadev just reminds me that sending you copies on Fridays
gives you no advantage because Madras copies are all sent on Fridays.
My previous letter tells you how utterly impossible it is to send you
anything earlier.
I return the letter from Dr. Rajan.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20347

499. LETTER TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
February 24, 1933
3

I had your telegram asking me whether you could release the
correspondence for publication. As I had done so 48 hours before the
receipt of your telegram I did not send a wire in reply, thinking that
you must already have seen the notice of the publication4.
Since then I had no time to dictate a reply to you, as Harijan
takes up practically all my time up to Thursday evening.
I hope you are getting regularly your copy of the Harijan. I do
not know whether you at all get the time to look at it. Now that the
world knows the difference of outlook between you and me as to
these Bills, I would like you to review the whole position in the light of
what you yourself have suggested.
You say that it is possible by discussion between sanatanists and
reformers to arrive at a compromise without the aid of legislation. I
taxed myself as to how this could be, even assuming that there was
1
2
3
4

Of Harijan
Vide “Letter to S. Ganesan”, 21-2-1933
Vide “Telegram frokm Madan Mohan Malaviya”, 15-2-1933.
In Harijan, 18-2-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

357

complete agreement between sanatanists and reformers that public
temples should be thrown open to Harijans. Even that agreement
cannot supersede the law which lays down that Harijans cannot enter
public temples.
I therefore cannot get away from the very real moral difficulty
that unless we get the law altered, we are not in a position to keep the
pledge given in the Bombay Resolution. We cannot plead helplessness
under cover of this law, of which I knew nothing at the time I drew up
the Resolution about temples. I suppose that you do know that the
original draft was prepared by me. True, several changes were made
after, but no change was made so as to alter the substance of my draft.
I wish therefore that for the sake of the very religion which you
and I hold dearer than life itself, you will examine the moral
difficulties I have presented here. And let me repeat, if it is at all
necessary, what I have said in my article in Harijan that this
latestdifference in viewpoint between you and me does not, in the
slightest degree, diminish my regard or affection for you.
P ANDIT MALAVIYAJI
From a photostat: S.N. 20348

500. LETTER TO ADA WEST1
February 24, 1933
MY DEAR DEVI,

I was glad to have your letter. I see you are now doing lighter
work. The change was certainly necessary for you and I hope that it
has benefited you. Of course we have cold here, but in this part of
India cold weather is very nice and pleasant, not at all severe, but it is
very severe in the Punjab, though it is very bracing.
I think I did meet Dr. and Mrs. Gray whilst I was there. You
should give me news of Albert whenever you have any, because I do
not hear from him at all. I have written to him.
Devdas is in Delhi doing Harijan work. Ramdas is in the same
prison, but not in the same yard. I am permitted to see him
occasionally. Mahadev is of course with me and doing quite well. Ba
and Mira are together in the Sabarmati prison, and so far as I am
aware, they are keeping well. Pyarelal is in a jail at a place called
1

358

Sister of Albert West, Gandhiji’s co-worker in South Africa

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Nasik. I hear from Manilal and his wife almost every month. Medh
and Pragji also write to me occasionally.
Are you getting Harijan every week? The whole of my time is
occupied with that work just now.
I am not writing to Muriel1 this week. Please give my love to her
and all the dear friends of Kingsley Hall and the School House.
S HRI DEVI
KINGSLEY HALL
P OWIS R OAD
BOW , E.3
From a photostat: S.N. 20349

501. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
February 24, 1933
I had your beautiful letter. I prize your love. Of course I was not
angry with you and therefore there is nothing to forgive. On the
contrary, it is a matter of joy to me that I have friends to whom I can
write without reserve and without any fear of being misunder-stood.
However, I am glad that you have resolved upon not spending
money on love cables. Love need not express itself in words, but if it
must, love-letters ought to be quite enough. Immediately we realize
that we have nothing of our own, that all we have is held in trust for
those in greater need, we have to spend it like misers.
I hope you are getting your copy of Harijan every week.
From a photostat: S.N. 20350

502. LETTER TO MIRZA ISMAIL2
February 24, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

N. I came to know through the temple-entry agitation. And I
was taking interest in her work for the removal of untouchability.
Meantime a friend brought rumours to me about her character. I
1
2

Muriel Lester
Dewan of Mysore

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

359

straightway put the substance of the rumours before her and invited
her to come and see me if I was to take Harijan service from her. She
came without hesitation. She will be with me for a few days longer.
She tells me that you know her. Will you please tell me what your
impressions of her and her work are?
S IR MIRZA ISMAIL
BANGALORE
From a microfilm: S.N. 20353

503. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA
February 24, 1933
DEAR RAMACHANDRA,

N. is in Poona as you may know. She tells me you were for
some time in the Ashram at Sabarmati. What year could that be?
She further tells me that latterly you have not felt quite happy
about her. Please tell me quite frankly all you know about her or may
have against her.
KINGHERI ASHRAM
BANGALORE C ITY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20354

504. LETTER TO NARGIS CAPTAIN
February 24, 1933
I have at last a letter from you. You will tell me all your
experiences in Kumbhakonam and Guruvayur. You can do khadi
work most decidedly, and you can also meet the orthodox people and
discuss with them the whole question of the service of Harijans.
Though orthodoxy is well entrenched in Cochin, you will have no
difficulty in approaching the orthodox people, and then of course
there is a large Gujarati colony in Cochin. You should meet them.
Lastly, you should secure subscribers for the Harijan among the
very large number of English speaking Cochinites.
NARGISBEHN
From a microfilm: S.N. 20359

360

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

505. LETTER TO N. D. VARADACHARIAR
February 24, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of 20th instant, as also a copy of The Madras
Law Review, for both of which I thank you.
I have now sent for the text of Rao Bahadur Rajah’s Bill. As
soon as I get it, I shall certainly study it carefully and try to write
about it in the Harijan.
So far as I can understand the Bill from your note, I do not
know that it solves the temple-entry question. Meanwhile, if you have
a copy of the Bill, I shall thank you to send it to me, so that if I get a
copy from you earlier than from friends in Delhi, I shall begin to
work at it.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. N. D. VARADACHARIAR
C/ O “THE MADRAS LAW R EVIEW”
118 ARMENIAN S T.
MADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20362

506. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 24, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your mail including letters by Narahari and others.
Read the letter to Prabhudas. Have a detailed talk with him and
calm him. Ask him to discuss his problems with Narahari or Panditji.
Don’t let him go till he has become calm.
Yes, I had a long talk with Purushottam. I will write to him more
about the subject when I get time.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

361

507. LETTER TO MUNI SHANTIVIJAYJI
February 24, 1933
MUNISHRI SHANTIVIJAYJI,

I have known N. through correspondence since she
communicated to me her intention to fast by way of protest against
me. It was from her own letter that I learnt how she regarded you as
her all in all. As I heard certain allegations against her while our
correspondence was going on, I wrote to her about them immediately
and suggested that she should come and see me. She did so
immediately. It appears from our conversation that the allegations
against her may be baseless. I have been guiding her to an extent, but
I think it to be my duty to ascertain your wish before I give her any
positive advice. Hence this letter. I have written it with her knowledge.
She will remain here till your reply is received. I request you to have
no hesitation in making any suggestion you wish to do.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: S.N. 20352

508. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
February 24, 1933
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

Narandas says that you have become very restless.1 How is that?
If you have faith in me, you can have no reason to be restless. You
must joyously do what you are asked. Have you heard or sung the
bhajan: “I will dance singing praises of the Lord”? Devotion to duty
is singing praises of the Lord. To do as asked by a person in whom
one has faith is also singing praises of the Lord. Hence the need for
careful thinking before putting one’s faith in anyone. Why don’t you
write to me? Stop thinking about your marriage. You may marry if
you happen to come across a suitable girl. Jamnalalji says that he will
try to find a match as soon as he is released. He is certain to succeed.
He has now three or four months of his sentence left. As for work, do
what Narandas assigns to you. But I will not mind even if you are not
able to do that. It will be sufficient if you can live at Almora and look
after yourself. I will not expect anything more from you at present. It
1

362

Vide also “Letter to N. D. Varadachariar”, 24-2-1933.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will be enough if you build up your health.
Write to Kaka from time to time.
What did you do where you went to learn about honey?
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Gandhi Nidhi File (August 1976). Courtesy:
Gandhi National Museum and Library

509. HIGHER EDUCATION FOR HARIJANS
I hope all those who are interested in the removal of
untouchability are familiar with Mr. David’s scheme for the higher
education of selected Harijans by caste Hindus. The scheme was
published some time ago in the Bombay Press after being
enthusiastically accepted by the Servants of Untouchables Society. In
Mr. David’s words, “It aims at enabling a large number of
untouchables to enjoy the benefits of the best higher education
(including technical instruction) possible in this country.” Under it,
“well-to-do caste Hindus are expected throughout India each to bear
the expenses for such education of at least one Harijan student for a
period of five years. Scholarships should be given to selected
candidates and the expenses imply the provision of educational fees,
books and living expenses on a modest scale”. Mr. David thinks that
Rs. 500 per year per Harijan would be required for college education
and half as much for high school education. He advises donors to
subscribe, wherever it is possible, the whole amount covering five
years in one lump sum.
“In order to build up the self-respect of Harijan scholars”,
says Mr. David, “it should be laid down that each scholar would be
expected to reimburse the amount originally advanced for his
education as soon as he is in a position to do so. Thus a student under
this scheme is provided by means of a loan and not a gift.” And if a
large number of students discharge these debts of honour, Mr. David
anticipates that a permanent fund will be created.
Mr. David advises the formation of a committee or committees
in Provinces which will frame rules for the selection of candidates, and
the disbursements of subscriptions will be subject to the
recommendation of such committee or committees. He is emphatic
that the scheme, if carried out, should “produce important and
sustained results”, and make possible within a comparatively short
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

363

period the creation of a large number of lawyers, teachers, doctors and
engineers from among Harijans. The existence of a considerable
number of such persons would be of material help in raising the social
status of the depressed classes, and, he adds, “it is framed on strictly
non-controversial lines, thus widening to the maximum its potential
field of response. It should win the support of even the staunchest
sanatanists. . . . It is an opportunity at hand for caste Hindus to give
concrete expression of their feeling towards untouchables.”
Let me hope, with Mr. David, that the scheme will commend
itself to the “staunchest sanatanists” and that in any case it would
receive liberal support. I do not know whether the Central Board or
the Bombay Board has received any donations. I venture to suggest to
the Bombay Board that, if it has not already done so, it should form a
small committee getting, if possible, a sanatanist to work on it, frame
rules and get scholarships.
Whilst it would be the most proper thing to get 1,000 donors
who would contribute Rs. 2,500 or 1,250, as the case may be, for full
five years’ expenses, it is not necessary to confine oneself to the letter
of Mr. David’s scheme, so long as its spirit is observed. The central
point of the scheme is that there should be a decent fund at once
collected from caste Hindus for the higher education of a select
number of Harijan boys or girls. I, therefore, invite subscriptions for
the scheme. They will be duly acknowledged in these columns.
Donors should send moneys to the Manager, Sjt. A. V. Patwardhan,
marking the envelopes ‘the David Scheme’. Acknowledgements will
be published from week to week, and the money will be handed to the
Central Board for their disposal strictly in accordance with the
donor’s instructions. As soon as the first full subscription is received, I
would advise the Central Board to make its selection. Donors may
make their own choice of the Province from which Harijan boys or
girls may be selected, or they may even make their own selection of
such boy or girl and hand the donation to the Central Board or
Provincial Board for disbursement to, and supervision of, the
candidate so selected.
Harijan, 25-2-1933

364

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

510. DR. SAPRU ON UNTOUCHABILITY BILLS
As the public know, I have been in communication with Dr.
Sapru and Sjt. Jayakar over the two Bills which have stirred Hindu
opinion. Sjt. Jayakar’s opinion I have already published. Dr. Sapru’s
opinion is now before me on both the Bills. In his letter of the 11th
instant on the first Bill, he says:1
. . . Whatever may be my own personal views, there is no doubt that
some eminent Judges (Hindus included) in Madras, Bombay and elsewhere have
interpreted the law in such a way that you cannot throw open the temples
everywhere to Hindus of the depressed classes except by an Act of the
Legislature. . . .

Now coming to the Bill itself.
. . . I am afraid the forces of orthodoxy are strong in the Assembly and I
am more than doubtful whether the reformers will carry the day. . . . I should
not, however, feel surprised if dilatory tactics are adopted and the motion to
circulate the Bill is carried. . . . Framed as the Bill is, I should strongly oppose
the motion to circulate the Bill and should enlist the sympathy and support of
the members of the Legislature to go ahead with the consideration of the Bill. I
appreciate the moderation of the Bill, though, speaking for myself, I should
not hesitate to go much further than the Bill. . . .
. . . In my individual capacity I can be of very little use, so far as the
Assembly is concerned, but I can assure you of my support, even though I feel
that the Bill is a very mild measure.2

On this I telegraphed for his opinion also on the shorter Bill of
the two. His reply dated 18th instant (omitting the immaterial or
personal matters) is as follows:3
. . . As I read this clause, it seeks to remove disabilities from which the
untouchables are suffering under the existing law, but it does notseek to
impose any disability on caste Hindus. So far as the latter are concerned, there
does not seem to me to be anything like an element of compulsion
contemplated by the Bill. If they do not wish to associate with the
untouchables in the temples, they are not, by this Bill, compelled to do so.
All that it requires them to do is that they must not stand in the way of the
untouchables. It also lays down a rule of law for the courts which are required
1
2
3

Only extracts are reproduced here.
For Gandhiji’s reply, “Letter to Tej Bahadur Sapru”, 16-2-1933
Only extracts are reproduced here.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

365

not to recognize any custom of untouchability for judicial purposes. I,
therefore, fail to discover any element of compulsion in this Bill.
I have read in this morning’s papers the telegram of Malaviyaji to you
and your reply to him. Personally I am in complete agreement with you, both
as a lawyer and as a public man.
I think I owe it to you to say frankly that I look upon both these Bills
as being essentially very moderate. Left to myself, I should be prepared to go
much further and I have not the same horror of compulsion in a matter of this
character as some others have. You are, however, taking the line of least
resistance and I am prepared to stand by you. . . .1

Harijan, 25-2-1933

511. A SANATANIST’S CONCLUSIONS
Pandit Pareshnath Bhattacharya, M. A., Vedantaratna, writes
from Cooch Behar under date 15th February, 1933:2
. . .I beg to note down in brief outlines the chief points and principles
on which I have failed to concur with you.
(1) You are reported to have said to the effect that the Gita is the only
scripture of unquestionable authority which alone should be our true guide in
matters social, religious and spiritual. . . .
(2) The sources of Hindu religion are enumerated in the first chapter of
the Manusamhita. There is no valid reason for its rejection on the mere
suspicion of interpolations.
(3) Scriptures are clearly distinguishable into two classes:
(a) those dealing with high principles of philosophy and directions for
spiritual advancement,
(b) and others laying down laws for social discipline and prescribing penalties
for lapses and crime.
(4) In dealing with society and socio-religious institutions, we must
recognize and abide by the authority of the Samhitas . . .
(5) The noble ideal of Vedantic Monism, Pantheism or Panatheism has
no application to the problems of social organization or reform, for the
simple reason that a whole people can never soar to that height.
(6) Humanism is admittedly the highest form of religious idealism, but
for all practical purposes it must remain the private property of the saints and
1

For Gandhiji’s reply, vide “Letter to Tej Bahadur Sapru”, 19-2-1933
only extracts are reproduced here. For Gandhiji’s reply, vide “Letter
Pareshnath Bhattacharyya”, 21-2-1933
2

366

to

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

siddha purushas. There are inequalities in the society, both in natural
endowments and personal habits. No amount of love or legislative efforts will
do away with these inequalities between man and man.
(7) According to the abstract theory of justice, we cannot condone
invidious distinction between man and man for the mere accident of birth or
the mistaken choice of profession. But in dealing with men, we must face the
stern reality and admit the necessity of differential treatment between different
castes and classes of people.
(8) The Hindu law-makers were not insensible to the theoretical rights of
men, nor were they actuated by the pride of caste or racial hatred. . . .
(9) According to the Shastras, a sannyasin has no caste. Likewise in
practice, a truly pious man is always revered irrespective of his caste. This
shows the true spirit of Hindu religion. . . .
(10) Religious reform cannot be enforced on the results of referendum.
For religion, unlike politics, is always cherished by a small minority and it is
always for these few to guide, and for the majority to follow. Religion cannot
be democratised with impunity.
With these observations, I beg to request you to reconsider the position
which you have taken up with regard to the temple-entry question, and if it is
not possible, to convince the orthodox people who are always open to
conviction.

It would have been much better if the Pandit had quoted my
very words about the Gita, as he would at once have seen the
difference between what I am reported to have said and what I have
actually written. This is what I wrote in my statement dated 4th
November last:
It is the one open book to every Hindu who will care to study it, and if
all the other scriptures were reduced to ashes, the seven hundred verses of this
imperishable booklet are quite enough to tell one what Hinduism is and how
one can live up to it. And I claim to be a sanatanist because for forty years I
have been seeking literally to live up to the teachings of that book. Whatever
is contrary to its main theme I reject as un-Aindu. It excludes no faith and no
teacher.

The Pandit and the reader will see that there is a very wide
difference between what I have actually said and what is attributed to
me, and, that being the case, the grounds for showing the untenability
of a position I have never taken up become irrelevant.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

367

Similarly with reference to the Code of Manu, I never rejected
the whole of it on “the mere suspicion of interpolation”; and as to
interpolations, they are more than a suspicion, for what I consider as
interpolations are clearly in contravention of the fundamentals laid
down in the Gita and, for that matter, in Manu’s Code itself. The
following is Manu’s touchstone of religion:

:

:

:|
||

Whatever is always followed by the learned, the good and
those who are free from anger and attachment and whatever is
experienced in the heart, know that to be religion.1
Another text is, again, from the same Code:

|
||
Steadfastness, forgiveness, restraint, non-stealing, purity,
control of the senses, intelligence, learning, truth, freedom from
anger, these ten are the touchstone of religion.2
Accordingly, whatever is clearly contrary to this touchstone
must be rejected as an interpolation.
The Pandit has summarilÁŸy dismissed the ideals of Hinduism
about equality and justice, by regardiÁfng them as the private
property of the saints, forgetting that ideals and saints become
perfectly useless if the practice of the poor sinners can never approach
the ideals and their repositories, the saints. What is that justice “which
will not condone invidious distinction between man and man but will
make us face the stern reality and admit the necessity of differential
treatment between different castes and classes of people”? Who are
the different castes and what is the differential treatment between
them? For instance, among the Banias, whom I should know best,
there are about 50 castes. I know of no differential treatment between
them. Nor do I find any authority for the formation of these castes in
the Smritis. There are as many castes among the Brahmins as there are
leaves in the little tree under which I am sitting, but I do not find any
Smriti which enumerates these castes and the differential treatment. I
1
2

368

Manusmriti, II. 1
Manusmriti, VI. 92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have a shrewd suspicion that these gentlemen will fight to the last ditch
any attempt made to mete out differential treatment to them, and some
of them may even, like my non-Brahmin friends, consign to the
flames Sanskrit verses printed and stitched together and passed off as
divinely inspired Smritis.
The Pandit says:
The best way, therefore, of rising superior to the stigma of social
inferiority is not enfranchisement, but emancipation from the snare of the
dark forces of Nature.

Who is to be emancipated from the snare of the dark forces of
Nature? Evidently the Pandit means that it is not the Brahmin who has
to emancipate himself from the snare of superiority, but the poor
Harijan has to disengage himself from the snare of inferiority.
Unfortunately, that is precisely what the modern sanatanist Brahmin is
resisting, and that is precisely what Dr. Ambedkar demands almost at
the point of the bayonet. For, he says, ‘the dark forces of Nature shall
no longer hold me in their snare. I shall rise to the same height that
the Brahmin occupies, even though I may have to demolish both him
and myself in the attempt.,’ Yet that is the net result of the Pandit’s
prescription.
As against the Pandit’s, my humble prescription is that it is the
Brahmin whose privilege and duty it is to disentangle himself from the
snare of superiority and himself become a ‘Harijan’ man of God,.
Then only will he vindicate the glory of varnadharma and the true
message of Hinduism, for which he is supposed ‘‘to live, move and
have his being”. I invite the Pandit to appreciate this very simple
prescription.
Lastly, he has done himself and me less than justice by
misreading the scope of the referendum suggested by me. Surely,
worshippers in a temple have at any time the right to admit others to
worship with them on the same terms as they themselves do, so long as
they do not interfere with the ceremonial or the mode of worship,
which undoubtedly can only be regulated by experience.
Let us know this ancient practice by its own ancient name, and
perhaps it will cease to frighten the Pandit, and other orthodox
friends. Have not Mahajans always decided matters of admission
to temples? And Mahajans are assemblies of men and they decide
by putting their heads together and taking the sense of the meeting. I
presume that this would be described as a referendum in the English
language. I have suggested nothing more and nothing less than this.
Harijan, 25-2-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

369

512. THE SCHOOLMASTER ABROAD
I wrote to the Rt. Hon. Srinivasa Sastri for a message to the
Harijan. And I received a characteristic reply marked ‘private’. The
letter seemed to me to be too good to be suppressed. I, therefore,
wired for permission to publish it. The reply wire was as characteristic
as the letter.
Firstly inappropriate to Harijan, secondly, offensive to partisans.
Ill requital for your steadfast affection. However if perchance useful please
publish.

And here is the letter:
Private

S VAGATAM,M YLAPORE,

February 13, 1933
DEAR BROTHER,

Thanks for your affectionate letter, in which you ask for a message to
your new baby.
I am going to change towards you. It is necessary in your interest, no
matter what effort it costs me.
You live in a difficult world. Waking or dreaming, you are racked by
thoughts of sin and penance, confessions and truth-quests, satyagraha and
moral self-flagellation. Those that talk to you or correspond with you
continually pose doubts and serious problems, only deepening the grimness
and suffocation around you. Few bring lightness of talk, familiar expletives,
innocent jokes, revealing banter. You badly need a privileged jester in your
establishment. Have you read a story called Ardath by Ouida? The hero there
has a critic whose business is to expose his errors and bring to light the flaws
in his character. Being a professional fault-finder, he overdoes his part in the
end and defeats his first object. I shall vary my function from time to time and
disappear from the scene every now and then. But I will endeavour to awaken
parts of your mind long gone to sleep and to supply elements of nourishment
which it has long been without. Of course, you can stop the medicine if it
disagrees and you cannot stand it. That would be a sign to me that the disease
had gone too far.
You are an extraordinarily correct writer of English. The ordinary reader
will not detect any slips on your part. They are not only rare but of a subtle
nature. The eye of a schoolmaster, made acute by dwelling on trivialities of

370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

grammar, can alone see them. Here are some, all from the first number of the
Harijan and from the parts bearing your name.
Page 3. “If it is a bye-product of the caste system, it is only in the same
sense that an ugly growth is of a body”. (‘That’ is fast undergoing a change
in English, but this use is far in excess of present usage. Better say ‘in which
an ugly growth is a bye-product of a body’.)
Also read the whole passage again. Don’t you say in effect ‘if the caste
system is a bye-product of the caste system’?
Page 3. “The outcaste-ness, in the sense we understand it, has therefore
to be destroyed altogether.” (A slip similar to the above. Between ‘sense’ and
‘we’ insert ‘in which’.)
Page 4. “Caste Hindus have to open their temples to Harijans, precisely
on the same terms as the other Hindus.,,
(Say ‘the same terms as to the other Hindus’. Else, it would mean that
the other Hindus opened their temples on certain terms to Harijans.)1
Page 7. “Beyond this I may not go, for the reason I have already stated
and which the reader should respect.” (Insert ‘which’ after ‘reason’. The
conjunction ‘and’ must not be made to connect a suppressed ‘which’ and an
expressed ‘which’.)
Page 8. “Untouchability has a great deal to answer for the insanitation
of our streets and our latrines.” (Idiomatically, ‘for’ is part of the verb
‘answer’, and cannot govern ‘the insanitation’. We must insert ‘in’ after ‘for’,
though the sentence becomes inelegant. I would recast it: ‘Untouchability is
answerable for a great deal of the insanitation etc.’).
Page 8. “Therefore, a person who is to attend to scavenging, whether it
is a paid Bhangi or an unpaid mother, they are unclean until they have washed
themselves clean of their unclean work.”
(The looseness is, perhaps, the result of rapid dictation unchecked by
subsequent reading. ‘A person’ is left hanging in the air. The plurals ‘they’,
‘themselves’ and ‘their’ are justified by the common gender required. Still the
discord of number is apparent to the point of harshness and may be avoided.
Read ‘A person . . . is unclean until washed clean of the unclean work.’)
Let me add a criticism of substance. On page 7 you answer a question
under the heading “Seeking or Giving?”. The paragraph has gained brevity at
the expense of clearness. The difference between giving co-operation and
seeking it requires more elucidation. Likewise the analogy of love leading to
feeding in one case and starving in another. But you are obscure and even
baffling when you say that your policy of non-co-operation with Government
1

This correction has been made in the text at p. 264.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

371

allows of your seeking its co-operation when ever your purpose is, in your
opinion, ‘very sacred and altogether good’. Most sensible people follow this
rule in ordinary life, not seeking co-operation when they don’t care and
seeking it when they care. They don’t proclaim it as a policy or give it a grand
name.
Ever yours affectionately,

V. S. S RINIVASAN

I wanted to share this letter with the public, because such a letter
would help any publicist and his cause and that in an unexpected
manner, more so when written without any thought of publication.
I want also to use the publication of the letter for easing the
tension between sanatanists and reformers. Let them learn that closest
friendships can subsist between persons of contrary temperaments. As
the public know, Sastri and I have opposite views on many important
questions. our mutual regard and affection have never suffered on
that account. There is no reason whatsoever why the same rule cannot
be extended to parties and groups representing opposite schools of
opinion. The sanatanists are out to defend religion as they believe it. I
take their claim at its face value and deal with it as such. Why need
they impute to me political motives when I solemnly assert that for
me, too, the question of untouchability is a matter purely of religion?
Would that the affection subsisting between Sastri and me prove so
deep and extensive as to reach and affect the whole society !
But enough of this. I almost hear Sastri’s spirit whispering to
me: ‘You are misusing the medicine I prescribed to wean you from
your disease of grimness and the like., Therefore, let me hasten to tell
him and the public that I have in my little camp of privileged jester in
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. He succeeds in bending me almost double
every day with laughter over his unexpected sallies. Gloom hides her
fiendish face in his presence. No disappointment, however great, can
make him gloomy for long. And he will not let me be serious for two
consecutive minutes. He will not spare even my ‘saintliness’! It may
deceive simple people but never the Sardar or the sanatanists. Both
tear down the mask and compel me to see myself as they delight to
see me. To be just to the sanatanists, let me admit that Vallabhbhai
does not see me quite as sanatanists do. But that is beside the point.
The thing that Sastri wants in our little family is there cent per cent.
Next time he enters the Assembly or some such place, he must vote
special thanks to the Government for putting Vallabhbhai with me or
372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

me with him.
But this consoling information does not it any way release Sastri
from his self-imposed obligation. For the Sardar will not do what
Sastri can be trusted to do mostly. Unlike him, the Sardar has the
wretched habit in the end of saying ‘ditto’ to all I say. And that is
bad for anybody.
Let the student note in passing Sastri’s love for the language he
has mastered as few men have done. He is a purist in everything. We
badly need purists in our counry. I want only purists as fellowworkers in this glorious compaign of abolition of untouchability.
As to the purity of the language of Harijan, whatever faults are
found notwithstanding Sastri’s warning will be shared with me by
Shastri, the Editor, and by Mahadev Desai, who shares with the
schoolmaster the weakness for writing correctly in the language which
for the moment he is using.
I must leave the reader to find out for himself or herself the
many other beauties of Sastri’s letter. If he will do so, he must read
the letter three or four times and look up all the references in the first
issue of Harijan.
Harijan, 25-2-1933

513. A CAMPAIGN OF ABUSE
Correspondents have been sending me cuttings from sanatanist
newspapers containing distortions of conversations with me and
attributing to me things I have never said.
There is a sheet in Tamil that the Editor has been kindly
translating to me. It contains nothing but libels against reformers.
There is in it what purports to be a report of my conversation with a
Madura Pandit 1 who came to see me some time ago. One
correspondent wonders if, as the report has tried to make out, I could
have said that there were no chaste women in India. The whole report
is a caricature, the most material portions having been omitted. But I
must not fill the columns of Harijan with a transcript of the caricature
and the true version of the conversation of which Mahadev Desai took
notes at the time. But I reproduce the portion relating to women. Here
1

Presumably Subramanya Sastrigal ; vide letters to K. S. Subramania Aiyar,.
25-2-1933, and K. K. Venkataram Aiyar, 25-2-1933
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

373

is first a free translation of the Tamil report:
GANDHI : Should a pure woman consort with her husband when he is
given up to sinful ways?
THE PANDIT : Yes. The sinful husband will be metamorphosed into a virtuous
man by the chastity of the wife.
GANDHI :

Are there chaste women in these days?

PANDIT : How can we say there are none? There may be virtuous women for all
we know. But why wander from our topic of conversation? Let us go on with our
discussion.

Be it noted that the Madura Pandit or his friend took no notes.
Here is the relevant portion of Mahadev Desai’s notes:
PANDIT : The temples are intended for women and Shudras. According to
Shastras, Shudras only can enter the temples today, because they alone are observing
their swadharma 1 ‘ viz., service, and chaste women have the same right. The others
are burdened with karmas and duties, which now they have ceased to perform and,
therefore, not entitled to enter a temple.

So whilst a Brahmin may be a karma Chandala2‘ his
chaste wife may be entitled to enter a temple.
GANDHI:
PANDIT :

The wife because of her chastity purifies her husband.

GANDHI:

Then, the moment a man has a wife who is pure, he
becomes pure, no matter what sort of life he lives.
PANDIT :

Yes; his wife saves him.

GANDHI : A man may go to the dogs, and yet if his wife is chaste,
he becomes pure?
PANDIT : Yes, his wife saves him; though what he does is wrong, his sins will
be neutralized.
GANDHI: So, if a man wants to remain immune from the

consequences of his acts, all that he has to do is to be armed with a
chaste wife.
PANDIT :

Quite so.

GANDHI:

Well, then, since we are not going to impute bad
character to a single woman in India, for we must assume every one of
them to be pure, unless, of course, she admits that she is impure or she
has been found to be impure—every married man is pure and there
should be no untouchability.
PANDIT :
1
2

374

She should be a true pativrata, a genuinely chaste woman, described

Duty of oneself
Untouchable for one’s actions
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in our religious books like Ramayana.
GANDHI:

How are you to determine that a particular woman
satisfies that definition?
PANDIT :

Agni-pariksha. She must prove her chastity by undergoing the ordeal

through fire, as Sita did.
GANDHI:

And so, those who cannot come scatheless out of it must
be declared to be impure?
PANDIT :

Indeed.

GANDHI: I have done.
Enough, however, about the Tamil sheet. A Gujarati sheet
published by one claiming to be a sanatanist Shastri and now
distributed broadcast in Hindi by sanatanist papers in North India
professes to publish excerpts from my writings, sixty in all, which have
the effect of proving me to be the very embodiment of everything
anti-Hindu. Excerpts are torn from their context and made to bear a
meaning the opposite of what they have when read in their context.
Here is a sample of statements attributed to me:
My parents and Sita were Bhangis.
The Shastras are the productions of hypocrites, and the sages are so
many Satans.
I regard a Bhangi to be superior to a Brahmin.
I am an iconoclast.

Now my correspondents, some of them frankly puzzled, invite
me to deal with these charges. I must respectfully but resolutely
decline the invitation. If there are people who will believe of me the
things that are said in the writings sent to me, no refutation will save
me. The public must take me as I am. What is more, the cause is
everything, I am nothing.. If the campaign against untouchability is
just and necessary for the very existence of Hinduism, it will survive
the reputation of a thousand Gandhi.
What is, however; sad, almost tragic, about these libellous
statements is that they are made by responsible sanatanists reported to
be learned men and presumed to be holy men fit to be religious
teachers of unsophisticated simple folk. Their curious interpretations
of the Shastras, their refusal to read the signs of the times, their
defence of obviously superstitions and even inhuman beliefs and
customs, one can understand as being honestly held. What may appear
as superstitious and inhuman to the reformer may not appear so to
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

375

them. But the resort by responsible pandits to untruths, distortions and
suppression of truth is bound to do incalculable harm to Hindus and
Hinduism. Let sanatanists put up as stubborn a fight as they like in
defence of what they regard as a good cause. But I implore them to
weed it of untruth.
Harijan, 25-2-1933

514. ‘WE DO NOT HATE’
One who is a Vedanta Shastri and Secretary of a branch
Brahmin Sabha writes:
Sanatanists do not hate untouchables but hate their customs and daily
actions. They are always ready to give all the Hindus, whether touchables or
untouchables, every help they can. They give the untouchables priests,
preceptors, Shastras with Ramnam, etc. But there are some so-called educated
persons who always hate those untouchables. They are always keeping aloof
from them and they want to pollute the sanatanists with the impurity brought
by them from non-Hindus.

The foregoing I have taken from a fairly long letter and I have
taken it as a sample from many such letters. ‘Hate, is perhaps the
wrong word. I should use the word ‘despise’. And if to relegate a
body of people to distant locations, to regard their touch, approach or
sight as pollution, to throw at them the leavings of one’s food, to deny
to them the use of public roads and institutions, even the use of public
temples, is not to despise them, I do not know what the word ‘despise,
means.
The writer says that the untouchables have priests and
preceptors. My own experience and the experience of numerous
reformers is to the contrary. Despairing of real priests, they have
raised from among themselves what must be called ‘an apology for
priests’. The writer betrays the secret when he says that untouchables
have the “Shastras with Ramnam”, implying that they can have no
access to any other Shastras. What are their daily customs and daily
actions which evoke hatred? Their daily action was described in
graphic terms by the Poet in his message1 for our first issue. Save for
carrion-eating, their customs are the same as those of innumerable
caste Hindus. And carrion-eating is by no means common to all the
1

376

Vide “The Cleanser”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

untouchables so called. If a census were taken, we would be astonished
to find that there are so few. I hope to present the readers of Harijan
with reliable statistics in this matter. And I have not a shadow of a
doubt that caste Hindus are responsible for this habit of carrion-eating
and that, immediately they are welcomed as brothers and sisters and
are offered the ordinary amenities of life on the same terms as caste
Hindus, that habit will automatically drop out.
Lastly, the common experience is that whatever has been done
for the Harijans by caste Hindus has been done by those who have
received education or who are otherwise ranked as reformers. It will
give me pleasure to know that sanatanists as such have done much or
anything for Harijans. I would gladly publish the list of their charities
or other acts of service rendered to Harijans.
Harijan, 25-2-1933

515. “HARIJAN” IN THE VERNACULARS
Some readers are anxious to know when, if at all, Harijan will be
published in Hindi and other languages of the country.
The idea was to publish the Hindi edition first and the English
and the other editions after. But, as there was delay in publishing the
Hindi edition, the Chairman of the Central Board of the Servants of
Untouchables Society authorized the publication of the English
edition without waiting for the former.
I am happy to be able to inform the reader that the Hindi
edition will have been out before this is in his hands. Arrangements
are proceeding as fast as possible for the publication of provincial
editions in the provincial languages, e.g., in Bengali, Marathi, Tamil,
Gujarati, etc. My prescription has been and is that they should all be
self-supporting. Moneys that are being collected for and by the
Central and the Provincial Boards must be predominantly spent
among the Harijans, i.e., for their educational and economic uplift.
The weekly journals and leaflets are part of the necessary propaganda
chiefly among caste Hindus. Therefore, they should pay for it. Except
up to a point, I do not believe in presenting the public with free
literature on any subject. It may be ever so cheap, but never free. I
believe in the old Sanskrit proverb, ‘Knowledge is for those who
would know’. But these are my personal views. I can only tender my
advice to the organizations and organizers. There is no copyright in
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

377

Harijan. Enterprising vernacular newspapers will publish their own
editions of Harijan. Some have already written to me of their
intention to do so. I can prevent no one, I can only plead with
everyone to follow the advice which I have tendered and which is
based on considerable experience.
Harijan, 25-2-1933

516. TELEGRAM TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
February 25,1933
C. R AJAGOPALACHARI
C ARE GADODIA, D ELHI
SEND

RAOBAHADUR

YOUR

OPINION.

RAJAH’S

BILL1

AMENDING

SECTION 144 WITH

BAPU
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I. G. P. File No. 20-X,
1933

517. TELEGRAM TO SUPERINTENDENT SEONI JAIL
Reply Prepaid
February 25,1933
S UPERINTENDENT
DISTRICT JAIL , S EONI (C. P.)
AM
JAIL.

INTERESTED
PLEASE

IN

WIRE

SETH

POONAMCHAND

CONDITION

HIS

RANKA

PRISONER

YOURS

HEALTH.

GANDHI
Government of Bombay, Home Department, I. G. P. File No. 20-X,1933

1

For Gandhiji’s comments on the Bill, vide “Rao Bahadur M. C. Rajah’s Bill”,
4-3-1933

378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

518. LETTER TO M. G. BHANDARI
February 25,19331
DEAR MAJOR BHANDARI’

As you know I have been endeavouring during my present
incarceration to study the heavens. You have kindly allowed
astronomical literature to come in to me. I need a fair-sized
astronomical telescope. Lady Vithaldas has one and has kindly
consented to give me a loan of it. Drs. Ramnathan and Desai of the
Government observatory (Poona) who put the telescope right say that
I won’t be able to use it unless they gave personal directions. They
need to be with me for that purpose for about half an hour after the
stars are observable. If there is any objection to this lesson being given
to me in the yard in which I am kept during the night, it may be given
in the yard reserved for untouchability interviews.
I shall thank you if you will please ascertain the wishes of the
Government in the matter.2
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 5130; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home
Department, Special Branch, File No. 800 (40) (4),p. 151

519. LETTER TO DR. MOHAMMAD ALAM
February 25,1933
DEAR DR. ALAM’

I was delighted to have your letter and to observe that you were
making steady progress.
If she continues to be as careless as she has been in her Urdu
writing in her latest letter, please tell Begum Alam that I shall have to
tone down my compliments. At one time I thought that she was
1

According to the Bombay Secret Abstracts, “4-3-1933”
The last sentence is from the Bombay Secret Abstracts. In reply Gandhiji was
informed that the Government could not relax the rule “by which no visitors are
allowed inside the jail after lock up, as this would disturb the jail routine and prevent
the staff going off duty”,
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

379

competing with Zora1 in beautiful writing, but in her present letter I
fancy that I can easily beat her after half a dozen letters from Zora.
This won’t do. I do not want to break my idols. I had begun to think
that Muslim women beat their Hindu sisters hollow in perfect writing,
for every Muslim sister who has written to me has a beautiful hand.
Begum Alam must keep up that reputation. I hope to enclose with this
a letter for Begum Alam.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

Encls.
From a photostat: G.N. 28

520. LETTER TO SAMUEL FRANCIS
February 25,1933
DEAR SAMUEL’

I had your letter of 12th January. I am writing2 to Hon’ble Mr.
Natesan to look after you and your children on your reaching
Madras. You will therefore please write to him giving him the exact
date of your arrival and the name of the boat. You will not expect Mr.
Natesan to [do] more than finding lodgings for a short time. If your
children can live simply and in the Indian style, he won’t find any
difficulty. Nor will he find any difficulty in supporting a high style of
living if you have ample money at your disposal.
Yours sincerely,

S AMUEL F RANCIS, E SQ.
8 M ARK LANE
EAST LONDON C. P. (S. A FRICA)
From a microfilm: S.N. 20387

1
2

380

Zohra Ansari
Vide the following item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

521. LETTER TO G. A. NATESAN
February 25,1933
MY DEAR NATESAN’

I enclose herewith a letter from Samuel Francis of East London,
and a copy of my reply to him. This will remind you of the old days
when I had thrown on your broad shoulders the burden of looking
after quite a number of Indian deportees from South Africa. 1 I hope
that I have not done anything wrong in expecting you to find quarters
for Samuel Francis and his children on their landing in Madras if they
give you previous intimation.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20368

522. LETTER TO SESHGIRI BALKRISHNA RAO SONDE
February 25,1933
DEAR FRIEND’

I have your letter of the 11th instant. There was a similar letter
from another friend, whose name I forget at the moment, to whom I
gave my views.
I am quite convinced that sacrifice of dumb animals to appease
a deity cannot have any religious or other merit about it. It is a sinful
act. These sacrifices are a relic of barbarism and it would be a great
sin if, in the face of the anti-untouchability movement with
temple-entry as a part of it, animal sacrifices are not stopped
altogether.
You can make whatever use you like of this letter.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S ESHGIRI BALKRISHNA R AO S ONDE
LANDOWNER AND MERCHANT
S IRSI (N. KANARA )
From a microfilm: S.N. 20369

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

381

523. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
February 25,1933
MY DEAR C. R.’

Your letter of the 21st. I have heard Vallabhbhai reading your
reply to C.P.R.
Tastes differ. You consider the second number of Harijan
excellent except for the denunciation. I consider it excellent certainly
for that, if for nothing else. But I agree with your opinion that the
thick types for some of the headings look ugly, but things will
gradually improve.
I am following your great effort for getting the Bills through. I
am not going to shed tears if you do not succeed.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. C. R AJAGOPALACHARIAR
C/O SETH L. N. GADODIA
NEAR C LOCK TOWER , D ELHI
From a photostat: S.N. 20370

524. LETTER TO K. S. SUBRAMANIA AIYAR.
February 25,1933
DEAR FRIEND’

I have your letter. There is an article in the current issue of the
Harijan with reference to the conversation1 mentioned by you. There
is no cause for dejection. In all great movements, hypocrisy and fraud
will spring up. We must battle against them in the purest manner
possible having full faith that truth must conquer in the end.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K. S. S UBRAMANIA AIYAR
S REERAGAVAPURAM S T.
KULLADAIKURICHI
(TINNEVELLY DISTT.)
From a microfilm: S.N. 20371
1

Which Gandhiji had with Subramanya Sastrigal on January 9, 1933; vide “A
Campaign of Abuse”,25-2-1933

382

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

525. LETTER TO M. V. PARAMESWARAN CHETTIAR
February 25,1933
DEAR FRIEND’

I have your letter. You are quite right in thinking that the object
of the anti-untouchability movement is to level down the distinctions
of high and low. There would be to the end of time different
professions and occupations, different qualities also, but none of these
differences necessitate the distinction of high and low.
The motive behind the temple-entry is from this standpoint
easily understood. It is to demonstrate to the Hindu mind and to the
world that in the house of God there is no one high and no one low.
This is a reform wanted by those caste Hindus who have got the
conviction that hitherto the treatment meted out to the so-called
untouchables has been sinful and contrary to the spirit of
Hinduism.Those who think that temple-entry has anything to do with
Congress politics are wholly mistaken.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. M. V. P ARAMESWARAN C HETTIAR
VALLAT ANGADY
P OST ANGADIPURAM (S. MALABAR)
From a microfilm: S.N. 20373

526. LETTER TO M. C. RAJAH
February 25,1933
DEAR RAO BAHADUR’

I thank you for your letter of 22nd instant enclosing copy of
your Bill to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure. I shall surely
study it and publish the text in the next issue of Harijan and comment
upon it. If there is anything special about the Bill which I cannot
incorporate in my note in the Harijan I shall certainly write to you
about it separately. I hope you are getting your copy of the Harijan.
You will please let me have any comment you may have on it.
I am glad you are doing your best to expedite the passage of the
two Untouchability Bills.
Why should you thank me for any humble effort that I can
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

383

make for the common cause? Am I not myself a member of the
community? I may not be yet a fit member, but I shall leave no stone
unturned to become fit.
Yours sincerely,

R AO BAHADUR M. C. R AJAH , M.L.A.
R OYAL HOTEL , D ELHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20374

527. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
February 25,1933
DEAR MR. JAYAKAR’

I see you have the old enemy 1 again. I hope however that with
the aid of good medical advisers you have successfully routed him. I
wonder if you were able to pass on my letter 2 about the opening 3
ceremony to Vinayakrao 4 . He has certainly done very good social
work in Ratnagiri, and it must have been a very serious
disappointment to him, as also to Sjt. Kir that you were disabled from
performing the opening ceremony.
I hope you got my second letter 5 together with the letter about
the Ratnagiri temple. With the letter I sent you a copy of the
Government’s reply to my letter and of my rejoinder.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20375

528. LETTER TO H. KHADER KHAN
February 25,1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter and copies of the Light.
It is impossible for me to find the time for writing out a reply to
all the things said in the paper, but there is no difficulty for a diligent
1

The addressee was suffering from fever.
Vide “Letter to M. R. Jayakar”, 19-2-1933
3
Of two temples in Ratnagiri to Harijans
4
V. D. Savarkar (1883-1966), an old revolutionary who later became leader of
the Hindu Mahasabha
5
Vide “Letter to M. R. Jayakar”, 19-2-1933
2

384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

student to find an answer to every one of the things in my writings.
I do not consider myself qualified for writing out a learned
comparison between the Gita, the Bible and the Koran. I have studied
these sufficiently for my own satisfaction. Beyond that I have
considered it unnecessary for me to go.
Yours sincerely,

H. K HADER KHAN (OF S ALEM )
ARKALGAD (P. O.)
HASSAN DIST. (M YSORE S TATE )
From a microfilm: S.N. 20376

529. LETTER TO S. NEELAKANTA AIYAR
February 25,1933
DEAR FRIEND’

I thank you for your two letters, one of which is unsigned, of the
14th instant.
I quite agree with you that so far as the civil rights are
concerned, we can make no distinction between Christian untouchables and Hindu untouchables, except that where Christians have
special facilities for education you need not worry about them.
About the other letter, I am unable to say anything definite in
the absence of fuller information, but this I can say that if the
rites are intended as a condition precedent to their admission to
varnashramadharma, I am wholly opposed to the performance of the
rites; if on the other hand, they are meant for their betterment and as
part of a spiritual instruction, they might be quite harmless and even
beneficial, if the selection is properly made and the rites are
performed by men, qualified both by their character and learning.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. N EELAKANTA AIYAR
S ECRETARY
S ERVANTS OF THE UNTOUCHABLES S OCIETY
TRAVANCORE BOARD
TRICHUR
From a microfilm: S.N. 20377

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

385

530. LETTER TO HARIBHAU PHATAK
February 25,1933
MY DEAR HARIBHAU’

I had a very long conversation with Upasak. His wife is a very
unsteady woman, she may even desert him any day and she is
wholly incapable of observing self-restraint. Such a couple cannot
possibly go to the Ashram where brahmacharya is indispensable. I
do not think also that Upasak will be able to conform to all the
conditions of the Board, but he says that if the grant up to April is
now paid, i.e., Rs. 22, he will try to do what he can to keep the school
going and he will take his chance if he cannot. I think that this is a
proposal worth considering. If, therefore, it is possible, I recommend
Rs. 22 being paid to him with the absolute warning that nothing more
will be paid to him thereafter.
Yours sincerely’
From a microfilm: S.N. 20378

531. LETTER TO D. M. DAVIDSON
February 25,1933
DEAR FRIEND’

I thank you for your letter 1 of the 23rd instant giving me your
experiences of your visit to Rahuri.
Yours sincerely’

MR. D. M. D AVIDSON
B. I. T. BLOCK NO . 5/25
S T. M ARY R OAD , M AZAGAON
From a microfilm: S.N. 20381 a

1

It gave an account of the work done by the addressee among untouchables
during the Christmas holidays.

386

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

532. LETTER TO K. K. VENKATARAM AIYAR
February 25,1933
DEAR FRIEND’

I thank you for your letter. You will find a brief reference, in
the current issue of Harijan, to the matter referred to in your letter.1
Yours sincerely’

S JT. K. K. VENKATARAM AIYAR
C/ O UDIPI HINDU R ESTAURANT
EAST VELI VEEDI
MADURA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20383

533. LETTER TO HAQQI
February 25,1933
DEAR PROFESSOR’

As I have already told you, I wrote 2 to Baboo Bhagwandas of
Benares. I hope he has written to you, but if he has not, you shouldput
yourself in touch with him. His address is as follows: “Seva Ashram,
Sigra, Benares Cantt”.
I hope to find another friend very shortly. As soon as I have met
him, I shall see that he writes to you.
Yours sincerely’
From a microfilm: S.N. 20384

534. LETTER TO GOKUL MOHAN ROY CHAURAMONY
February 25,1933
DEAR FRIEND’

I have your letter. The simplest manner in which I can put
before you my views about the education of children is that they
should be put in the company of people having a character beyond
reproach. If we were living in an ideal age, the parents should be such
1

The addressee, in his letter dated February 17, 1933, (S.N. 20273) had referred
to the report of an interview between Gandhiji and Subramanya Sastrigal on January
9, 1933; vide “A Campaign of Abuse”,25-2-1933
2
Vide “Letter to Bhagwandas”, 7-2-1933.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

387

people. Unfortunately parents are not always in a position to take up
this responsibility, and we have therefore to find suitable people from
society, and although it is not easy to find such people, it is a search
worth making.
Yours sincerely’

S JT. G OKUL MOHAN R OY C HURAMONY
C/ O S JT. S RISHCHANDRA GHOSH
R AMCHANDI S AHE
P URI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20388

535. LETTER TO D. RAGHAVACHANDRAYYA
February 25,1933
DEAR FRIEND’

I have your letter. Many people dedicate books to others
without waiting for their permission. You can also do likewise. I can
do nothing to you. For me to give you the permission would mean
that I have read your book and have generally approved of it. You
will admit that this I cannot honestly do.
Yours sincerely’

S JT. D. R AGHAVACHANDRAYYA
S ATH S ASTRI
S ATE R AHMANA ASRAMAM, B EZWADA
From a copy: S.N. 21545 a

536. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
February 25,1933
CHI. RAMDAS’

Khushaldas has passed away. I received both the accompanying
letters yesterday evening. I have written to Shantilal and informed
him. Khushaldas has indeed been released from the suffering of this
life. The truth is that everybody who goes on a journey along that
royal road is released from this life. For this life is given to us for
repaying our debts, and nobody can leave before he has paid off his.
If this idea is correct, death means that the person has paid off his debt
388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

partially at least.
He who knows with perfect conviction that this life is given to us
for repaying our debts can repay his debts to all, and the ancients
described that as attaining moksha. Moksha means complete freedom
from debt and, consequently, end of the cycle of births for the person.
I was pained to see your condition yesterday, your broken
health and your mental suffering. I had no remedy for either, and
was pained because you attributed to your father more power than
he possessed. I felt as Harishchandra had done. He had become ready
to sell his only son for the sake of dharma. I have been doing very
much the same thing. Though I know the remedy for your poor
health, I cannot adopt it because of my concern for dharma, nor can
end your mental suffering for the same reason
If you follow the rule that you cannot avail yourself of facilities
which other prisoners who keep bad health would not get, you can do
nothing to improve your health. I can understand that you would not
like to ask for special facilities for yourself but it does not seem right
to me that you should not avail yourself of facilities which may be
offered to you when you explain to the authorities the condition of
your health. When you are outside, you enjoy more facilities than the
countless millions and never think about the matter. I ask for and
enjoy, both in jail and outside, facilities which they can never hope to
get, and am fully aware that I do so. But I do not feel that I violate
dharma thereby. If an elephant tries to crawl like an ant, he will not
succeed in becoming an ant thereby and will cease to be an elephant,
which means that he will have lost his true nature. An elephant like
me, however, would humbly accept his big size and consume food
weighing more than thousands of ants and would also draw, without
the least effort, loads which those ants could never draw. An elephant
is entitled to consume food which the size of his body requires. Only,
he must not waste that food by not giving proportionate service in
return. That is, he should carry loads proportionate to his strength. If
he does that, he will have consumed as much food and given as much
service as an ant. This is communism. If, therefore, you can secure the
food which your body requires by legitimate means and without
humiliating yourself for the purpose, you should do so and improve
your health, and then serve other people to the best of your ability.
But even in trying to serve other people and securing facilities
for yourself by legitimate means, you should know and understand
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

389

your duty as a prisoner. A prisoner has no right except that of
preserving his self-respect, for he ceases to be the master of his body
as soon as he becomes a prisoner and the jail superintendent becomes
its master. Even if the latter does not give the prisoner enough to eat
or to drink or sufficient clothes to wear, the prisoner should remain
contented and cheerful. Anybody who cannot do so is not a true
prisoner. We must admit that in this age the British policy towards
prisoners is comparatively more liberal than that of any other
government. It is improving day by day. There is certainly room for
much more improvement still, but that is another matter. A prisoner
may fight to bring about such improvement. If, however, he
remembers the general principle stated above, he will not be
disappointed if he fails in his attempt—for he has no absolute right to
enjoy any facility. If you understand this reasoning fully, I shall be
relieved and you will be able to overcome your mental unrest.
I will certainly try to do what I can in regard to everything
which you mentioned—but in my own way, and that is bound to take
time. The delay will not make me impatient, and I wish that you also
should not be. What can you or I do? Certainly we are not masters of
the result.
We can only try the best that we can. You have been doing what
you can, and I also will do what I can. Even if we don’t succeed, you
should dance with joy, and so will I.
Be not moved by joy or sorrow; with the body were they created;
None can escape them for by the Lord of Raghu were they decreed.

Do you follow all this? Read the letter three or four times, and if
you do not follow any point ask me to explain it again.
Keep me informed about the condition of your health.
Blessings from

B APU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 20366

390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

537. LETTER TO VIYOGI HARI
February 25,1933
BHAI VIYOGI HARI’

I have your telegram. I do not know whether the Hindi Harijan1
has or has not come out. What should I write for you?
You may select anything you like from the published issues of
Harijan. Your skill will be tested in making a proper selection of
articles and translating the relevant portions. After seeing the Hindi
version I shall decide if anything more needs to be written. Yes,
one thing you can do. If you address me some questions, I may
by way of answer write on some important topic. I hope the journal
will become self-supporting from the very start.
BAPU

[From Hindi]
Badonke Preranadayak Kuchh Patra, frontispiece

538. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
February 25,1933
CHI. HEMPRABHA’

Your letter. Who do you mean by ‘Arun’s2 father’ 3? Where was
he? Yes, do send me the Hindi translation when it is printed. Why not
get the Hindi version printed in the Vishal Bharat Press? Benarsidasji
would love to get it printed. Do you know him? If not, show this letter
to him. Have you noticed any improvement from sun-baths? Arun
must be all right by now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1697

1

Harijan Sevak, edited by the addressee. The first issue came out on February
23, 1933, but Gandhiji got a copy only on February 26. Vide “Letter to Viyogi Hari”,
26-2-1933
2
Addressee’s son
3
Actually Arun’s grandfather; vide “Letter to Satis Chandra Das Gupta,”
5-3-1933.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

391

539. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
February 26,1933
MY DEAR BHRRR,1

So you have entered your eightieth year and you do not want to
believe it!! Shall we say it is your eighteenth year? Being nearly 15
years younger than you, I should be a four-year-old baby expecting
to grow new teeth. How nice! Then the sanatanist friends can swear at
me to their heart’s content for many, many years to come.
But no such good luck for them. For with your silvery beard,
even little children won’t take you to be only 18. They would vote us
down as old humbugs wishing to give them no chance.
If you get your Rs. 2’000 from the Maharajah, it would be a
good start.2
You should waylay all the lecturers that come there. They
should give you something for the great cause.
Poor Rehana! I had a note from her. You will not hurry her out
of Poona if she is comfortable at Nanavati’s.
Do you know what time it is now? Not yet 4 a.m. Good
morning.
Love from us all.
Yours,

BHRRR
From a photostat: S.N. 9583

540. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 26, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

Champa has written to me about repairs in her bungalow and the
need for getting it painted. She also wishes to go to some hill station
during the summer. If painting and repairs are necessary, get them
done. About her desire to go to a hill station, I have put some
questions to her in my letter. Read it. Does she remain on good terms
1
2

392

This was the form of greeting between Gandhiji and the addressee.
The addressee was collecting funds in Kathiawar for Harijan work.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with you? Does she behave with proper courtesy? How is Ratilal? Does
he wish to go to a hill station?
Read my letter to Parashuram. He wishes to spend some time
with Rajaji. I don’t know whether the latter will give his consent. Can
you make him free for two months? Who will teach Hindi during his
absence?
Tell Kusum that as I wrote to her separately some time ago, I
don’t write to her today. I shall get another opportunity to write
separately to her.
BAPU

[PS.]
In all there are 14 letters. They are all stitched together.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

541. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
February 26, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. You will find with this a letter for Bhagwanji
and one for Panditji. I believe that up to a certain quantity (12
ounces) milk is supplied to a prisoner at the cost of the jail.
Personally I am glad that you have told Hariyomal that he could
come back. Such persons learn only through experience. Your
suggestion regarding Parvati is excellent. If it is acted upon, both will
be free.
We must bear the expenses of Prabhudas’s journeys. He is
rather timid. He will probably take time to find a partner, and it may
even be a difficult task. He will not get over his restlessness till he
marries. The forcible repression of his strong desire to marry was the
cause of his restlessness.
Your remaining firm about the problem of Lakshmi is very
necessary. I cannot understand Dudabhai’s opposition. I have had no
letter from Purushottam. I did ask him to write to me. I don’t think
fasting will do him any harm. If he knows how to break the fast
gradually, he is bound to benefit from it. If the bone-setter knows his
job well, there will be no harm. It will probably be safer to get Kanu
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

393

examined by Haribhai 1. If Mathuradas remains firm in his resolve,
Motibehn will give up her opposition. It has been my unfailing
experience that if one of the two parties is firm and the other party
knows that he or she cannot be shaken from his or her resolve, the
latter resigns herself or himself to the situation. As we forget in time
our grief even over the death of one who was dearest to us, so also this
folly leaves us by and by. The truth is there is some weakness in both
parties and that is why they need each other’s support. Really
speaking, such support is of no avail. If it helps any couple to keep
their resolve, the fact must be counted as an accident. How can a
blind person lead another blind person? How can one who is
drowning save another in the same plight as himself? How can a
person who is not free from passion help his or her partner to be so?
The reasoning is quite simple.
You need not take any trouble to enlist subscribers for Harijan.
We will send five copies to the Ashram addressed to no particular
subscribers. You may use them in any way that you can. See if you
can maintain a file with four out of the five copies, or with the copies
which remain unsold. Some day they will be useful.
I got Satyarthaprakash, the slivers and the leather for the soles.
Kellogg’s book must have been sent to Dhulia jail for Madhavji. Or it
was with somebody in Vijapur. I am sure about this.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I; also Bapuna Patro–9: Shri
Narandas Gandhine, Pt. II, pp. 35-6

542. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
February 26,1933
CHI. PREMA,

Do not expect a long letter today. I have been writing so much
with the right hand that it has got tired now. Nor have I much time.
I got the slivers sent by you. They were received yesterday
evening. I spun with them today. Assuming that their weight as stated
by you is correct, I see that I can spin yarn of 60 counts with slivers
made from the devkapas variety of cotton. I will give half the quantity
1

394

Dr. Harilal Desai
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to Mahadev to spin. He has better skill in handling slivers than I have.
Very probably he will be able to spin yarn of 100 counts at the very
first attempt.
You give no news about your health. Is your throat all right?
How is the backache?
Let me know how you found Mr. Duncan.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10325

543. LETTER TO BHAU PANSE
February 26,1933
CHI. BHAU

If Rajkot agrees with you, you should stay there for a longer
time. While there, you may help Jamnadas in any way you can. If you
are completely cured there, the improvement will remain even after
you have left Rajkot. Let me know your daily programme of work
and also your diet.
Those who have money ought to help others. Those who cannot
meet their needs in any other way, like totally disabled people and
sannyasis (genuine),etc., deserve to be helped.
The mendicant may be deserving if he gives all his time to social
service and accepts no other return.
The woman certainly deserves help.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6750

544. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
February 26,1933
I got your letter only today. I would certainly advise you to go
to Banaras. It is our duty to plead with Malaviyaji. Whether we shall
succeed or fail does not depend on us. The interpretation which you
put upon his wire 1 is correct. From the wire it seems that he has an
open mind on the subject.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 121
1

Presumably Madan Mohan Malaviya’s telegram dated February 15; vide
“Telegram from Madan Mohan Malaviya”, 15-2-1933
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

395

545. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
February 26,1933
CHI. VIDYA,

I got your letter. You should have faith in Premabehn’s advice
and follow it. That will be for your good. This applies to the other
teachers too.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9633. Courtesy: Ravindra R. Patel

546. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
February 26,1933
BOYS AND GIRLS,

Harijan children won’t listen to talk on abstinence from liquor.
But coming in contact with you, they will gradually be influenced. It
is a nice idea to visit them on Sundays. Try if possible to make this
arrangement. It would be enough if the Friday programme is shifted
to Sunday. Discuss it with Narandas. If your conduct is spotless, it will
definitely influence them. It is inevitable that you should mix with
older people. They also will be won over by love and service.
Sometimes you may invite the Harijan children to the Ashram. Before
inviting them take permission from Narandas.
I regard it as good news that the weights of most of you have
gone up and also the counts of the yarn.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

547. LETTER TO KALICHARAN
February 26,1933
BHAI KALICHARANJI,

I have your letter. I know all that is written about me. I do not
think there is any remedy for it except remaining unperturbed. I hope
that nobody believes it at all. And how can my denial have any effect
on those who believe it? Anyway I have written something in this
connection in the current issue of Harijan.1
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 8039

1

396

Vide “A Campaign of Abuse”, 25-2-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

548. RESIST UNTRUTH WITH TRUTH
February 26,1933
It is unfortunate that untruth is being preached these days in the
name of the sanatana dharma. I am receiving many new sanatanist
newspapers which abound in untruth and indecency. I have been
severely attacked in them. Many correspondents ask me to write
something in reply to them. What can I write? Some say I do not
believe in religion. In answer to that, except for me to say that religion
is my life-breath what other reply can I give? A learned religious
propagandist has written in the same vein. I can only give this reply to
it that every word of it is almost entirely untrue. His words are not
proved untrue because I say so, just as, his mere saying so does not
establish what he says as truth.
Still untruth can be resisted by truth alone. It is necessary to
understand this great saying. The root of all actions is in thought.
False thoughts result in false utterances; and after that, or along with it
or without the utterances, action follows. In the same way right action
has its roots in right thoughts. If the thought is not true then that
action or utterance which seems true is only false, is erroneous. That is
to say, if I am entirely truthful even in my thoughts falsehood will be
warded off automatically. People will not believe these canards. This
firm faith keeps me unperturbed, and my friends also should be
unperturbed. This false propaganda cannot last long. It is that for a
short while the atmosphere will be contaminated by it. In every
agitation such things always happen.
Let the reformer remember one thing. Let him never even
contemplate untruth. We have a great religious mission before us. The
abolition of untouchability is the great religious task before me, an
onerous duty. To eradicate untouchability is the supreme duty of
every Hindu. We can never accomplish this religious task with untruth.
Ultimately anger or violence is also untruth. For this reason, it is
necessary for those who serve Harijans never to be angry with their
opponents; never to utter lies; but to overcome anger with affection,
rudeness with courtesy, falsehood with truth, and violence with
non-violence. And since we cannot control the outcome but can
certainly practise truth and other virtues, God has said, “You have
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

397

only the right to action; and not to the fruit thereof.”1 If all those who
serve Harijans will stick to truth, then the result will only be good.
There is no doubt whatever in this.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1068; also Harijan Sevak, 10-3-1933

549. KEEPING THE WORD
February 26, 1933
A gentleman writes:
You are very hasty. Although a non-co-operator, you even seek help
from the Assembly. Why such weakness? Negotiate with the sanatanists and
have the temples thrown open.

I replied to this gentleman on these lines:
I am not hasty. I am striving to fulfil my pledge. In Bombay, at the
end of September, this large conference of Hindus leaders on behalf
of the Hindus resolved to strive to get the temples thrown open to
Harijans in as peaceful a manner as possible. Now this difficulty has
cropped up in our way, namely, the British courts have decided that
Harijans cannot enter many temples. Even a consensus among Hindus
cannot abolish the law. Law can be abrogated by law alone. So
legislation has become necessary and Shri Ranga Iyer has presented
the Bill. It does not have even a hint of force or of interference with
religion. According to the Bill, if the Hindu public wish so, temples
can be thrown open to the Harijans. The temples will be thrown open
when Hindu public decide to do so; never by the Bills. There is no
question of co-operation or non-co-operation in this. But this matter
is outside my province today. People should have this much faith that
if I, the author of the principle of non-co-operation, am a partisan to
the passing of these Bills, the possibility of the principle being violated
is very little. The important thing is that it is the duty of those who
made the solemn declaration in Bombay to do their utmost to remove
the legal obstruction. Only then can they say:
Rather die than go back upon one’s word.2
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1070; also Harijan Sevak,10-3-1933

1
2

398

Bhagavad Gita, II. 47
Ramacharitamanasa, Ayodhyakand
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

550. LETTER TO VIYOGI HARI
February 26,1933
BHAI VIYOGI HARI,

It is mail-time now. I received your telegram. I had sent a reply.
I have also received Hindi Harijan1 today. I am sending two articles2
with this letter; I hope they will reach in time. I have not been able to
read Harijan Sevak yet. I shall write about it in the English [Harijan].
BAPU

[PS.]
You may correct the language.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1086

551. LETTER TO BEGUM MOHAMMAD ALAM
February 26,1933
DEAR SISTER

Your letter should serve as an Urdu lesson for me. However
short the letter may be, the letters must be well formed. Your earlier
letters were beautiful. I was extremely glad to learn that both of you
were now maintaining good health.
Blessings from

BAPU
BEGUM ALAM
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 29

552. LETTER TO BENARSILAL AND RUKMINIDEVI
BAZAJ
February 27,1933
CHI. RUKMINI

Two letters from you are lying before me. I am writing this
before the morning prayer. I am glad that you don’t want to be
exempted from writing to me even when there is pressure of work. If
1

Vide “Letter to Viyogi Hari”, 26-2-1933
Resist Untruth with Truth’, and “Keeping the Word’’; vide “Resist Untruth
with Truth”, 26-2-1933
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

399

one works methodically, one does not feel any strain. Such work
becomes part of one’s nature. Since you get news from Deolali and
the Ashram, I need not mention anything. Hindi Harijan is being
published now.
BAPU
CHI. BENARSI,

Your simile for that string of sixty allegations is a good one.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 9646. Courtesy: Benarsilal Bazaj

553. LETTER TO VIYOGI HARI
February 27,1933
BHAI VIYOGI HARI,

I have gone through Harijan Sevak; I did not like it. It requires
more labour and more study. It contains the news of the opening of
the Santram temple at Nadiad. The news is published despite the fact
that the Santram temple has not been thrown open. No news item
should be quoted from the papers without verifying it. Publication of
such news always undermines one’s prestige and harms the cause of
dharma. The prefix ‘it is reported’ is certainly there but who can
thank you for it? Very many things are reported but few turn out to
be true on verification. This must now be corrected. Enquire from the
head of the Santram temple. The account of activities has taken up too
much space. It indicates that you had nothing left to print and that is
why even after so much space being used up the lower portion
remained blank. And that is an eyesore. You could have found
sufficient material from the two issues of Harijan lying with you.
Certainly there was no lack of time. The translation of my article
should have borne at the end the appellation ‘translation’. Even the
translation is not satisfactory. Harijan Sevak should not be stuffed
with articles but it should be a guide to the workers and should
abound with news. The problems facing the sanatanists should be
indicated and solutions suggested. The falsehoods of the sanatanists
should be exposed at the appropriate time. Hence we must receive
exhaustive reports from all provinces. The letters published already in
Aaj need not be reproduced.
400

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am sending today a wire 1 in this connection. I trust you will
not mind my plain speaking. All this is meant not to discourage but to
encourage you.
The two articles I sent yesterday must have reached you.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi: S.N. 20393

554. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
February 28,1933
DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

I know you don’t believe in giving yourself rest. I propose to
join you in not giving you rest. Mahadev wrote to you at my instance
yesterday about the wretched get-up of the Harijan Sevak, both as to
the matter and the manner. I sent even a telegram to Viyogi Hari.
Today I send you what has appealed to me as an extraordinarily
clever report on the Harijan organizations of the Punjab. I am dealing
with it in the ensuing Harijan, but you should circulate the copies of
the enclosed report among the Punjab organizations and get their
replies. If you think that there is absolutely nothing to be said for the
report and that it simply contains a series of exaggerations and
unsupported statements, naturally you will not go to the expense of
copying the report and multiply your and your staff’s work. You will
then return me the report with a brief note that it is not worthy of
consideration. Perhaps you know the writer; if you do, you will let me
know all about him. I am still in correspondence with him. I wonder if
you read the English Harijan. It is addressed to you personally as it is
to every Harijan servant, because it contains suggestions for workers,
appeals to them, as also arguments to arm them for their battle.
Arguments and appeals you may not need at all, but suggestions you
must welcome, no matter from what quarter they come. There is one
suggestion of my making in my article on the Punjab report which I
do not want to duplicate, because I expect you to see it in the Harijan.
If you see a flaw in the reasoning, or if you find it to be impossible to
carry out, you will tell me and if your counter-argument appeals to
1

This is not available.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

401

me I shall correct it. But it is better that instead of making big
suggestions privately I make them publicly.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI A . V. THAKKAR
BIRLA MILLS
S ABJI MANDI
DELHI
From a photostat: G.N. 1112, also S.N. 20410

555. LETTER TO R. KAIMAL
February 28,1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I believe I have a previous letter of yours
unanswered. I must however deal with it when I come to it in the
regular course.
With reference to your question in your letter of 23rd instant,
my emphatic answer is, like the rest, the present priesthood is
decadent. If it was not, we should find Hinduism in a different state
altogether.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R. K AIMAL
TRIVANDRUM
From a microfilm: S.N. 20400

402

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

556. LETTER TO K. N. KATJU
February 28,1933
DEAR DR. KATJU,

I thank you for your valuable letter. 1 I am glad that
yourdaughter is happy with her husband. I know you will do all you
can for the Harijan.
I appreciate your argument about temple-entry. In my opinion,
based even upon the present experience of new temples which are
being opened, the donors have no fixed ideas. They simply build
temples for Hindus without a rigid definition for the class of Hindus
to be admitted to the temples. Hinduism has never been a rigid faith.
It has kept abreast of the times. Untouchables of today were not the
untouchables, say, a hundred years ago, and those who were
untouchables a thousand years ago are undoubtedly not untouchables
today.
Would you say that the English law of Trusts is applicable to
Hindu usage? Some of the most learned Shastris who are no
reformers of the Western style do not hesitate to give the opinion that
Hindu public temples should never have been closed to untouchables.
According to your argument, our ancestors could stop the march of
Hinduism by opening temples in accordance with the usage then in
existence. I would like you therefore to re-consider your position, and
if there is a flaw in my deductions from your argument, I would like
you to strive with me. For I have no desire to see any injustice done to
any party or person.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K. N. KATJU
19 E DMONSTONE R OAD , A LLAHABAD
From a microfilm: S.N. 204 1
1

The addressee had written: “. . .It cannot be denied that . .. for many many
centuries, rightly or wrongly, untouchables have not been allowed access to public
temples. . . . it seems to me that it is not so much a question of Hindu Shastras or their
right and correct interpretation, but in truth a question of what the founder must be
deemed or presumed to have intended. . . . otherwise I do not see what right has the
majority to override the intention of the founder, and it may be open to any member
of the Hindu public to appeal to a civil court to give effect to the intentions of the
founder. I am just mentioning this point for your consideration. . . .”
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

403

557. LETTER TO VITHALRAO K. JOSHI
February 28,1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. 1 As soon as I got Sjt. Athavale’s letter, I
wrote2 to Sjt. Chhapkhane. I did not know his full name and address,
but I am sure he will get my letter.
Yours sincerely

S JT. V ITHALRAO K. J OSHI
NEW P ETH , S ANGLI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20402

558. LETTER TO P. H. GADRE
February 28,1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. If you do not mind, I would wait till
I see your article in the Press, but you may certainly come and see me
if you feel like it any day except Wednesdays, Thursdays and Sundays
between 1 p.m. and 2 p.m. by previous appointment.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P. H. G ADRE
NASIK C ITY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20403

1
The addressee had written: “It is quite false that you commended that the sum be
retained by Mr. K. R. Chhapkhane of Sangli, for use in the political advancement in
general and specially in the Sangli State, at his absolute discretion. . . .”
2
Vide “Letter to K. R. Chhapkhane”, 23-2-1933

404

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

559. LETTER TO GAYA PRASAD SINGH
February 28,1933
DEAR GAYA BABOO,

Many thanks for your letter and all the effort you are putting
forth in connection with the Untouchability Bills.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. G AYA P RASAD S INGH
13 C FEROZSHAH R OAD
NEW DELHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20404

560. LETTER TO TRICUMDAS DWARKADAS
February 28,1933
MY DEAR TRICUMDAS

I thank you for your letter enclosing counsels, opinion. I see
that I put down my questions1 stupidly and I have got what I
deserved.2 But as Dr. Sapru had understood my questions put in
identical language I thought that I was quite safe. If I get a moment’s
leisure I will re-frame the questions and see what I can get. Even the
present answers you and I can understand, but the general public will
certainly cry out ‘His own lawyers say there is compulsion and
interference.’ I am therefore not making any public use of this
opinion. My thanks are all the same due to the friends for taking the
trouble of promptly giving their answers.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. T RICUMDAS DWARKADAS
C/ O MESSRS KANGA & C O.
YUSUF BUILDING
C HURCH GATE S TREET
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20409
1

Vide “Letter to Jaisukhlal K. Mehta”, “Letter to Jaisukhlalm K. Mehta”,
20-2-1933
2
The addressee had forwarded opinions of D. N. Bahadurji, V. F. Taraporewala
and M. C. Setalvad.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

405

561. LETTER TO P. R. LELE
February 28,1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. I knew about
Jaisukhlal’s illness and I wrote to him on Sunday. Will you be in full
charge then? I received today Sjt. Tricumdas’s letter with opinion. I
have sent him a letter1 of acknowledgement.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P. R. L ELE
THE R ECLUSE
31 M URZBAN R OAD
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20405

562. LETTER TO C. NARAYANA RAO
February 28,1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your postcard.2 I quite agree with the sentiment
expressed therein.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. C. N ARAYANA R AO
P EDDA WALTAIR
UPLANDS, W ALTAIR P. O.
From a microfilm: S.N. 20407

1

Vide the preceding item.
The addressee had regretted that some sanatanists were opposing the two
proposed Bills and stressed the importance of legislation for the removal of
untouchability.
2

406

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

563. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
February 28,1933
DEAR DAUGHTER,

Your letter. It is very good indeed that Devdas has arrived.
You must not be impatient for serving others. First of all
improve your health, everything else will be all right then. If Dr.
Sharma puts his trust in God and has a sincere wish to go to the
Ashram his path will be cleared by Him. If the doctor has full faith in
his treatment the Ashram offers good scope and the people will learn
to trust him. However, he must not hope for the present to sell his
books.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 278

564. TELEGRAM TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
[On or after February 28,1933] 1
YOUR

WIRE.

SORRY

BUT

UNRUFFLED.

WE

MUST

CARRY

ON.

BAPU
From a photostat: S.N. 20408

565. LETTER TO DUNCAN GREENLEES
March 1,1933
Newcomers do find the routine a stiff business. But we are
trying to live the life of the billions of the earth. They are toilers all
the day long. They have to do their thinking whilst their bodies are
working. When the routine becomes natural, it becomes pleasant
and does not interfere with hard thinking. All thinking is not useful.
Clear thinking is the need. That can only come through continuous
sacrifice, i.e., toiling for the service of others.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
1

The telegram was in reply to the addressee’s received on February 28. It
reads: “Despite generous disciplined co-operation majority House and cruel neutrality
Government all but one hurdle overcome. Obstruction had its way. House adjourned
quarter after five. Bill not reached. Next only non-official day twenty-fourth.”
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

407

566. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 1,1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your mail (a big packet). I think it would be best to serve
rice to Maitri and others who insist on it. We may only explain the
properties of the different classes of grain and not press anybody to
follow our advice. These properties are a matter of direct experience. I
see from experience every day that we should consume a minimum of
starches. Rice is pure starch, and so it is served to people who cannot
digest any other grains. The derogatory use of the term “rice-eater’,
is perfectly justified. But this argument will convince only those who
use their reason. It is not at all likely to appeal to a person whose
stomach will not tolerate anything but rice. I could write a great deal
more on this subject, but I have no time for that.
Ramabehn saw me yesterday. You have not won her trust. Try
harder. She wishes to learn English. She wishes to do so in spare time
after doing her work for the Ashram. Go and meet her. Listen to what
she has to say and request Mathew or Mary or Duncan to give her one
hour daily. Do all you can to satisfy her desire to learn English. If any
of the women who are old inmates of the Ashram wish to learn
English, their desire is natural. We feel the necessity of its knowledge
every hour, and also observe that as soon as a person learns English he
or she goes up in the esteem of others. We cannot check this tide.
There is no harm in knowing the language itself. The harm comes
from the misuse of the language, from its blind worship. Women are
not likely to cultivate such an attitude soon. If you see any flaw in this
reasoning, point it out to me.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

567. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Morning, March 2, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

You must have received the letter which I wrote to you
yesterday. Make careful preparations for Lakshmi’s marriage and see
that everything goes well. Jamna and you should give away the bride,
and Velanbehn should offer the bridegroom. If possible, I will send
Lakshmidas there. As usual, keep a dhoti, shirt, cap, takli and a copy
each of the Gita and the Bhajanavali ready for the bridegroom. Tie
the marriage knot with the ends. Give a translation of the vows 1 to
both the bride and the bridegroom. And they should fast on that day
and eat nothing till after the ceremony is over. You, Jamna and
Velanbehn also should fast. Both the bride and the bridegroom
should perform the ceremonial worship of the cow and the tree and
recite Chapter XII of the Gita. It is not necessary to invite any friends
except Anasuyabehn. We don’t want the marriage to be published in
newspapers, though we do not wish to keep it a secret either. The bride
and the bridegroom may leave for home by the night train and start
working immediately. Velanbehn will arrange for the sari on behalf of
Maruti. If you wish to ask any other question, you may do so. Invite
all Harijan friends to attend the wedding. If you wish, you may serve
them refreshments. In that case, I believe fruit will be the best. But
consult your own convenience in all this, and make any changes
which you feel necessary. Let the members of the Committee come
together and plan the arrangements. Invite the senior women inmates
also to the meeting of the Committee. Let the day of marriage be for
us a sacred day of tapascharya and self-purification and one to be
celebrated in keeping with our ideal of simplicity and self-control. Let
all present shower their blessings on the bride and the bridegroom.
Maruti’s letters simply fill me with admiration for him. If he remains
true to the aspirations which he expresses in them, we shall believe that
he must have become a member of Lakshmidas’s family
blessed with the holy merit of his good deeds in previous lives.
Lakshmidas’s love for him, too, must be wonderful beyond words.
1

The marriage vows, called saptapadi, which form the essential part of the
Hindu marriage ceremony. For a translation of the vows, vide “With Bare Religious
Rites”, 7-3-1926
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

409

And what excellent training he must have given!
Explain to everybody in the Ashram that it is the universal
experience that anybody who does not give his best, physically and
mentally in serving the sick, can do no other useful work, and that the
Ashram exists to enable its inmates to serve others. Nobody in the
Ashram, therefore, should be half-hearted in doing service.
BAPU

[PS.]
Doesn’t Velanbehn keep well? Read my letter to Dudabhai. I
have not pressed him to attend the wedding. I am enclosing letters for
Dudabhai, Lakshmi, Velanbehn and Durga.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

568. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
March 2,1933
MY DEAR AGATHA,

I have not been able to overtake your letter of 10th February
before now. Please forgive me. I see that it required a prompt reply. I
hope, however, that this will be in time for you in helping you to come
to a decision if you had not arrived at it when this reaches you.
I have no hesitation in saying that you should accept the
invitation 1 of the Y. W. C. A. if they will bear the expense of the
journey. Poor workers must not be expected to find the expenses
themselves.
I hope the Harijan gives you all the information you may need
about the untouchability movement.
Love from us all.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
MISS AGATHA HARRISON
2 C RANBOURNE C OURT
ALBERT BRIDGE R OAD
S. W. 11
From a photostat: G.N. 1462; also S.N. 20436
1

For the Quadrennial Conference to be held at Ootacamund from April 29 to

May 8

410

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

569. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
March 2,1933
MY DEAR MARGARETE,

You are sending me letters regularly. But you are telling me
nothing except about myself. You must now begin to tell me
something about your children, and the many things that you teach
them and how you teach them. You don’t think that those things will
not interest me. They will, because they might be of use for the
Ashram children. You should tell me also as a teacher what you would
do to and for the Ashram children if you had them under your
charge.
Love from us both.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Also S.N.
20429

570. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
March 2,1933
MY DEAR CHILD,

I have your letter. I am sending it to Maria. I know she will be
delighted with it. Probably you wrote the same time that you wrote to
me. Even so, the news of your joining her early will not be stale to
her.
I posted a letter 1 last week to Tangai and just gave you a line
only. I hope she felt duly proud to receive a letter all to herself, put in
an envelope bearing her address, and I hope that she sent me a
thousand kisses when she got that letter.
As I am pouring out my heart through Harijan, I feel that I
have nothing more to say to the members of the growing family.
With all the experience gained in a big hospital, Menon should
return as a distinguished specialist in surgery.
Love from us all and kisses to children.
BAPU
From a photostat: No. 120. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also My
Dear Child, pp. 99-100
1

Vide “Letter to Tangai Menon”, 23-2-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

411

571. LETTER TO W. TUDOR OWEN
March 2,1933
DEAR FRIEND,

It was good of you to think of me and send your paper1.
Whether I can agree with you or not, I know that you have always
something useful and original to say.
With the restrictions natural in a prison-house, you will not
expect me to discuss the political aspect of your paper. I have
therefore only to tell you that I shall read the paper with sympathy
and attention and shall approach it without any preconceived ideas. I
have no axe to grind. I believe that I have got the mind of a scientist. I
endeavour always to look at all the sides of a question and I have
sanity and courage to own my mistakes as soon as I detect them.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20423

572. LETTER TO JON ROMMEL
March 2,1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter2 and your book called Regeneration.
I glanced through the pages, but I must confess to you that I found in
it nothing to appeal to me.
Yours sincerely,

JON R OMMEL, E SQ.
NIAGARA F ALLS
N. Y.
4111 SAUNDERS R OAD
LEWISTON
From a microfilm: S.N. 20425

1

“India at the Cross Roads”
The addressee had asked Gandhiji not to “start another fast”, and stated that
his “mode of dress, and method of procedure” did not coincide with his views.
2

412

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

573. LETTER TO NELLIE BALL
March 2, 1933
MY DEAR NELLIE1 ,

Next time when you feel like writing you should trace the
spelling of your name. As I read your signature I can only make out
‘Mell Bull’. I can easily read ‘Bull’ as ‘Ball’, but Esther confounds
me. She has clearly spelt your name as ‘Nellie Ball’. I have therefore
adopted her clear spelling in preference to your doubtful ‘Mell’. If
therefore I have made any mistake you must go for Esther. But I see
that you are a little philosopher with a big heart. Therefore you will
exclaim, ‘What is in a name? It is the spirit that matters’. And whether
I trace Mell or Nellie my spirit goes out to you, the little invalid
daughter. But I propose a peremptory change in the way you describe
yourself. Your body is no doubt shattered, but your spirit seems to
have risen triumphant over the body. I do not want to think of you
therefore as my ‘little invalid daughter’, but my ‘little daughter
strong with the faith in God’. Now that C. F. Andrews is there you will
certainly have the joy of receiving visits from him frequently and not
only rarely. He is a genius for seeking out persons like you and going
to them as often as he can. To visit people in power is a tax upon his
mind. To visit people like you and me is a matter of perennial joy to
him. He derives his strength from his association with those whom the
world calls weak and helpless and who often but wrongly feel so
themselves. But I must now stop.
You should give my love to your doctor and ask him to write to
me about you.
Yours,
From a photostat: S.N. 20427

574. LETTER TO ANNE MARIE PETERSEN
March 2,1933
MY DEAR MARIA,

I enclose herewith letter from Esther which I have no doubt you
will like and prize. We shall all look forward to their coming in
autumn and it will be a great relief to me.
Mary Barr wrote to me that she was likely to accompany you
1

Of Birmingham

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

413

during your visit to Kashmir. I hope it is coming oft and that it will do
you good and give you a little bit of bracing air and rest to your tired
limbs and mind.
I hope you are getting your copy of the Harijan regularly.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20431

575. LETTER TO MURIEL LESTER
March 2,1933
MY DEAR MURIEL,

I know you will always be wandering. That is part of your work
and therefore it does not appear to me quite as horrible as you think it
might. I hope your new child will not fare as badly as the preceding
one. Of course those who have read your book 1 do not
mind having read it, but these are very few. Those who do not want to
know anything about your having entertained a funny little man
cannot be blamed for not wanting your book. There must be quite a
few thousand people who would like to know the story of Kingsley
Hall and Children’s House dedicated to the service of the neglected
poor. Why were you sorry that John Morris was being removed to an
old workhouse? Would he not get there the same kind treatment he
had at the hospital? Where is the place situated? I suppose you will see
him often enough, or, is the workhouse far away from you? When
you see him you should take my love to him. I see you are in your
18th year and so is the Ashram at Sabarmati. Let us hope that both the
institutions pass muster in God’s book. I am glad that Devi2 has
lighter work .
Yours,
From a photostat: S.N. 20432

1
2

414

Presumably Entertaining Gandhi, published in 1932
Ada West
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

576. LETTER TO GERTRUDE S. KELLER-CHING
March 2,1933
DEAR SISTER,

I continue to receive your letters fairly regularly. You must not
hesitate to write as often as you like so long as you don’t always
expect prompt acknowledgement from me.
I hope you got over the effects of the hurt long ere this reaches
you.
I am glad you possess all the volumes of the Upanishads. Some
of them will no doubt appear dry to you, but I am quite sure that you
will not miss the central teaching which permeates all the principal
Upanishads. But no teaching, however lofty it may be, enables us to
control our nerves and our senses. That control only comes from
incessant prayer from the heart and from utterly selfless service.
Yours sincerely,

GERTRUDE S. K ELLER-CHING
VILLA LAVOISIER
LA SIGNALS , L AUSANNE
From a photostat: S.N. 20433

577. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR1
March 2,1933
DEAR MR. JAYAKAR,

I thank you for your letter. 2 If you can give me your opinion
without much tax on 3 your energy, I would value it. Every help that
comes counts in the midst of the difficulties that are being created day
after day.
I hope you are fast regaining your lost strength.
I wonder if you have seen the Madras Law Review’s opinion on
1

A letter, in terms identical with paragraph 3 onwards, was sent to C.
Rajagopalachari on March 3.
2
The addressee had written: “I am doubtful whether you still desire to have my
opinion.”
3
The source has “of”.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

415

Rao Bahadur Rajah’s Bill. 1 I enclose it for your perusal. Tell me
whether you still hold to your opinion. I personally think that Mr.
Rajah’s Bill deserves support.
You had my telegram2 in reply to yours. Whether for the
moment we succeed or not, we must continue to create public opinion
in favour of the Bills and make such effort as is possible to have them
passed. That we did not succeed on the 27th does not worry me.
I hope you are following carefully what I am writing for the
Harijan. It is my weekly letter to you as much as it is to other
co-workers. You will read what I have said about temples.
Mathuradas must have gone to Benares to see Malaviyaji.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. M. R. J AYARAR,
THE ASHRAM
WINTER R OAD
MALABAR HILL

BAR-AT -LAW

From a photostat: S.N. 20434

578. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
March 2,1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have received from Mr. M. I. David Rs. 2,500. So far as I
know, it is the first answer to the appeal on behalf of his scheme. Mr.
David wants to remain anonymous. I am sending the money to you
by registered and insured packet. For the present you will please
retain the money on account of the David Scheme. It would be better
to put it so as to bear interest at once. We won’t need to use it all at
once and I expect to get his own letter which he has promised.
I think that we ought to be able to announce a few scholarships.
You blessed the scheme, the Bombay board blessed the scheme and if
it ends with a solitary subscriber, and that also the creator himself, it
would be a miniature disaster. Do, therefore, induce Lala Shreeram
and others at least to give these paltry sums and let me announce some
1

Vide “Letter to M. C. Rajah”, 25-2-1933, and also Rao Bahadur M. C. Rajah’s
Bill”, 4-3-1933
2
Presumably identical with “Telegram to C. Rajagopalachari’’, 28-2-1933

416

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

names.
I hope Viyogi Hari and Amritlal Thakkar have shown you what
I had to say about the Hindi Harijan. It needs very considerable
improvement. You were to have given some personal attention to it.
Do please give it.
I hope you are keeping good health. Is the nose causing
trouble? Whether it is or not, it should receive early attention.
Yours sincerely,

B APU

[PS.]
The sooner now the Selection Board or Committee that I have
suggested is formed the better it will be.
From a microfilm: S.N. 20435. Also C.W. 7929. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

579. LETTER TO P. J. ANDREASEN
March 2,1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter and a copy of The Secret of the
Universe.
Though you have asked me to acknowledge your letter only
after I have read the book, I do not want you to be in suspense,
because I am so preoccupied with the work on hand that I have no
notion when I shall be able to reach the book.
Yours sincerely,

P. J. A NDREASEN , E SQ.
30 E VANS WAY , B OSTON , M ASS.
From a photostat: S.N. 20437

580. A LETTER
March 2,1933
You seem to have cultivated a spirit of service beyond my
expectation. I, therefore, have no fear now. May you always remain
what you are. It is no ordinary responsibility which you are
undertaking. In your hands lies Dada’s honour and, if I may say so,
of Hinduism, too, in large measure. If you shine in the life which you
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

417

have adopted, even your detractors will be converted and become
your admirers.
Don’t feel unhappy at my absence. Though my body will be
here, my soul will be with you and watch you both and protect you.
[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 168

581. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS
March 2,1933
Gandhiji stated in reply to a question that, if the necessary permission was
given, he would, after duly examining the terms of the permission, quite willingly
make a declaration of his policy on political questions. But just now he was not
thinking about it at all. Politics was excluded from his thoughts. He was deliberately
practising and doing this for two reasons, firstly, that he might not be burdened with
its weight when he had another subject in hand to which he had been permitted to
devote attention, and secondly nothing might escape his lips, even inadvertently,
which would be tantamount to a breach of faith with the Government. He was now so
constituted that he could not discuss politics. He added:

It is a wonderful gift God has given me.
Did it mean he was not interesting himself in contemporary political events?
Gandhiji replied:

Oh yes, but only as a foreigner would. I note them in passing,
but I bestow little thought on them. Of course, if the ban is lifted, and
I am permitted to speak, I can, without any difficulty, speak on
questions of policy and fundamental principles.
He added that those agents in his brain who were now on leave would then
begin to work.
Asked if in his own opinion, the Harijan movement had not diverted attention
from civil disobedience, Gandhiji replied:

Surely, it is a matter which everyone can decide for himself,
because, all the materials are before him. One might as well ask me
what is the height of the Himalayas when both he and I are seeing it.
one will say it is 23,000 feet, another 25,000.
Asked as to what was his estimate of the height, Gandhiji replied at once.

The Hindu, 3-3-1933

418

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

582. LETTER TO K. RAMACHANDRA1
March 3,1933
MY DEAR RAMACHANDRA,

I thank you for your wire. But I did not reply as I would not
trouble you to come just now. I would like you however to write out
whatever you know about N. It should not be difficult for you to do
so although you consider the case to be intricate. Then, if necessary, I
might ask you to come.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20440

583. LETTER TO M. R. JAYAKAR
March 3,1933
DEAR MR. JAYAKAR,

I thank you for your two letters with your opinion2. It will assist
me greatly. I would like you to bear the Bills in mind and do whatever
is possible.
I hope you have recovered all your lost strength.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20445

584. LETTER TO DIWAKAR SINGH
March 3,1933
MY DEAR DIWAKAR SINGH,

I am glad you wrote to me. I had already seen a notice in the
papers about your work. If you will stick to it, I am sure that the work
will prosper. The quieter it is, the better it will be. Do please continue
to report progress. N. is here just now and I have shown your letter to
her. She is happy over the beginning made by you and she agrees
1
2

Of the Deena Seva Sangh, Bangalore
Published in Harijan, 11-3-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

419

with me about the necessity of avoiding showy demonstration and
sheadds that this she can say from bitter experience.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
KUNWAR DIWAKAR S INGH
3 C ANNING R OAD
ALLAHABAD
From the original: C.W. 9655. Courtesy: Municipal Museum, Allahabad. Also
S.N. 20447

585. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
March 3,1933
MY DEAR ANAND,

I have your letter. They say dreams go by contraries. Naturally,
therefore, there was nobody and no prisoner and no trial.
The more we merely think of the duty in front of us the greater
is the satisfaction from it. Absorption in the immediate duty is like
brahmacharya, peace-giving and invigorating.
Love.
BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

586. LETTER TO PRABHULAL
March 3,1933
BHAI PRABHULAL,

I got your letter. If you go on working with patience and
firmness, your success is assured.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4133

420

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

587. LETTER TO LILAVATI
March 3,1933
CHI. LILAVATI

I got your letter. Come on Monday at 2 p.m. I do not write more as
we are to meet. Narandas’s letter is enclosed. Write down all your
questions and bring them with you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9324

588. LETTER TO AMAR SINGH
March 3, 1933
BHAI AMAR SINGH,

I got your letter. It is only through silent service that one can
reach God and realize the self for, such service reveals that all are
equal. I am glad to know that your are well now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: S.N. 33627

589. ‘NO INFRINGEMENT’
The following important opinion 1, on the question of templeentry, of Sjt. T. R. Venkatarama Sastri, ex-Law Member of the Madras
Government, is taken from the daily Press.
S JT. K ELKAR ’S C OMPROMISE

Sjt. N. C. Kelkar was good enough to pay me a visit at
my request to discuss the question of temple-entry. I was anxious
to know what he thought of the proposed legislation. He said that
1

Not reproduced here. It said that temple-entry legislation did not infringe the
property rights of anyone.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

421

he had for years held that there was no way out of legislation
in matters, even affecting religion, where a law alone could set
them right, as in the case of temple-entry. Judge-made law had
ordained that trustees of public Hindu temples were bound to pre vent
Harijans from entering them. No amount of public opinion could
undo that law. It could demand the passage of a law but could not
make the law permitting temple-entry.
Whilst, therefore, Sjt. Kelkar agreed that measures like
Sjt. Ranga Iyer’s were necessary, he said that actual temple-entry
would only be effected by amicable settlement. He had no doubt that
Harijans should enter temples on precisely the same terms as caste
Hindus. But public opinion might not be ripe for the former’s
admission to the sanctuaries. If so, the caste Hindus should
forgo the rights which Harijans could not have. He, therefore,
suggested that in all the public temples there should be a common
barrier set up, beyond which nobody but the priest actually in charge
of the ceremonial could go. This would mean that, in some temples
where now caste Hindus are able to enter the sanctuary and touch the
idol, they would have to deny themselves that right, if they were not
prepared to let Harijans enjoy it equally with them. I said I should
have no objection whatsoever to such a compromise, provided, of
course, that it was honestly carried out in practice. Nothing would
please me better than to see this unseemly domestic wrangle close at
the earliest moment.
HARIJAN ,

4-3-1933
590. A WAIL FROM KUMAON

A Harijan correspondent from Haldvani writes complaining that
nothing is being done by caste Hindus on their behalf in his district.
This complaint is a sign that the message of the September resolutions
has reached the Harijan masses and that, therefore, they are expecting
great things. Provincial Boards of the Servants of Untouchables
Society will have to organize their work so as to penetrate the remotest
village and let the Harijans know that every attempt is being made to
fight the monster of untouchability.
Harijan, 4-3-1933

422

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

591. JOINT OR SEPARATE?
Correspondents suggest that there should be separate temples,
schools, wells, etc., for Harijans for the time being. A general adoption
of the suggestion may easily be the way to perpetuate untouchability,
and we might as well have had separate electorates
and elections for them, if we are to have everything else
separate for them. I would certainly not have staked my life just to
avoid separate electorates. I staked it, and it is still at stake, for the
purpose of eradicating the present unnatural untouchability from the
religion itself. I rose against separate electorates, because it would have
spelt an end to the effort for the destruction of the canker. They
would have meant an end to effective penance by the penitent caste
Hindu. With the Yeravda Pact, such penance is a possibility, whether
the penitents are in the majority or the minority. That there is a
mighty upheaval in Hinduism and that we have two well-defined
divisions working actively for their respective objectives is the surest
justification for the Yeravda Pact. As a result of it, the religious
untouchability goes or the reformer. If he is to be true to his pledge,
the reformer has no other choice.
Therefore, separate temples and separate other services must be
regarded with suspicion. Let us consider the limitations of the
suggestion.
Till the legal obstacle in the way of opening public temples to
untouchables is removed, the opening of existing temples on a large
scale comes to a standstill. But the march of reform cannot be stayed.
There are three ways of doing the thing.
(a) Where public opinion and trustees are quite demonstrably in
favour of opening temples, trustees may open the temples under their
charge and may take the risk of an injunction being issued against
them.
(b) Private temples should be opened where the owners are
willing to open them.
(c) Wealthy and spiritually minded people may open new
temples under pure methods of consecration. (I add the adjective
advisedly because I believe that all is not well with the existing
temples.) These temples will be purposely designed for the Harijans as
well-as for the other Hindus. These must, therefore, be situated in such
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

423

localities as are easily accessible to Harijans.
Common schools and wells should be opened where the existing
ones are not available for Harijans either owing to the violent and
successful opposition of the neighbours or some other unavoidable
cause. Harijans cannot be left uncared for in matters of necessary
services till public opinion has ripened. If there is a clearly awakened
body of Hindus who have the same feeling towards Harijans as if they
were their own kith and kin, they will not wait for public opinion to
consolidate itself before taking action. They will do their best to
supply pure water and good education to their own newly found kith
and kin.
There is one special consideration in favour of opening what
may be called preparatory schools for Harijan children. I cannot do
better than quote the reason in the words of a co-worker who has gone
to live in their midst and who writes:1
My school is conducted in a Harijan verandah. Some of my scholars are
. . . full of dirt. . . . My lesson, therefore, begins with telling them how to
keep clean, and behave. . . . They are bad liars. Some of them are industrious
and wise. I play with them and perhaps learn more than I teach. . . . I begin my
class in the early morning. I sleep in a Harijan dharmasala about a furlong
from the school. . . . I naturally sometimes enter their homes when they do not
mind. Many of them are dark holes with inmates packed like matches. . . . But
I am a novice. I know my limitations. . . . I long to fulfil God’s conditions for
becoming a true Vaishnav.

This is but a sample of the condition of raw Harijan children.
We want every one of these children to learn to live in a clean and
decent manner. We want them all to attend the common public
schools. Therefore, preparatory schools for them are an absolute
essential if we mean honest business.
Harijan, 4-3-1933

592. CONFUSING THE ISSUE
The Secretary of the Jat-Pat Torak Mandal, i. e., Society for the
Abolition of Caste, has published in the daily Press his letter to me of
the 18th ultimo.
He does me the honour of calling me a ‘deep thinker’ and in
the same breath withdraws it by saying:
You have failed to see that the caste system is the origin of
1

424

Only extracts are reproduced here
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

untouchability and that one cannot do without the other.

I venture to suggest to the Secretary that, if he is really honest in
his paying me the compliment, he must suspend his judgement about
the caste system and follow out the reasoning of the ‘deep thinker’ of
his imagination; whereas if he has called me a ‘deep thinker’ in order
to increase the height from which I have fallen, I fear that no
reasoning of mine will affect him.
However, according to my wont, I propose to give the Secretary
credit for honesty and shall, therefore, strive with him. I am one of
those who think that the caste system, in so far as it is the English
equivalent for varnashrama, is nothing but a division of labour or
duty. Anyone who will take the trouble of looking at any religious
book must find this out for himself. In that sense the divisions or
classes are four and no more, and these classes are known all the world
over. One is the repository of knowledge, the other is that of power,
the third is that of wealth and the fourth is that of service. All these
four labours are regarded as duties to be discharged by every one of
them for the protection and advancement of dharma, and everyone
who performs his duty to the best of his knowledge and ability gains
equal merit with the rest, if the latter, too, do likewise. The merit,
therefore, consists not in being one or the other, but in the
performance of the duty assigned to it. Here, there is no
untouchability. There is no superiority. And this is the essence of
varnadharma. It may be non-existent today and it is so. That, however,
in no way diminishes the force of my argument that there is no
superiority and inferiority in the original conception of varnadharma
and that untouchability can never be a necessary outcome of this pure
division of duties. If this varnashrama cannot be revived in its original
simplicity and purity, persons like me would consider it to be a
calamity. Others may welcome it, but let varnadharma and
untouchability stand or fall on their own merits or demerits.
Confusing the two can only add to the difficulty of removal of
untouchability, which all reformers and even many sanatanists desire.
The caste-abolitionists must, therefore, hold their souls in patience and
join the battle against the common and admitted evil of
untouchability.
Varnashrama, as I interpret it, satisfies the religious, social and
economic needs of a community. It satisfies the religious needs,
because a whole community, accepting the law, is free to devote ample
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

425

time to spiritual perfection. Observance of the law obviates social evils
and entirely prevents the killing economic competition. And if it is
regarded as a law laying down, not the rights or the privileges of the
community governed by it, but their duties, it ensures the fairest
possible distribution of wealth though it may not be an ideal, i.e.,
strictly equal, distribution. Therefore, when people in disregard of the
law mistake duties for privileges and try to pick and choose
occupations for self-advancement, it leads to confusion of varna and
ultimate disruption of society. In this law, there is no question of
compelling any person to follow the parental occupation against his
or her aptitude; that is to say, there can be no compulsion from
without as there was none for, perhaps, several thousand years, during
which the law of varnashrama worked without interruption. By
training, the people had recognized the duty and the justice of the law,
and they voluntarily lived under it. Today, nations are living in
ignorance and breach of that law and they are suffering for it. The
so-called civilized nations have by no means reached a state which
they can at all regard with equanimity and satisfaction.
It is easy enough to see that this conception of varnashrama has
nothing to do with restrictions as to inter-dining and intermarriage.
The Vedas and the Mahabharata are filled with illustrations both of
inter-dining and intermarriage. But these are matters of choice, not a
matter of religious regulation. No one can be compelled or required
to dine with any other or contract marital relations. No doubt social
habits will grow up and regulate these things more or less rigidly. But
it would be wrong to dignify them by the name of religious
observances. Therefore, inter-dining and intermarriage can form no
part of the campaign against untouchability. In so far as they are a
matter for reform, they must be treated, in my opinion, as an
absolutely separate subject, unconnected either with untouchability or
even with varnashrama reform. So far as the multiplicity of castes
apart from varnadharma are concerned, they are essentially trade
guilds or societies, with intermarriage and inter-dining restrictions of a
more or less rigid character superimposed upon them. Castes are as
numerous as the leaves of the famous banana tree whose every branch
becomes a trunk for shooting out more branches. They are
undergoing a perpetual transformation. Many have disappeared and
new ones are appearing. Surely they have nothing to do with
varnashrama; nor have they anything to do with religion. That today
they are regarded by sanatanists as an integral part of Hinduism arises,
426

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in my opinion, from an utter ignorance of the working of these trade
guilds. There are undoubtedly many undesirable practices that have
crept into these corporations, but that is only because Hinduism as a
religion has ceased to be a living, vitalizing force. We are today living
upon capital which is itself being fast exhausted.
Harijan, 4-3-1933

593. THE DAVID SCHEME
It is a matter of great pleasure for me to be able to announce, so
far as I am aware, the very first subscription of Rs. 2,500 to the David
Scheme for the higher education of Harijans.
As the reader may remember, this amount covers five years’
expenses for one Harijan student. I am sorry I cannot publish the
name of the donor 1, as he desires to remain anonymous. I hope that
this announcement will result in inducing others to send in their
donations.
Harijan, 4-3- l 933

594. RAO BAHADUR M. C. RAJAH’S BILL
Rao Bahadur M. C. Rajah, M. L. A., has sent me a copy of his
Bill, ‘Further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898’.2
This measure is not likely to give much relief to the Harijans
from the disabilities they are suffering from. But I should welcome its
passage as a nail driven in the coffin of a custom which I regard as
wholly evil.
Harijan, 4-3-1933

1

M. I. David; vide “Letter to G. D. Birla”, 2-3-1933
The Bill, not reproduced here, provided that no order under section 144 of the
Criminal Procedure Code might be made preventing the exercise of lawful rights by
“untouchables” on the ground that persons belonging to the “higher castes” might
create disturbances.
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

427

595. HINDI “HARIJAN”
The Hindi edition of Harijan is at last out. The first issue
was published on the 23rd ultimo. 1 It is the same size as the English
edition and has no paid advertisements. The annual subscription is Rs.
3-8-0, a single copy is one anna. It contains among other things
articles by Swami Satyadeva and Sheth Ghanshyamdas Birla and me, a
brief poem by the well-known Hindi poet and author, Shri
Maithilisharam Gupta. There is naturally something from the pen of
the Editor, who is Sjt. Viyogi Hari, well known to the Hindi literary
world. For years, service of the Harijans has been a passion with Sjt.
Viyogi Hari. He was for some time himself editing and publishing a
journal specially devoted to the removal of untouchability. There are,
too, the usual news columns. The news service leaves much to be
desired. But no doubt, in this and every other respect, every
succeeding number will be better than its predecessor till the desired
standard is reached. The habitation of the paper is Birla Mills, Delhi,
the address of the Servants of Untouchables Society, under whose
auspices the paper is being published. I may inform the reader that
the Bengali edition was expected to make its appearance on the 28th
ultimo with Sjt. Satis Das Gupta of the Khadi Pratishthan as Editor.
Satisbabu says in his letter to me that, in order to overtake the last
issues of the English edition of the Harijan, his first two numbers
would be double numbers. Arrangements are in progress for bringing
out the Gujarati Harijan.
Harijan, 4-3-1933

596. A MAHARASHTRA SAINT’S TESTIMONY
Sjt. R. D. Paradkar,. Editor and Publisher, Moropant’s Works,
writes:2
You have pointed out3 that the use of the word ‘Harijan’ to denote the
untouchable class in the present movement inaugurated in their behalf has by
no means been novel and that the word had thus been used previously by a
Gujarati poet. I have taken up the pen just to let you know, as the news is
1
2
3

428

Vide “Letter to Viyogi Hari”, 25-2-1933
Only an extract is reproduced here.
Vide “Why ‘Harijan,”, 23-2-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

likely to give you particular pleasure, that the very word has been used in the
same sense by Moropant, the celebrated Maharashtrian poet. The stanza 1 i n
question is as follows. ...

Similar testimony is to be found in the writings not only of the
other saints of Maharashtra but also the saints of the whole of India. If
industrious scholars will collect such sayings of the saints from
different parts of the country, I shall gladly hand them to the Editor
for publication in the Harijan, and they will be a help and an
inspiration to the workers in the cause of the abolition of
untouchability.
Harijan, 4-3-1933

597. AS THEY SEE US
Hardly has the great central organization of the Servants of
Untouchables Society made the commencement, when complaints
against it and the provincial organizations have cropped up. They
come chiefly and naturally from Harijans. One of these correspondents sent to me some time ago an able letter, undertaking to give
details if I desired. I took him at his word and asked him to give me
details; and the letter he has sent me in reply is abler than the first. It
will compete with any well-written report of an inspector. It contains a
summary of reports of every organization claiming to work in the
writer’s Province for the uplift of Harijans, and after giving me sufficient details, his one conclusion about all the organizations practically
without exception is:
They are run principally by caste men who have their own axes to grind
or who are in need of some occupation that would maintain them decently. The
utmost that some of these have done is to fling a few scholarships at Harijan
boys. Some others have been great at delivering lectures. All have come to us
as patrons. Hardly has anyone come as a friend and equal, let alone as a
servant. Your provincial organization is no exception. It is difficult for a
Harijan to approach its chief man without fear and trembling. He is always in
danger of being met with a frown.

My correspondent is also not without suggestions, which may be
1
Which is translated as follows: “In your superior wisdom you give Harijans
names like Mahar, Yawan, Kunbi. It is the fruit of the tree that reveals the property
concealed in the seed (i.e., actions reveal the man).”

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

429

summarized thus:
If you are to take advantage of the great awakening that
has taken place, you must concentrate upon primary education
on a mass scale. You will not drive out the ignorance of ages
without spreading that education. We shall certainly help, but
seeing that caste Hindus want to remove untouchability and
make us one with them, there is no better way of employing
their money and their labour than in imparting this education.
It is necessary to know the Harijan mind in any programme of
work that may be taken up. Caste Hindus, for whom removal of
untouchability is a matter of penance and purification, have
undoubtedly to do much more than open schools everywhere. I have
discussed elsewhere1 where such schools may be opened. The conduct
of caste Hindus would be generally tested by its reaction upon the
mass mind of the Harijans. If we have really changed towards them,
they will feel the change in a thousand ways. Our activity, I mean that
of caste Hindus, will affect every department of their lives. Even in the
remotest village we are interdependent, so much so that this
interdependence cannot be dissolved all at once, even if we desired it,
without resulting in the greatest harm to the nation in general; and this
interdependence, which is today that of slave and master, will never be
corrected unless there is absolute religious equality. It is a tremendous
task, but as we progress towards the goal, the truth must dawn upon
every caste Hindu that there is no half-way house between abject
slavery and perfect religious equality. Hence my humble insistence
upon temple-entry without losing sight of the other things we must
do.
My correspondent is bitter in discussing what he considers to be
the extravagant management of the different organizations that have
come under his lash. As an expert organizer that I may claim to be, I
have been generally guided by the rule that the cost of administration,
that is, overhead charges, should never exceed 10% of the receipts—
5% being the ideal—the balance going to the cause which brought the
organization into being. I suggest this test to the Central Board and
the Provincial Boards and all other independent Harijan organizations
run by caste Hindus. Let it not be said of us that we spend more on
running the organizations than upon Harijans themselves. Let us see
1

430

Vile “Joint or separate?”, 4-3-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to it that, out of every Rs. 100 received as donation for the Harijan
cause Rs. 90 go straight into the pockets of Harijans. Therefore, our
officials should be largely volunteers, never highly paid wherever paid
service is required. Wherever it is possible, we should get Harijans. We
should select candidates and train them. The correspondent says that
peons in the organizations inspected by him are not drawn from the
Harijan ranks.
Let every organization for the service of Harijans introspect
itself in the light of the criticism I have condensed and the suggestions
I have made. I know that the correspondent has painted the picture as
black as he could. He has refused to see the bright side. I know
something of Harijan service done by caste men in the different
Provinces. I know that there is a bright side to the work of the
organizations referred to by my correspondent, but it was unnecessary
for me to give the bright side. It will take care of itself, if the
organizations will take care of the dark side of the picture. Most
organizations have a capacity for self-deception. There is a tendency
towards self-glorification. The Harijan exists for the sake of giving
due prominence, therefore, to every bit of criticism that can be
levelled against us by Harijan critics.
Harijan, 4-3-1933

598. IS IT LOSS OF FAITH?
A co-worker writes:
Some of us feel that your ‘fasting unto death’ may mean a conscious or
unconscious loss of faith in the efficacy of non-violence. Can you enlighten
us, who have derived our faith in non-violence from you?

It is a flattering thought that some people have derived their
faith in non-violence from me. But I would warn them that I may
prove a broken reed at a critical juncture, if they have not assimilated
the spirit of non-violence and if it has not become an integral part of
their life. Faith in a man is a perishable quantity, for it vanishes like
smoke when their idol does not come up to their expectations; but
what gives us hope and courage in the nick of time is an undying faith
in a cause or a principle, irrespective of persons from whom it is
derived.
Having uttered this warning, let me say that my ‘fast unto death,
was not due to loss of faith in non-violence, but it was, as I have
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

431

already said on more than one occasion, the last seal upon that faith.
Sacrifice of self even unto death is the final weapon in the hands of a
non-violent person. It is not given to man to do more. I, therefore,
suggest to this co-worker and all the others that in this religious battle
against untouchability they must be prepared joyously even to ‘fast
unto death, if such an urgent call comes to them. If they feel that they
are party to the September pledge 1 given unsolicited to the Harijans
and if they cannot make good the pledge in spite of ordinary effort,
how else, being non-violent, will they propose to deliver the goods
except by laying down their lives?
The Shastras tell us that, when people in distress prayed to
God for relief and He seemed to have hardened His heart, they
declared a ‘fast unto death’ till God had listened to their prayer.
Religious history tells us of those who survived their fast, because God
listened to them but it tells us nothing of those who silently and
heroically perished in the attempt to win the answer from a deaf God.
I am certain that many have died in that heroic manner, but without
their faith in God and non-violence being in the slightest degree
diminished. God does not always answer prayers in the manner we
want Him to. For Him life and death are one, and who is able to deny
that all that is pure and good in the world persists because of the silent
death of thousands of unknown heroes and heroines!
Harijan, 4-3-1933

599. THE BOGEY OF BOYCOTT
This is the substance of what a correspondent2 writes in the
course of a long letter:
Some of us caste men tried and succeeded in having
certain wells in some of the Bihar villages opened to the use of
Harijans. But the Brahmin pujaris nearby retorted by stopping
the service in the village temple, and the local Brahmins threatened to stop all religious services at shraddha3, marriage and
the like. This frightened the simple villagers. I feel tempted to
offer satyagraha, but I desist lest I might do so in anger. What
would you advise in such cases?
1
2
3

432

Vide “Statement on Viceroy’s Decision”, 24-1-1933
Janakdhari Prasad; vide “Letter to Janakdhari Prasad”, 4-3-1933
The Hindu ceremony of oblation for the spirit of deceased ancestors
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Not long ago there was a similar case near Trichinopoly. Dr.
Rajan acted with decision. Himself a Brahmin by caste and Shudra by
right of service, he defied the orthodox Brahmins who had refused
even to perform the funeral rights in the case of death in a reformer’s
family.
My advice, therefore, is that there is no occasion in such cases
for satyagraha. Those who regard untouchability as a sin must be
prepared to suffer all the hardships of boycott and the like as a part of
the process of purification and penance. In all humility they must
learn to dispense with the outward form. Anything done in the name
of God and for His sake needs no support from an officiating priest,
whether it is a death or a marriage or a shraddha. Anybody can unite
a couple in marriage by reciting the sacred mantras, whether it is
Ramanama of any of the known formulae according to the tradition
in which one has been brought up. God is known not by His thousand
names only but by millions of names. Any name which comes from
the heart and by which we can recognize Him is as good as any other
or, rather, the best of all for us. But these things can only be done by
those who have the courage of their conviction, faith in themselves,
faith in their cause and faith in a living God. This is not a movement
in which faint-heartedness can be of any use. Only workers with stout
hearts and irreproachable character will be able to infect the villagers
with their own strong convictions and enable them to do the right
thing in the face of boycott or worse persecution.
Harijan, 4-3-1933

600. LETTER TO MIRABEN
March 4, 1933
CHI. MIRA,

This is Saturday before prayer time 3.30 a.m. No letter from
you till Friday evening. I put off even yesterday in the hope of getting
your letter in the afternoon and still posting you something yesterday
but that was not to be. So each week your letter is getting later in
coming. But though I look forward to it I do not worry.
The letter-writing is not a right of prisoners. Therefore there is
no deprivation. What in ordinary life religion calls duty becomes or
seems to be compulsion in the prison life. But that is not the case with
us. We are in a way voluntary prisoners. Therefore we may not feel
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

433

the compulsion as such when a certain permission is withdrawn or is
regulated in the manner suited to the authorities. I can do without
your letters if need be and you must train yourself to do likewise and
feel happy 1. In a manner everybody trains himself to do without
things when he cannot get them. A follower of the Gita dharma
trains himself to do without things with happiness2 called equanimity
in Gita language, for happiness of the Gita is not the opposite
of unhappiness. It is superior to that state. The devotee of the Gita
is neither happy nor unhappy. And when that state is reached, there
is no pain, no pleasure, no victory, no defeat, no deprivation, no
possession. Prison life is a life of privilege if we learn to practise the
Gita teaching. It is easier in the prison than outside. For outside we
have the opportunity of picking and choosing. Hence we are not
always able to test ourselves. In the prison, there are various jarring
occasions. Are we able to bear them with equanimity? If we are, it is
well with us.
I have kept your letter of 19th February which I got after I had
written my weekly letter. You had Mridula in your party. I hope she is
quite well. She was not quite strong and healthy. Ba should look after
her jaws. Does she wear her teeth? Does she take enough exercise?
Does she do any reading herself? Does she get weekly letters or
fortnightly? I know last time she did not get several of my letters. I do
not know what happened to them. This time I am anxious that she
should get my letters. So far as I am aware prison authorities had not
withheld her letters.
I do propose to write to Dr. Saunders 3 about your history. But
whatever the history, there is only one treatment which I have
mentioned to you. There need be therefore no waiting for his report.
It would be interesting to know what he has to say. Sunlight, simple
food in which vitamins have not been destroyed and exercise in the
open air will dissolve all glands and other affections.
Verrier has cried off the proposed marriage with Mary Gillett.
But his communications are not happy. He is showing a very
vulnerable spot in his character. But it is well to know our friends as
1

These words are underlined in the source.
ibid
3
Arthur Saunders, addressee’s cousin, who had attended on her from her
childhood in England. Vide also “Letter to Dr. Arthur Saunders”, 5-3-1933.
2

434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

they are and still to love them.
Here they come for the prayer. 4.10 a.m. I stop.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6265. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9731

601. LETTER TO JANAKDHARI PRASAD
March 4, 1933
DEAR JANAKDHARI BABOO,

You were quite right in sending me your long letter. You will
see that one portion of your letter I have dealt with in the columns of
the Harijan.1 I have purposely refrained from using your name. You
will have to lead the way by defying the priesthood yourself, and you
will find, as I have found elsewhere, that the boycotting priests will
immediately quiet down and want to perform the ceremonies, for they
would not want to lose the income that they get from the performance
of these ceremonies. They proclaim the boycott today, because they
think that thereby they will be able to get more money from
frightened people, and you will find too that you will presently get
reformers who will gladly officiate at these functions. That was what
Dr. Rajan was able to do.
Do please continue to write to me whenever you feel you have
something to say to me.
As for your personal struggle, no prayashchitta is necessary
except that you should resolutely live apart from your wife, and you
will soon find you will be quite all right. You must develop the will to
enforce this resolution.
The other thing you ask is much more difficult. You attain to
‘param’ i.e., truth, by constantly practising it. The saying that a man
becomes what he thinks is a scientific truth. Here thinking does not
mean the mental vapours. It means perfect accord between thought,
speech and deed, and when there is that completely, you are within
sight of Truth. I wonder if it is clear to you.
1

Vide “The Bogey of Boycott”, 4-3-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

435

I am glad you like Miss Lester’s book. She is indeed a good
woman. Her address is: Muriel Lester, Kingsley Hall, Bow, London, E
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
SJT. J ANAKDHARI PRASAD

ISLAMPUR
P. O. M UZAFFARPUR (BIHAR )
From a photostat: G.N. 53

602. LETTER TO RAMA RAJU
March 4, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. Of course I would gladly discuss the
problem of untouchability with Pandit Krishnamacharya if he could
possibly visit Yeravda.
The difference between Malaviyaji and myself is as you
properly say unfortunate, but since the difference was there it is as
well that it has come out. It promotes healthy public opinion.
Yours sincerely,

R AMA R AJU
MASULIPATAM
From a microfilm: S.N. 20453

603. LETTER TO BOYD TUCKER
March 4, 1933
MY DEAR BOYD 1 ,

I have your long and good letter but none too long to mar my
pleasure. You were quite right in writing the letter. The best
appreciation I could show was to publish the relevant parts of it and to
offer my own criticism. I had prepared the article 2 for this week’s
issue of the Harijan, but it had to stand aside for matters more urgent.
I hope however it will go in next week. I shall then send you a proof
copy and as I have said there all I had to in connection with your
1
2

436

An American correspondent who was at Santiniketan at that time
Vide “Are Temples Necessary”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

letter I will not repeat the argument just now. The reference to
Gurudev I have not given in the Harijan. I know he has been specially
tender towards me of late. Perhaps Truth suffers through his reticence
if he has absolutely strong and confirmed views on the question as
your letter would suggest he has. I should hold it to be a great tragedy
if through the tenderness of friends, untruth had crept into my life or
had passed current among the people. If what I hold is truth, it must
stand the light of fiercest criticism even of friends who have hitherto
worked with me. I have no end to serve but that of Truth. If my defeat
means victory of Truth, I would count that defeat itself as victory. I do
not regard my judgements as infallible and even though I may be
right in 99 cases out of 100, I do not want to trade upon it and assume
or expect other people to assume that the 100th judgement is also
right. I have for that reason called Gurudev the great sentinel, and I
have always appreciated his warnings even when I have not been able
to depart from my course by reason of his warnings. They have put
me on my mettle and made the . people think and choose. It is not
good for individuals or nations to be under the hypnotic influence of
any single person. It is a golden cover that hides the face of Truth.
You may, if you like, read this to Gurudev, and if he is clear in his
mind, after reading the article that you will see in a few days, that he
has no doubt in his mind that I am in error, let him issue his warning
by way either of a public statement or a letter addressed to me for
publication. But if he has any doubt I want the benefit of that doubt
because I do not want the people to be confused. As it is, on this
temple-entry question I do not hold the field undisputed. They have
all kinds of arguments put before them for examination. I do not want
Gurudev’s to be one of this crowd of arguments against the simple
issue. His must be an overpowering deliverance standing by itself in its
strength and originality.
I am personally not quite sure that Gurudev agrees with you in
your attitude, for Santiniketan has its own temple or church or mandir,
whatever you like to call it. Where two or three people gather together
in a particular place in the name of God to offer worship, it becomes a
temple. In Santiniketan we have a humble but beautiful building
where prayers are offered, incenses burnt and sermons given. In
Sabarmati we have no building, no walls, but the cardinal points are
the walls, the sky is the roof and mother earth is the floor;
nevertheless, the spot that has been selected for the morning and the
evening prayers has all the essentials of a temple. But in accordance
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

437

with your letter even that bare ground is a prostitution of religion.
Surely, Gurudev will not agree with you in this attitude if I have
understood it correctly.
With love from us,
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20454

604. LETTER TO N. V. THADANI
March 4, 1933
MY DEAR THADANI,

Though I cannot immediately promote you to the rank of a
privileged jester, your letter just enables you to be admitted as a
candidate for that coveted service. You have therefore every reason to
persevere. You have no reason to fear publicity. When you have
actually been admitted to that high order, whether you fear or covet
publicity, it will be there.
You had only one English educated Indian seriously to tell you
that untouchability has been from the beginning of time. I discover
these celebrities practically every day, and, if I was not a child of the
Mother Gita all the fears that Sastri entertained would have been long
ago realized in spite of the presence of a privileged jester. But thank
God, the Gita is a never failing mother, and what is more, she is
immortal.
Yours sincerely,

P RINCIPAL THADANI
R AMJAS C OLLEGE
DELHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20455

605. LETTER TO MELISCENT SHEPHARD
March 4, 1933
MY DEAR SISTER,

I am glad you are back to your work. I did not know that you
had come.
Yes, Benarsidas is one of the good men we have. I know him
very well indeed.
Your appeal I appreciate though it is superfluous. For I began
438

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

this work after my own fashion when I was 15 years old and, finding
myself in the house of a prostitute 1 I discovered suddenly that God
had deprived me at that time, to my shame as I then thought and later
as I discovered to my great pleasure and the glory of God, of the
animal instinct. I knew then how man was misbehaving towards
woman, and since then I have never allowed a single opportunity to
pass by without making an effort to eradicate the evil. I have written
strongly against it, spoken against it still more strongly. My private
correspondence is filled with the same thing. At the present moment
my activities in that direction must be necessarily circumscribed. But
within that limit you may depend upon my doing all I can to deal with
the evil. In the Harijan I won’t be able to handle the problem directly.
The reason for it is obvious.
You have no need to apologize for being a foreigner doing this
service. When people realize that you have no other motive,
but the simple motive of serving these fallen sisters of India
and through their service also serving the fallen men of India,
they will forget that you are a foreigner. Those who have other
ends to serve under the guise of humanitarian service will always be
treated as foreigners, whether they wear the white skin or the brown
skin.
Yours sincerely,

MELISCENT S HEPHARD
6 R AJPUR R OAD , D ELHI
From a photostat: S.N. 20456

606. LETTER TO P. N. SANKARANARAYANA AIYAR
March 4, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your postcard. I had your letter also with copy of your
report and pictures. These are lying in my file awaiting disposal.
When I reach them and if I have anything to say I will certainly write
to you.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P. N. S ANKARANARAYANA AIYAR
NO. 1, 3 RD S TREET
GOPALAPURAM
C ATHEDRAL P . O., M ADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20457
1

Vide “An Autobiography”

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

439

607. LETTER TO L. M. SATOOR
March 4, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter and figures of census for which I thank you.
In the census you are taking in Poona you should have a column for
giving the sub-caste to which Harijan may belong, and for children
you should have a column showing who attends school and what
occupation, if any, the child is following, what he or she is earning.
There should be a description too of their tenements, the condition of
water-supply, lighting and streets or roads if they are living in separate
quarters.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. L. M. S ATOOR
99 M AIN S TREET, C AMP, P OONA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20458

608. LETTER TO ANNAPURNANAND1
March 4, 1933
Tell Shivaprasad to give up reading the newspapers. He can read
the Gita or Yogavasishtha or the Ramayana—Balkanda or
Uttarkanda—or the dialogue of Socrates on death 2. He should leave
worldly affairs solely to God.
[From Hindi]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 172

609. WHAT SHOULD HARIJANS DO?
Q. (1) What should be done to unite the several sub-castes among Harijans into
one?
(2) In large cities where there is sewerage the Harijan brothers are being
deprived of their livelihood. What should they do under these circumstances?
(3) In certain towns at the time of marriages and the like Harijans are not
1
2

440

The addressee was secretary to Shivaprasad Gupta who was seriously ill
Plato’s Phaedo
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

allowed to ride a horse. You have written about the duty of caste Hindus. But please
write and say what the Harijans should do under such circumstances.

A. The above three questions have been sent by a Harijan
brother. All the three are difficult questions. As long as there are
several sub-castes among caste Hindus it is very difficult to abolish the
different sub-castes among Harijans. But this much is true that if there
is a great awakening among Harijans then they can march ahead by
leaps and bounds, at once. I should like to see a time when Harijans
will be actually far ahead of the caste Hindus. But the question here is
about the present condition.
In the present circumstances, it can only be said that castes
considered higher among the Harijans should attempt to mix
with castes deemed lower. For example, the Mahar1 caste should mix
with the Mang 2 caste; they should begin to eat together and
intermarry. The Mahars who mix in this way with the Mangs should
be fearless and face whatever difficulties they might encounter.
The second question is common to all. In this age of transition
many occupations will vanish and new ones will crop up. It has always
been so. The question of sewerage can never arise in villages, Only
towns can have sewerage. Scavengers are found in towns. I imagine
that where there is sewerage, some scavengers must lose their jobs. It is
the duty of the municipality to provide work for such unemployed
scavengers. My advice is that weaving or some such occupation
should be learnt by the scavengers. In Gujarat I noticed that
scavengers who lost their jobs took to weaving. There is no common
remedy for all in this matter. It varies with the individual.
The third question is very difficult. It is implied in the question
itself that Harijans are entirely helpless and frightened. Under these
circumstances, it can only be said that they should go to the police for
help. Dr. Ambedkar told me that since the police belong to higher
castes, they do not assist and this is quite possibly true. Therefore, it
can only be said that where there is police indifference or opposition
and where no help is offered by the caste Hindus and where the
Harijans are not sufficiently strong, it is best to have patience. The
only consolation is that there are occasions in the life of every person
and every community when there is no other course open except to
1
2

Sub-castes among Harijans of Maharashtra
ibid

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

441

keep patience. Were it not so, man would become an atheist, and
forget God. Therefore, if the Harijans can see no non-violent way out
of a difficulty, then they had better pray to God for help.
Harijan Sevak, 5-3-1933

610. LETTER TO BHAGWANDAS
March 5, 1933
MY DEAR BABOOJI,

I have your letter of 28th ultimo. If you need more for the Aaj 1
Supplement, you will please ask Sjt. Ghanshyamdas. He told me that
he was writing to you to that effect. I have received 20 copies of
Kokje Shastri’s opinion, for which many thanks. I am now having a
weekly bulletin about Shivaprasad’s health from Calcutta. Let’s hope
that the prayers of the many for his recovery will be answered.
Differences of opinion with Malaviyaji are sometimes inevitable.
But I have regarded them always as blessings in disguise. One can
have differences with him without the slightest bitterness, and as they
are always honest they serve to educate public opinion.
Yours sincerely,

DR. B HAGWANDAS
From a microfilm: S. N. 20460

611. MESSAGE TO “SOCIAL SERVICE QUARTERLY”2
March 5, 1933
The field of social service is as wide as India itself, but it may
not be an exaggeration to say that the centre of it is Harijan service;
for, in serving the Harijans, the worker will meet with every
conceivable social problem in a concentrated form and he will have to
possess the best qualities.
From a photostat: S. N. 20468

1

The source has “Art”.
The message was addressed to Vaikunthlal Mehta and was meant for a special
issue of the journal to be published in April.
2

442

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

612. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
March 5, 1933
CHI. MARY,

Received your letter.1
Your letters are never fault-finding. You need not therefore be
afraid of writing as you feel, without any polish. I want you to think
aloud. Polishing is often a concealment of thought. If it is relevant
thought, the concealment amounts to an untruth. In ordinary life our
speech is rarely 100 per cent truthful. If you will go through the
translation of all the verses we sing for the morning prayer you will
perhaps find what you are craving for. Only remember that Mother
Earth, Mother Saraswati, etc., are all manifestations of God, even as
Father God is a manifestation. No one has described the whole of
Him.
The test of your yarn is not at all bad.
The coolness of a room is never the same as the coolness right
under the sky. In London, I slept with the door and the window open
but had the roof for fear of the rain coming down any moment. But
you must not try, so long as you have any fear.
I wonder if I answered your question [as to] when I began
spinning. I began it in 1919, i. e., when I was 50. I know people who
began after 60. You have therefore no cause whatever for despair.
And if it will give you comfort, know that I was a dunce.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
It is not necessary to fast whilst you are silent. Begin first with a
few hours.
From a photostat: G.N. 5955. Also C.W. 3320. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

1

The superscription and the first sentence are in Hindi in the source.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

443

613. LETTER TO CHARU CHANDRA MITRA
March 5, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. I am now sending your letter to Dr.
Bidhan Roy for such investigation as may be possible for him to
undertake.With reference to your pamphlet, I have read it. You will
permit me to say that I regard it as unbalanced. Such argument in it as
is relevant has already been dealt with in the pages of the Harijan
which you can easily secure, because there is a local sale of the paper.
Sjt. Satis Chandra Das Gupta, 15 College Square, is the Agent.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. C HARU C HANDRA MITRA , A TTORNEY -AT -LAW
5 HASTINGS S TREET
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm. S.N. 20475

614. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
March 5, 1933
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,

I enclose herewith a letter from Sjt. Charu Chandra Mitra. Will
you please make what enquiry is possible and perhaps write direct to
Sjt. Charu Chandra Mitra, sending me a copy of your reply, or, if you
prefer it, send your reply directly to me? If the reformers were in
error, we should publicly apologize.
I hope that the Board is doing constructive work.
Yours sincerely,

Encl. I Letter
From a microfilm: S.N. 20461

444

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

615. LETTER TO DR. ARTHUR SAUNDERS
March 5, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

Mirabai (Madeleine Slade) is, as you perhaps know, undergoing
imprisonment under the Civil Disobedience policy of the Government
of India. Her health has latterly been a cause of some anxiety. She
tells me that you, as the family physician, attended at all her youthful
illnesses and were present at an operation she had undergone for
glands.1 If you have a record of her illnesses I would thank you to
send me a copy for use when required. I may mention that there is
absolutely nothing serious about her health just now. She has been
removed to a better prison and has been feeling better also after her
removal. But as there was a fear at one time that she might have
tubercular glands, by way of precaution I have asked you to give me
what information you can about her previous condition.
Yours sincerely,

DR. A RTHUR S AUNDERS
37 HARLEY S TREET
LONDON, W.
From a photostat: S.N. 20466

616. LETTER TO P. N. VENKATARAMAN
March 5, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. You will find that I shall be
constantly writing about varnashramadharma in the pages of the
Harijan as so many correspondents have been writing to me as you
have done.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P. N. V ENKATARAMAN
580 P YCROFT’S R OAD
TRIPLICANE, M ADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20469
1

Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 4-3-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

445

617. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
March 5, 1933
DEAR SATISBABU,

I have your letter, and I have also two copies of the Bengali
Harijan. I wish my knowledge of Bengali was such as to enable me to
read what you have been writing. Sjt. Ghanshyamdas has heard me
say that I am studying Bengali. Unfortunately, that is untrue. What I
told him was that I was studying Urdu and that if I had the time I had
a great longing for studying Bengali and reviving my knowledge of
Tamil. A study of Bengali, as you know, is an old dream. It was about
to materialize in 1914, but I had to abruptly leave London for India
and the lessons which Mrinalini Devi was giving to me had to be
suspended. Therefore when Mahadev has read the paper 1 will send
you what he has to say. The cover is certainly attractive. You will let
me know what reception it has had from the public. As for the articles
to be sent in advance, there are tremendous difficulties, but I shall see
what can be done.
I understand your position about vaccination. Your faith will
sustain you.
You will see how the report that you sent about the Bengali work
was interwoven by Shastri into the “Week to Week” columns.1
Have you noticed the ‘comedy of errors, that happened in
connection with the information that Hemprabha had given me about
Aroon’s father’s death? When I read her letter, I could not believe my
eyes. There was nothing wrong with you. You were Aroon’s [sic]
father and yet the expression ‘Aroon’s father, was there right enough.
I read or showed it to the 9 Sardar, Mahadev and Chhaganlal, and we
all came to the conclusion that it must be another Aroon whose father
was dead, because later from the language used by Hemprabha it was
clear that you were to have seen Aroon’s father before he died, but
you and she were too late. I had a vague recollection of Hemprabha
having adopted a boy or girl, so I connected Aroon with this adoption,
and yet there were not two Aroons to my knowledge. Therefore my
letter 2 to Hemprabha baldly referred to a strange Aroon’s father. Your
1
2

446

Of Harijan
Vide “Letter Hemprabha Das Gupta”, 25-2-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

letter cleared the mystery. And now comes Aroon’s postcard, but of
course your letter itself was quite clear that it was your father who had
died. If I had remembered, as I should have remembered, that your
father was still alive, I would at once have known that Hemprabha
meant grandfather instead of father. But at the time I read
Hemprabha’s letter I had forgotten altogether that your father was still
alive. It was only your letter which revived the recollection.
I hope you and Hemprabha, Aroon and everybody who read
my letter had a hearty laugh at my expense. But if I had been there
when my letter was received, I should have joined that hearty laughter,
or perhaps called for a laughter at Hemprabha’s expense. I am not
writing separately to Aroon. You will therefore share this portion with
him. I see that he is still not quite well. And tell Aroon that I shall
write to him when he has written to me the letter he has promised.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20470

618. LETTER TO V. S. R. SASTRI
March 5, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have read your letter of 24th February from beginning to end
with greatest attention. Whilst I acknowledge the great pains you have
bestowed over the composition and the Sanskrit learning which you
exhibit, you will permit me to say that I miss the application of that
learning to the reality, and it has been a matter of very deep grief to
me that in the contact I am having with so many learned sanatanists,
hardly any one of them has touched the fundamental points I have
raised. I state them for you.
Of all those who appear as untouchables in the census figures,
who are the untouchables by birth? Where is the authority in the
Vedas for regarding them as such? And if there is none in the Vedas,
call the later Shastras impose disabilities or create classes not
contemplated by the Vedas? What is there in the Shastras to justify the
numerous disabilities which I have described in the pages of the
Harijan and which are suffered by those who are classified as
untouchables?

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

447

You ask me whether I claim to be a sannyasi. I do not. I claim to
be a very ordinary Hindu trying to serve the faith of my ancestors in
the best manner I know.
Yours sincerely,

P ANDIT V. S. R. S ASTRI
25 N. SUBBARAYA MUDALY ST .
MADHAVAPURAM , M YLAPORE
MADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20472

619. LETTER TO ALASTAIR MACRAE
March 5, 1933
DEAR MR. MACRAE,

I got your letter of the 3rd instant yesterday. I was deeply
grieved like you to see the A. P. report. The interview was
undoubtedly only for you, and I had no notion that Gopalan had
taken it. But not only did he take it, he never even showed it to me.
Hence the extremely bad form in which it has appeared. It does not
even accurately convey my opinion. Nevertheless, I am quite satisfied
there was no dishonourable conduct on Gopalan’s part. It was a
bona-fide mistake. I hope therefore you will dismiss from your mind
all irritation against him.
Yours sincerely,

ALASTAIR MACRAE, E SQ.
ARSENAL R OAD
P OONA
From a microfilm S.N. 20473

620. LETTER TO P. R. LELE
March 5, I 933
DEAR MR. LELE,

I thank you for your postcard.
Yes, I have already got Sjt. Jayakar’s opinion. I understand what
you say about yourself. I hope it would be possible for you to
continue. Can you tell me how Sjt. Jaisukhlal is getting on?
Yours sincerely

S JT. P. R. L ELE
3 1 MURZBAN R OAD
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20474

448

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

621. LETTER-TO M. I. DAVID
March 5, 1933
DEAR MR. DAVID,

I thank you for your letter. I duly received the notes for Rs.
2,500. You must have seen the announcement in the Harijan.1 I shall
jealously guard your wish that your name should not be published. I
shall do what is possible to ensure a proper selection of the first
student.
The name 2 that you give to the Scholarship is an impossible
name, but I do not know that any name is at all necessary, and if there
must be one, it must have the ancestral name, and that would be ‘The
David Scheme Scholarship’.
Whilst I shall try to secure the name of a suitable student, you
will not hesitate to let me know if you ever come across a good
candidate. I need hardly tell you that in all I do the cooperation of
Sardar Vallabhbhai is always there.
Yours sincerely,

M. I. DAVID, E SQ.
4 QUEENS R OAD
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20476

622. LETTER TO KESHAV GANDHI
March 5, 1933
CHI. KESHU,

You should ask Narandas why you have lost weight. It should
not have gone down so much. Get rid of anger and envy. Ask
someone there to tell you why the name of the Ashram was changed.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3288

1
2

Vide “the David Scheme”, 4-3-1933
The addressee had suggested “Mahatma Gandhi-Vallabhbhai Scholarship”.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

449

623. LETTER TO MATHURADAS P. ASAR
March 5, 1933
CHI. MATHURADAS,

Motibehn1 is again impatient. You will have to face the test once
more. If you are firm, all will be well. Cling to your vow.
Don’t work at the cost of your health. Moti writes that you do
not keep well. Continue to write to me.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3760

624. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
March 5, 1933
CHI. JAMNA,

I heard that you have had another attack of asthma. How is it?
You did well in writing to Purushottam not to be in a hurry to leave
Santa Cruz. He had promised to write to me but till today I have had
no letter from him.
BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 873. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi :

625. LETTER TO NARMADABEHN RANA
March 5, 1933
CHI. NARMADA,

You seem to have no regard for truth. You did not write any
letter yourself and you demand that I should write to you
You did well in paying a visit to your home. Now devote
yourself completely to work
Write to me regularly. :
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 2773. Courtesy: Ramnarayan N. Pathak

1

450

Addressee’s wife
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

626. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
March 5, 1933
BHAISHRI MUNSHI,

I got your postcard. It seems that you are being weighed down
by misfortunes. But probably man cannot be tested except through
suffering. I had already given a ‘quick doctor’s’ advice to let Jagdish
stay where he was if his health had deteriorated very much. Your hand
does not seem to have improved yet. Take proper treatment and see
that it does.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7527. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

627. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
March 5, 1933
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I am glad that you are released. You did not get the second
letter which I wrote to you, but I think they must have given it to you
at the time you were released. Write to me about your experiences in
jail this time. You have done right in accompanying Lakshmi. Write to
me about your experience in the Ashram together with your
experience in jail. And also tell me how your health was while in jail.
What did you read, and what did you think about? And what
work did you do? the women prisoners here are quite well. The Jail
Superintendent often tells me in joke that, when you were here, all the
other women prisoners wanted medicines form you, but now nobody
asks for any medicine. I replied to him, of course. But you also may
send your reply, if you wish.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–6: G. S. Gangabehnne, p. 67. Also C.W. 8797. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

451

628. LETTER TO NANIBEHN JHAVERI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

March 5, 1933
CHI. NANIBEHN JHAVERI,

You have written after a long time. But you have said nothing in
the letter. You should let me know about your programme.
Gangabehn met me. She was to come again. But she has not
come, probably because she had nothing further to ask me.
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Manavtana Prahari—Pannalal Jhaveri, p. 27

629. LETTER TO BUDHABHAI
March 5, 1933
CHI. BUDHABHAI,

Parvati has made a serious complaint against you. Have we not
made an agreement that you will not abuse her nor beat her? To abuse
or beat a weak woman ought to be regarded as a terrible form of
violence. Wake up, reform your ways, calm down. If a person like you
cannot exercise such self-control, who else can we expect to observe
ahimsa?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33121

452

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

630. LETTER TO ASHRAM BOYS AND GIRLS
March 6, 1933
BOYS AND GIRLS,

I got your letter. It is violence to tear sheets from a notebook
and use them for writing letters. Do you understand this? Don’t do it
again.
If the secretary or the other office-bearers show themselves unfit
or if the members harass them, in either case our progress will be
arrested. When you grow up you will behave as you now do. What
you do not learn now you will never learn later. I hope you do
understand that. Just as mangoes cannot grow on a babul tree, you are
not likely to change suddenly after ten years if you cannot work
unitedly or behave with self-restraint. You should, therefore, learn to
manage your body in a proper manner.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II

631. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,1

March 6, 1933
CHI. PREMA,

I am starting on this letter at five sharp (Silence Day). Yours was
the last letter I read from the Ashram post.
I have not been able to go beyond 75 counts with the slivers
which you sent. Yarn of 75 counts should be regarded as very much
below the mark. I have calculated the count on the basis of the figure
you give for weight. The scales here are not good enough for
weighing with any minute accuracy. I do believe, however, that if my
hand was all right I would be able to go up to 100 counts.
What you write to me regarding Sushila is simply incomprehensible to me. I am not aware of having ignored her in theleast. She
herself made me feel that there was no need to inquire after her or
1
Literally, ‘Yeravda Temple’, that is, Yeravda Central Prison, where Gandhiji
was imprisoned from January 4, 1932 to May 8, 1933. This place-line is not
reproduced in subsequent letters.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

453

advise her. So I did not ask her any detailed questions. Tell her this.
How could I know that like you she also craved for a show of love and
for compliments? I ought to have known that your friend would be
like you. Isn’t that what you suggest? But probably Sushila herself
will not admit this. Isn’t one Prema enough for me? There are other
Premas, of course, but they are all different from one another and
from you. However, I will be more careful in future.
How old is Vijaya? How does she behave?
Train Lakshmi thoroughly.
I also suspect something from the fact that Durga’s boils cannot
still be cured. She used to write to me regularly, but she never writes
now. From that, too, I suspect that she is hiding something. Inquire
and find out if she is suffering from some other disease.
A diet of raw vegetables and dates is bound to help you to
reduce your weight. You should also include in it two and a half
ounces of unboiled milk. Among raw vegetables, you may eat
tomatoes, radishes, carrots, lettuce, etc. You should exclude salt. You
should take two or three lemons with water or with dates. Probably it
will be better to take it with water. If, however, it sours your teeth you
may not take it. You can also mix soda bicarb with it.
I cannot discuss the question asked by Rajaji and others. That
would be violating truth. It can be done when a suitable opportunity
arises. My writings, however, contain a reply to every doubt.
I will admit all the shortcomings of the Ashram which you may
point out. But you will help me better if you also suggest suitable
remedies at the same time. Even if, however, you cannot do that, I
must have your criticism. I use my brain as much as I can. I know
this: the Ashram’s shortcomings are not its own, but mine. If the
potter makes an ill-shaped pot, is that the fault of the pot or of the
potter? I literally believe what I have said, and the shortcomings of the
Ashram, therefore, are a measure of my ignorance. But notwithstanding its shortcomings, I like the Ashram, for I am not ready to say
positively that I do not like myself. I like myself in the measure that I
do not feel the sense of “I”, and ceaselessly strive to overcome what
still remains of that sense.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10329. Also C.W. 6768. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

454

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

632. LETTER TO CHHOTUBHAI PATEL
March 6, 1933
BHAI CHHOTUBHAI,

I got your letter. Indulgence in moderation is less harmful, but
brahmacharya is the best. The atman is not a body and can exist
without the body, as God does. That which is bodiless can have no
need for sex-gratification, and, therefore, one who has awakened from
the state of ignorance also can have none. If it is one’s dharma to
shed ignorance, sex-gratification is contrary to dharma and, therefore,
harmful.
The earth is certainly ever alive, but man who is of earth is not.
He must perish.
I cannot say whether at present people are rising or falling, It
seems to me to be a futile question.
It is certainly true that we have no strength of our own except
what God gives us and we must, therefore, admit it.
He who has real humility has risen far above the man who is
proud, for humility is truth and pride is falsehood.
One should not brush the teeth with a babul stick after a meal,
but one must clean them with a finger and gargle well.
The future will show what relations you will maintain with the
Ashram after your marriage. It is needless to think of it Just now.
I cannot say that I immediately recognized you on reading your
letter. I cannot say that with regard to anybody.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10476

633. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
March 6, 1933
CHI. VIDYA,

The fact that you have been putting on weight in the Ashram
shows that the Ashram has suited you. As one’s health improves,
one’s heart and mind too gain strength.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9638. Courtesy: Ravindra R.
Patel
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

455

634. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

March 6, 1933
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I have your letter. I understand what you say about the girl. I
am not likely to be satisfied with any sort of girl for you. Gomati had
approved of her. She believed that the girl did not belong to the modh
sub-caste. The only point was that if an educated girl is desirable for a
match, though rather grown-up, she should be accepted and the
objection on the ground of her being a Gujarati or belonging to the
Bania caste, should be waived. I have no intention whatever of doing
anything without your approval.
You have not said in your letter anything about honey or the
school. Do they make honey there? From what do they make it? What
is the quality of teaching? Who are the people who are learning?
I hope you have not completely given up your writing work or
your study, have you?
I do not want to burden you with any responsibility in Almora.
Let the Shail Ashram remain just a dharmashala1 for the present. We
will see later what should be done.
I, too, would welcome keeping the Chandradutta brothers. If
they are good men, no harm will be done. It would of course be good
if Mahavirprasad accepts them. I think it would not be proper to give
a big salary for the care of the Shail Ashram. But in this matter, too,
Narandas will know better. If you trust his decision, you will be at
peace and so will I.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32992

1

456

An inn
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

635. LETTER TO VIYOGI HARI
March 6, 1933
BHAI VIYOGI HARI,

Your letter. This issue1 is better though there is still room for
improvement. It is not necessary to take everything from English nor
is it necessary to translate in full all that is taken. Some article may
deserve full translation, another only a summary, yet another may be
rejected; in brief, the Hindi readers should get all that is worth giving.
Items published in other journals too should be screened. But
sometimes those translations may be faulty. For purity, simplicity and
restraint our translation should read like original writing. As for the
translated items appearing in newspapers, they need not be included in
Hindi Harijan if the translations are accurate. I am arranging to send
English articles in advance. Satisbabu wants them and so does
Ganesan. I shall see what can be done. Why do you not include
articles by Hindi writers? But they should not be mere essays. They
should contain either the views or arguments of some sanatanists and
answers to them or a discussion of problems faced by the workers or
an account of the hardships suffered by Harijans. All the articles, in
short, must be written with a view to solving the current and immediate
problems. An abstract of the activities in Provinces should be a must
every time.
From now on I shall send everything care of The Hindustan Times.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1075

636. LETTER TO K. R. CHHAPKHANE
March 7, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 26th ultimo and now your
letter of the 3rd instant. Owing to pressure of work in connection with
the Harijan I have not been able to acknowledge your first letter
earlier.
I have no ground whatsoever to dispute the facts which you
1

Of Harijan Sevak, the Hindi edition of Harijan

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

457

seem to remember so well. Have you any recollection of the
subscribers to the fund?1 If you have, and if you can send me their
statements also, it completes for me the chain of evidence. My only
interest just now is to secure as much money as I can legitimately for
Harijan work, and when I was told by Sjt. Joshi that I had control over
the money in question I was naturally pleased. You may depend upon
it however that if I could by any chance persuade you to let me have a
say in the disposal of a purse that was supposed to be presented to me,
it won’t be Sjt. Joshi who would have the fund. I could not even write
to you this letter if there was the slightest political motive behind my
investigation of the fund.
I thank you for reminding me that I had the honour of being
your guest at the time of my visit 2 to Sangli and that the alleged
presentation was only formal and was made under your roof.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. K. R. C HHAPKHANE
P LEADER , S ANGLI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20486

637. LETTER TO BUDHI RAM DHYAN
March 7, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your postcard. I favour khaddar because everything I
spend on it goes directly into the hands of the poor.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. B UDHI RAM DHYAN
C LASS XII-A
D. A. V. COLLEGE
DEHRA DUN
From a microfilm: S.N. 20487
1
The reference is to the allegation against the addressee and one Athavale that
they misappropriated a public fund raised during Gandhiji’s visit to Sangli in 1920.
Chhapkhane had claimed that the fund in question was raised from selected
contributors for starting a movement for uplift of ‘‘States’ subjects”, that the matter
had been discussed with Gandhiji at the time and that he had asked the addressee to
start the said movement and keep the money on his (addressee’s) responsibility. Vide
also “Letter to Vithal K. Joshi”, 9-3-1933
2
In November 1920

458

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

638. LETTER TO KESHAV
March 7, 1933
DEAR BROTHER KESHAV,

I have your letter and copy of your appeal. As I take up your
letter, Kakasaheb1 is sitting by me and so I have asked him to see you,
understand from you the scheme, see the brother who has had his
training in the Ashram, and he would then advise me, after which I
shall form my opinion and let you know. As you know, Kakasaheb is
a founder-member and so he knows the evolution of spinning and
weaving from the beginning.
Yours sincerely,

BROTHER KESHAV
C HRISTIE S EVA S ANGHAM
AUNDH (NEAR P OONA )
From a microfilm: S.N. 20484

639. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA2
March 7, 1933
MY DEAR RAMACHANDRA,

I thank you for your exhaustive letter of the 4th instant. I had
entirely forgotten your stay at the Ashram. Your letter is quite helpful.
N.3 . . left Poona on Saturday, the 4th instant. Your presence is now
quite unnecessary. Perhaps by this time I know more about her than
you do. She has been much worse than you have described her to be.
She has led for years an utterly immoral and extravagant life and has
been an utter stranger to truth. She has made that confession to me
and has also definitely promised that she would make that confession
publicly before the world and she has also promised to turn over a
new leaf and lead henceforth a truthful, chaste life, and to that end she
would retire from all public activity and live a beggar’s life in Harijan
quarters in the poorest possible style, living on charity, unknown to
the world. Whether she has the strength to carry out this promise or
1
2
3

D. B. Kalelkar
Joint-Secretary of the Mysore Board of Servants of Untouchables Society
The name has been omitted.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

459

not I do not know. Let’s hope that she has. She thinks that she has
that strength. If she is sincerely desirous of leading this life, you will
render her what help you can. You are at liberty to show this letter to
her and you will please tell me all about her from time to time. From
her talks with me she led me to understand that she had great regard
for you, but that regard has very little value because she was leading
an altogether false life when she entertained this regard for you. Even
here truth had not dawned upon her when she came, but if it has really
come to her, it dawned slowly and unperceivably. That of course is all
the better. Some of the young men at least who have surrounded her
do not seem to have behaved well. But of that perhaps some other
time if necessary.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20481

640. LETTER TO V. N. SOMASUNDARAM1
March 7, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. The only thing I can
advise is that you should on the one hand persuade the temple
trusteesand on the other cultivate public opinion among the present
temple-goers.
Your sincerely,

S JT. V. N. S OMASUNDARAM
43 S ALGADO S T.
MUTWAL
C OLOMBO
From a microfilm: S.N. 20485

641. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
March 7, 1933
2

BHAI PARIKSHITLAL ,

I have your letter. For the present you should give up the idea
of starting a school of the Sangh in Surat. If we can manage well what
we have already undertaken, we shall later think about Surat.
1
2

460

Hon. Secretary, Mutwal Young Men’s Hindu Association
Secretary of the Gujarat Board of Servants of Untouchables Society
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I understand about Sarupbehn1 .
We are thinking of starting a Gujarati edition of the Harijan to
be published from here.2 The idea of publishing a leaflet is not bad.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3994

642. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Silence Day, 5.25 [Before March 8, 1933] 3
CHI. NARANDAS,

Send Prabhavati the volume of Speeches. She has written to
tell me that she had asked for it but has not received it.
Probably you know Parachure Shastri. He has once stayed
in the Ashram. He is suffering from leprosy, but the symptoms may
be considered to have dried up now. He is in jail and will be
released on the 8th. He is a good man, a man of renunciation. He
knows Sanskrit, is married, and has three children. The children are
foolish. The wife is weak in the brain. She had once been admitted to
a lunatic asylum. I think we should keep him. Give him one room.
Kaka says he should be given Mirabehn’s room. The wife will of
course live in the women’s wing. The children could be kept
anywhere. Parachure Shastri will observe the modern hygienic rules
for lepers. That is, he will not touch anyone and will keep his
clothes separate. It will be necessary to send his meals to his room.
Probably he will live on milk and fruit, or on a mixture of fresh milk
and neem leaves. He can do a great deal of work sitting in his room.
He will teach Sanskrit. He can teach even Marathi there. He will arrive
there by the 10th or the 12th. He will presently go to see his wife. I
will know from him what he intends to do if his wife is against his
1

Vijayalakshmi Pandit; vide “Letter to Nagendra Nath Bhattacharjee”,
6-4-1933
2
The first issue of Harijanbandhu came out on March 12, 1933.
3
The letter does not bear the date of writing, but in his letter to addressee dated
March 8, 1923, Gandhiji says: “I have replied to Parachure Shastri. Everything will
depend on your wire.” Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 8-3-1933. Evidently, the
wire expected by Gandhiji would be in reply to this letter. Again, in his letter to the
addressee dated March 10, 1933, Gandhiji says, “ I just received your wire about
Parachure Shastri. I had been waiting for it before asking him to go there.” Ibid.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

461

joining the Ashram. He spins a great deal. He has spun quite a lot in
the jail. He will spin there, too. He was in fact a teacher in Chinchavad.
I do not think I have any further suggestion to make. I take it that no
one will take fright by this news. Leprosy does not spread through the
air. Personally, I doubt if it is contagious. In our country, lepers freely
move about everywhere. But we should observe the prohibitation
about physical contact with a leper since that would be the right thing
for us to do. We cannot completely ignore modern science. Shastri
himself willingly observes that prohibition. If he employs the
remedies I have suggested, he may even be cured of his leprosy. I
have assumed that you yourself will not be reluctant to take him in. If,
however, you are, send me a telegram. Ask the Managing Committee,
too. It is better to consult the other permanent inmates of the Ashram
as well. In fact I feel that it is my dharma to ascertain the opinion of
every member in this matter. I took this step only after all of us here
unanimously agreed on it. But I do not worry about it. I felt it is to be
my clear dharma to take him in. He had in fact arrived with the
purpose of living in the Ashram but had to leave because his wife was
against it. I think we cannot reject him. However, there may be room
for difference of opinion in this matter. Since he had left the Ashram
once, we cannot say without further deliberation that it is our dharma
to take him back again. Hence, on getting this letter, think over the
matter. First yourself, then the Committee, and after that the rest. If
your own view is against taking him in, I should not send him there,
nor if the Committee is against it, nor if the old-time members are
against it. I would not consider it essential to seek the consent of those
who have joined the Ashram only for a short period. However, it
would be proper to discuss the matter with all the members. I feel that
I have abused the freedom which I obtained from you. Such things
come naturally to me, but I have no right, without the co-workers’
consent to send anyone who might be a burden on them. I followed
the same rule at Phoenix. Once, when I was practicing there, someone
suffering from a dangerous disease turned up and I made Ba nurse
him. I am nearing the end of my life doing such things but have still
not changed my ways. That is, I act on the assumption that the
co-workers, particularly those who are very close to me, will as a
matter of course do what I do. Let us believe and hope that this will
prove to be my last misdeed. I will settle the matter perfectly well with
Parachure Shastri. Hence nobody should come to a decision on the
basis of my assurance to him. After considering the matter
462

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

independently and examining the Ashram’s dharma in this case send
me a telegram whether thedecision is ‘yes’ or ‘no’. Let no one
believe that I will be shocked, whatever the decision. I had expected
that I would have to give but one sheet of paper to this subject, but
now it seems that I would instead be giving five. I went on writing as
ideas came to me one after another. In the matter of observing one’s
dharma, taking a decision in a hurry is harmful and ought to be
avoided. It implies self-conceit. You will see from this something of
the present state of my mind. My fitness to think about anything
except what relates to Harijan service seems to be fast leaving me. To
think about other things or to do anything or speak about anything
else has become painful to me. I am going through painful
experiences which I find impossible to describe. Even if I wished to
describe them, I have no time to do so. But no more of this now. I feel
perfectly at ease in pouring out my heart to you. I believe you have
the capacity to respond to such things. If you have followed all I have
said and wish to give the letter to others to read, I will have no
objection. If you feel that what I have written is strange, keep the letter
with you after reading it. I will explain it if we meet some day. What I
have said is nothing mysterious. It is easy enough to understand, but it
gives a glimpse into what agony one, who unswervingly follows the
path of dharma, has to endure. I do feel that if someone who has not
associated himself with my life were to read this, it would do much
harm.
Tell Parasaram firmly what your decision is. I am writing to him.
If he wants to leave despite your being straightforward in dealing with
him, let him do so. If he wishes to stay in spite of it, no objection need
be made. There is no room for charity in the sphere of dharma. It
would be easy to acquiesce in it if we transgress the proper limit of
ahimsa. But it becomes difficult to do so when in the name of ahimsa
one shows undeserved compassion and is thereby guilty of a subtle
form of violence. Just as we do not indulge an invalid’s fancies so also
we need not indulge the fancies of a person who violates the rules.
This is the way to put an end to Parasaram’s noisy complaints.
I think it will be difficult to arrange for Kusum’s trip to Almora.
At present, there are just no such facilities there. I think it will be
difficult to look after her there. We cannot put the burden of doing so
on Prabhudas, nor on Navin. If her disease gets aggravated, who will
look after her there? It might be possible to send her either to Deolai
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

463

or Matheran. Whether or not she can be sent to Deolali, will have to be
considered. I do not think it proper for the whole family to go.
Beyond this my brain refuses to work just now.
I have already written to you about Lakshmi. Lakshmidas will
certainly come there. Perhaps Devdas also will come. Rajaji and
Shankerlal are here at present.
BAPU

[PS.]
Monday, 5.25
One thing was left out in the letter for the children. Some of
them write to me to say that they have got tired of the agricultural
work. Tell them that this does not become them. A duty once
undertaken cannot be abandoned. Even music tires one so long as one
has not learnt it well. Those who have learnt agricultural work well, do
not give it up. If agricultural work were not interesting, millions in the
world would not engage themselves in it. It does require hard work,
but hard work is interesting, not indolence. Moreover, the hard work is
only physical. But our bodies love ease and comfort and therefore we
avoid hard work and in consequence suffer from diseases. I therefore
hope that the children will not tire of agricultural work. Besides, the
mother Gita also teaches us that it is in doing our duty that we find
pleasure and agricultural work is one of our duties. I have looked into
the result of the yarn-test competition. It is disappointing. Only one
sample bears the mark ‘excellent’. The mark against two is ‘bad’. All
other samples fall short in both respects. This defect must be
remedied. Ask those whose yarns have gone through the test and the
others also, to be vigilent. Spinning good quality yarn that is even and
strong, requires nothing more than careful attention. If the sliver is of
inferior quality, the yarn may fall short in respect of . . . 1 but it will
certainly not be uneven or weak. I still consider the count of the
samples low. The quality of slivers is likely to be at fault in that. It
does not matter if we produce a smaller quantity of slivers and yarn,
but what we do produce must be of the finest quality. Pay attention to
this subject and induce others to do the same. Wake up all of them. In.
. . 2 for achieving perfection, everyone must acquire speed and . . .3 It
would be good if they acquire speed in carding and ginning also.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33383
1

One word at each of these places is illegible in the source.
ibid
3
ibid
2

464

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

643. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR AND DUNCAN
GREENLEES
March 8, 1933
CHI. MARY AND DUNCAN,

I like your letter very much indeed. Before I argue to the
contrary, let me say what I have told Narandas and I think I made
clear to both of you, that you should not be treated as the other
learners who come to the Ashram, that you should take only such part
in the Ashram work as you like and can digest and that you should
use your time as may seem most profitable to you from your own
standpoint.
Now for my own opinion. The Ashram is a place where the idea
is to enforce literally the maxim ‘to labour is to pray’. This labour
was interpreted by Thoreau and Tolstoy to mean physical labour and
Tolstoy adopted Bondaref’s maxim of bread labour being God’s law
for all mankind. I read the same thing in the third chapter of the Gita.
I have tested the truth of the interpretation in my own life and in the
lives of many companions and I have felt that our lives have been
incomplete and unsatisfying exactly to the extent that we have failed
to carry out the interpretation in practice. Therefore I would say that,
so long as the routine of the Ashram appears to be a slavish following
of it, the spirit of tile Ashram is not imbibed. I confess unhesitatingly
that so few have imbibed the spirit. Many follow the routine
mechanically and, therefore, slavishly. I do not grumble over the
mechanical following, because even that is better than people idling
away their time and I am not without hope that even those who are
mechanically following the routine will some day detect the spirit and
the beauty behind it. So many Englishmen and women, especially
missionaries, make, in my opinion, the tremendous mistake of
directing the activity of others without themselves taking a direct part
in it. They, therefore, remain untouched by the activity itself and often
become blind guides. As I am dictating this, illustrations from life
crowd in upon my mind. I would, therefore, say that if you can
appreciate and understand the spirit of my remarks and feel the truth
of them, then follow the routine patiently, intelligently, whole-heartedly, till it becomes a part of your nature, lies light upon your mind
and seems to speak to you its message. Then, but not tillthen, are you
really able to write anything serious for public service. Not even every
good thought is worth giving to the world unless it is repeatedly tested
on the anvil of experience. All true labour is both contagious and
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

465

infectious. I wonder if I have driven my meaning home. If I have not,
you must reject all my argument without the slightest hesitation and
do exactly as you feel you should, so as to get the best out of your
experience of the Ashram.
With loving blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5996. Also C.W. 3321. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

644. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
March 8, 1933
MY DEAR MARY,

I had your two letters. You are not going to put an undue strain
on your body. By all means try your utmost to live the Ashram life
but not at the cost of your health. And don’t hesitate to tell me all
about the Ashram drawbacks. I would like you to show my long letter1
to Narandas.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5997. Also C.W. 3322. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

645. LETTER TO Y. R. DATE
March 8, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

This is my message for the Gaekwar Birthday Commemoration2
Volume:
“There can be no doubt that His Highness the Maharajah Saheb
Gaekwar of Baroda deserves the warmest congratulations of usall for
his treatment of Harijans and his withdrawing all State recognition of
untouchability.”
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. Y. R. D ATE
C/ O S JT. H ARIBHAU P HATAK
From a photostat: S.N. 20497; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, File No. 800(40)(3), Pt. IV, p. 127

1
2

466

Vide the preceding item.
The photostat source does not have this word.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

646. LETTER TO P. R. LELE
March 8, 1933
1

MY DEAR LELE ,

I have your letter, being your answer to “As They See Us” 2 . It
is a very good reply, if my assumption is correct that the whole of the
balance after deducting overhead charges has gone into the pockets of
the Harijans. Your letter is going in this week, but I would like you to
let me have the details showing how the disbursements were made.
As to the reply received by you from the Government regarding
the supply of Harijan to prisoners, I must not deal with it through the
Harijan. You too may regard the matter as closed.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P. R. L ELE
31 M URZBAN R OAD
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 20496

647. LETTER TO P. RAMAMURTI3
March 8, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter and I am glad you have written to
me. I wish you would care to read all the numbers of the Harijan and
I think that most of your doubts will be solved. You will find in them
that I have unhesitatingly said that all that is bad about varnashrama
and caste should be wholly removed. Temple-entry is certainly
coming much sooner than you expect. It is the centre of reform
because it would be a visible sign to the millions that untouchability is
gone. Therefore we must prosecute the reform whether the vast mass
of caste Hindus come round or not.
Anti-untouchability leagues are, I think, working satisfactorily.
A great deal is being done by them for the educational advancement
1

Acting Secretary of the Bombay Board of Servants of Untouchables Society
Published in Harijan, 4-3-1933; vide “As They See Us”, 4-3-1933
3
A Harijan teacher and member of the Andhra University Senate; Vice
President, Board of Servants of Untouchables Society, East Godavari District
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

467

and you should study the columns of the Harijan to note the progress
in that direction. I think that you are not doing justice to Sjt.
Nageswar Rao when you say that nothing but platform lectures are
being given in Andhradesa. But I am writing for fuller particulars.
If you were to start the leagues and the Birla Committee1 were to
furnish the funds, you won’t call that self-reliance. As a matter of fact,
what you need is not money but men who having received education
would take it to the humbler Harijans. My advice to the Harijan
youths, therefore, is to take up the reform energetically among the
poorest.
I do not know the effect of the Madras Services Commission.
You will perhaps enlighten me on the point, but Harijan graduates and
other highly educated Harijans have limitless scope for serving
fellow-Harijans.
If there is no Telugu newspaper specially devoted to Harijans, I
suppose it is because there are very few literate Harijans. Before,
therefore, you think of starting a paper, all the educated Harijans
should spread themselves among the illiterate Harijans and impart
instruction to them. Every educated Harijan should, therefore, become
a walking newspaper, and this you can supplement by issuing leaflets
from time to time as they may be demanded.
Please keep yourself in touch with me.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P. R AMAMURTI , B. A.
P. R. C OLLEGIATE S CHOOL
C OCANADA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20495

648. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 8, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your big packet of mail.
My views about the teaching of English, it may be said, have
changed to a certain extent. I feel that the older women in the Ashram
should be permitted to learn what they wish to. They feel their
deficiency at every step, and particularly, in our circumstances, their
1

468

Officially named “Harijan Sevak Sangh”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ignorance of English. They don’t mind being ignorant of arithmetic
nor do they mind their indifferent Gujarati, but they feel unhappy that
they don’t know English. Our connections with Englishmen will
continue, ought to continue, and, therefore, we shall also continue to
use the English language. Hence the women feel that if they know a
little English, they will be able to use it every now and then. This
argument is not altogether tenable, but there is enough truth in it to
make them wish to learn English. It is certainly not immoral to learn
English. I think that, if the women do not feel interested in any other
subject, it would be good to teach them even English to make them
study-minded. It is desirable that the older women should become
interested in study, no matter how. It is also desirable that they should
increase their knowledge. I, therefore, think that we should provide
whatever facility we can to any older woman who may wish to learn
English. Please point out to me any weakness that you may see in this
reasoning. I will try to explain again.
I see from Kikabhai’s letter that a large crowd of Harijans will
be attending Lakshmi’s wedding. I think that Jamna and you are the
right persons to give away the bride. I hope Jamna does not harbour
the prejudice of untouchability in her heart. Don’t make the Harijans
who may attend sit apart from the others. Since their proportion will
be large enough for the gathering, serve them some fruit as refreshment, as I have suggested. I suggest copra and raisins. If possible, I
will write something to be read out to the assembled guests and enclose it with this letter.1 You will have to give some dresses to Lakshmi
as a gift from the Ashram. Think over this. If you can, see Ba and ask
her advice. I should be happy if she gives one of her saris, a new one
or an almost new one. If she has preserved any jewellery, she may give
some of it too. Tell the Superintendent that you wish to see her
specially for this reason. If he permits you, well and good, if he does
not, don’t mind. Discuss with the women this question of what to give
to Lakshmi. See that we omit to do nothing which would be proper on
such an occasion. I will write to you again if I think of anything more.
You can ignore any of my suggestions which you don’t think
appropriate.
I have replied to Parachure Shastri. Everything will depend on
your wire.
1

Vide the following item.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

469

I have received Kellogg’s book. Gangabehn and Sharda have
arrived here. They have not seen me yet. Gangabehn will not be able
to do so. Sharda will see me on Saturday if she is here on that day.
You did the right thing in keeping Lakshmi’s younger sister
with Anasuyabehn. I see that Dudabhai 1 has stayed on. Dahibehn2
should be welcomed if she comes. You did right in agreeing to pay
her the expenses of her journey.
For the present, at any rate, Anandi seems to be completely free
from danger. I will give her some work every day. She lives on milk
and fruit. For some time she must remain here. You may ask
Lakshmidas about the remedies which are being tried for her. They
will be useful to others, too. It cannot be said, though, that they will
agree with everyone. But they will certainly do no harm.
I have no fear about your health so long as your diet includes
milk and curds. But I should certainly like you to exclude gram from
it. It makes the mental work you are doing more difficult. The best
food for mental workers is milk and fruit. If you eat uncooked
cabbage, it should be tender. But this is not necessary if you eat it
boiled. It would be better if you drink milk without boiling it.
Jamna should take sun-bath, get her body massaged with oil, do
pranayama systematically and, for food, drink milk and eat papaya,
raisins and, if she wishes, some vegetable. I believe she will be all right
if she restricts her diet to these things.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8328. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

649. MESSAGE ON WEDDING OF LAKSHMI
AND MARUTI
March 8, 1933
I feel a little unhappy that neither Ba nor I will be present in the
Ashram on the occasion of the wedding of Lakshmi and Maruti3 , but I
think that is ignorant love. One should feel happy wherever devotion
to dharma may make it necessary for one to be. Since one who
1

Lakshmi’s parents. The family joined the Ashram in 1915; vide “Letter to
Narandas Gandhi”, 16-9-1915
2
ibid
3
A South Indian orphan boy, brought up by Velabehn and Lakshmidas Asar

470

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

follows dharma should never wish that things should be otherwise than
they are, he can have no cause to feel unhappy.
Moreover, when so many elders and friends, men and women,
will be assembling to give their blessings, Ba’s presence or mine
should not be considered at all essential.
Lakshmi was of course eager that Ba and I should be present at
her wedding. So was Chi. Maruti. I could understand their desire. But
all of us felt that the marriage should take place without delay, and
hence I advised both the bride and the bridegroom to have the
wedding as soon as possible and they accepted my advice. Lakshmi
has been brought up in the Ashram since her childhood. But we have
not been able to educate and train her as well as the Ashram and I
would have liked to do. We did not, therefore, think it desirable to
keep a girl in the bloom of youth unmarried for very long after
betrothal. The fact that Chi. Lakshmi is getting married does not mean
that her education will stop. I regard Maruti as a very worthy young
man. He is a man of self-control. He has received training at the hands
of Bhai Lakshmidas and Velabehn. He realizes the responsibility he is
undertaking. He will not only be a husband to Lakshmi, but will also
be a friend and teacher to her. There can be no doubt that, if this
marriage is successful, it will benefit both Harijans and Hinduism a
great deal. Looked at from this point of view, this marriage is of great
importance and makes the responsibility of both correspondingly
greater.
Chi. Maruti and Chi. Lakshmi were betrothed some years ago. It
was a big problem for the Ashram to whom Lakshmi should be
married. We thought that, having regard to the training she had
received in the Ashram, she would be happy only if she got a partner
who had received a similar training. The Ashram believes in the
principle of varnashrama and tries to follow it as well as it can. I
cannot speak for all, but I have often stated that I myself believe that
in the present age all Hindus can, and do, belong to one varna only. If
we wish to revive the varnashrama system, we shall have to start with a
clean slate. This being my view, it was my duty to find a suitable
husband for Lakshmi. Velabehn came to my help and suggested
Maruti’s name. Lakshmidas also liked the idea. I put the suggestion to
Lakshmi, and she, too, accepted it. Her father also gave his consent
and the two were betrothed. In my opinion all that we did was in
conformity with dharma. I regard marriage too as a protective hedge
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

471

for dharma, and we should hope that the bride and the bridegroom
also will regard it in the same light.
This marriage has no connection with the present movement.
Mixed marriages like this one are in no way a part of the movement
for the removal of untouchability. This marriage is a recognition of
the point of view of one who believes in all the various ideals of the
Ashram. I hope that no one will misunderstand its significance
because it is taking place at the present time when the movement for
removal of untouchability is going on and because it is inspired by
one who is the chief leader of that movement. I do not hold up this
marriage as an example for anybody to follow. I regard marriage as a
matter of the parents’ and their children’s free will. I believe that
there is ample support for this view in Hinduism. However, it has no
connection with the problem of the removal of untouchability. The
question belongs to another field of reform in Hinduism.
[Vandemataram] from

MOHANDAS
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8329. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

650. DRAFT CONSTITUTION OF THE HARIJAN
SEVAK SANGH
[March 9, 1933] 1
The following resolution was adopted on behalf of what are
known as caste Hindus by a meeting of their representatives from all
India held at Bombay under the presidentship of Pandit Madan
Mohan Malaviya on 25th September, 1932.2
This Conference resolves that henceforth, amongst Hindus, no one shall be
regarded as an untouchable by reason of his birth and those who have been so
regarded hitherto will have the same rights as the other Hindus in regard to the
use of public wells, public roads and other public institutions. This right shall
have statutory recognition at the first opportunity and shall be one of the
1

This is presumably the draft mentioned in “Letter to Amritlal V. Thakkar”,
14-3-1933. The Sunday previous to March 14 was March 9. The constitution was
finally adopted with minor changes on January 2, 1935. Gandhiji says in the above
letter that the draft was prepared by Mahadev Desai. The portions of the original draft
left after Gandhiji had revised it are underlined.
2
Vide “Resolution at the Hindu Leaders’ Conference, Bombay”, 25-9-1932.

472

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

earliest acts of the swaraj Parliament, if it shall not have received such
recognition before that time.
It is further agreed that it shall be the duty of all Hindu leaders to secure, by
every legitimate and peaceful means, an early removal of all social disabilities
now imposed by custom upon the so-called untouchable classes including the
bar in respect of admission to temples.

This was followed up by a public meeting convened by the
Hindu leaders from all parts of the country and held in Bombay on
the 30th September, under the presidentship of Pandit Madan Mohan
Malaviya, at which following resolution among others was passed:
This public meeting of the Hindus resolves that an All-India
Antiuntouchability League, with its headquarters at Delhi and branches in
different provincial centres, be established for the purpose of carrying on
propaganda against untouchability and that for this purpose the following
steps should be immediately taken:
(a) All public wells, dharmsalas, roads, schools, crematoriums, burning-ghats, etc., be declared open to depressed classes.
(b) All public temples be opened to members of depressed classes. Provided
that no compulsion or force shall be used with regard to (a) and (b), but
peaceful persuasion will be adopted as the only means.
This public meeting of Hindus appeals to the Hindu community to collect as
large an amount as possible to be used for the removal of untoucha-bility and
cognate objects and for this purpose authorizes the President and [the]
Secretary to take all necessary steps.

In pursuance of the said resolutions a society, named the AllIndia Anti-untouchability League subsequently named as Harijan
Sevak Sangh was duly formed and a constitution was adopted by it at
[Delhi] on 26th [October, 1932].
It was then considered advisable to frame a fuller constitution
and the following was finally adopted at a meeting of the central
board of All-India Harijan Sevak Sangh held at Delhi on . . .
superseding the previous constitution.
THE C ONSTITUTION OF THE HARIJAN S EVAK S ANGH
R EFERENCE TO
P RESENT R ULES

1. The name of the Society will be Harijan Sevak Sangh.
2. The object of the Sangh shall be the eradication by truthful
and non-violent means of untouchability in Hindu Society with all its
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

473

incidental evils and disabilities, suffered by the so-called untouchables
hereinafter described as Harijans in all walks of life and to secure for
them absolute equality of status with the rest of the Hindus.
3. In furtherance of its objects the H. S. S. will seek to establish
contact with caste Hindus throughout India and show them that
untouchability as it is practised in Hindu society is repugnant to the
Shastras and to the best instinct of humanity, and it will also seek to
serve Harijans so as to promote their moral, social and material
welfare.
4. The affairs of the Sangh shall be managed by a Central Board
constituted as hereinafter provided.
5. The Central Board shall consist of the following members and
(2) the Presidents of the Provincial Boards of the Sangh with power to
the President to co-opt not more than five members.
The organizing members are:
1.
Sjt Ghanshyamdas Birla, President
2.
Sir Purushottamdas Thakurdas, Bombay
3.
Sir Lalubhai Samaldas, Bombay
4.
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, Bombay
5.
Seth Ambalal Sarabhai, Ahmedabad
6.
Dr. Bidhan Chandra Roy, Calcutta
7.
Lala Lachmandas, Delhi
8.
Rao Bahadur M. C. Rajah, Madras
9.
Rao Bahadur Srinivasan, Madras
10.
Dr. T. S. S. Rajan, Trichinopoly
11.
Sjt. A. V. Thakkar, General Secretary
12.
Mr. Baloo P. Palwankar, Bombay
13.
Mr. J. P. Mandelia, Treasurer, Delhi
14.
Mr. D. P. Khaitan, Calcutta
15.
Shrimati Rameshwari Nehru, Lahore.
6. The Central Board may co-opt members from time to time
either for life or for a fixed period. The organizing and the co-opted
members together shall at no time exceed the number of ex-officio
members.
7. The President shall subject to re-election retire every three
years and be elected by the then existing Board.
474

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

8. The President shall have the power to remove [the] Secretary
or [the] Secretaries and [the] Treasurer and appoint others In their
stead provided that there shall never be more than three Secretaries or
more than two Treasurers.
9. The Sangh shall have as many branches in provincial centres
as the President of the Central Board may deem necessary.
10. The President of the Central Board shall select the President
of each Provincial Board who, in his turn, will select as many members
for his Board as he may think fit not, however, more than ten.
11. The President of a Provincial Board shall appoint a working
Secretary for his Board from among its members, subject to the
approval of the President of the Central Board.
12. Each Provincial Board may form as many committees or
agencies as may be found necessary in the interest of the Harijan
cause.
13. The Presidents of the Central and Provincial Boards and
their committees shall all be honorary.
14. The office-bearers and members of the Central Board he
Provincial Boards and committees and agents shall (1) sign the pledge
hereto annexed, (2) pay annual subscription in advance of Rs. 6.00
payable at his will in two half-yearly instalments subject to special
exemption by a President within his jurisdiction, (3) perform some
definite Harijan service named by him and approved by one half of
the board, (4) send a diary to competent authority from month
tomonth containing a record of such services.
15. It shall be competent for the Sangh to acquire and hold
immovable properties. Such properties shall vest in a permanent
Trustee or Trustees appointed by the President of the Central Board.
The Trustee or Trustees shall be entitled to deal with them only in
accordance with the resolutions of the Central Board.
16. The funds of the Central Board of the Sangh shall be
deposited in a bank or banks in the name of the Sangh and the
account shall be operated upon by the President or his nominee or
nominees.
17. The funds of the Provincial Boards and their committees
shall similarly be deposited in banks as far as possible and the
accounts shall be operated upon by the respective Presidents or their
nominees.
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

475

18. The Central Board shall meet in any convenient place in
India at least once in a year. The quorum for its meeting shall be ten.
19. It shall be competent for the Central Board to frame
bye-laws for preparing and passing of the central and provincial
budgets, for the custody, disposal and audit of the funds of the Sangh
and for otherwise regulating its work.
20. The Central Board may function in Indian States in which
there is no prohibition against its activities.
21. No member or agent of the Central Board or Provincial
Boards or committees shall while holding such position in any way
engage in any campaign of civil disobedience.
22. A member of any Board or agent who fails without just
cause to attend three consecutive meetings of Boards to which they
belong shall be deemed to have vacated office.
23. Any member of a board when required thereto fails to carry
out instructions duly issued to him by a competent authority may be
relieved of his office at the discretion of the Central or the Provincial
Boards.
24. Any person who subscribes to the object of the Sangh and will
help the Sangh by paying and collecting contributions to the Sangh
and otherwise further its object can become an associate of the Sangh
and shall be kept informed of the proceedings of the Sangh from time
to time and shall be entitled and invited to attend the meetings of the
Central Board or of the Board of his Province without however the
right of voting.
25. The Central Board, the Provincial Boards and the
committees shall establish contact with Harijan organizations
throughout the country and invite them to send lists of advisers who
will be kept informed of the activities of the Sangh and who will be
invited to attend the meetings of Boards or committees and to take
part in their deliberations, without however exercising the right to
vote.
26. Every Board or committee shall have as many Harijan
members as it is possible to secure consistently with its maximum
provided that the pledge to be signed by them shall be as per form B
hereby attached and that they will be exempt from other conditions
laid down in sub-clauses 2, 3 and 4 of clause 14 hereof.
476

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

27. For the better administration of the affairs of the Sangh the
President shall select from among the members of the Central Board
executive committee of seven members including himself as Chairman
and two Secretaries.
28. The E. C. shall meet every three months and oftener when
necessary and have all the power exercisable by the Central Board
subject however to revision of its work by the Central Board in so far
as such revision is possible. The four members besides the President
and Secretaries will subject to re-selection retire every year.
29. All the acts performed hitherto and transactions undertaken
under the superseded constitution are hereby ratified.
30. Consistently with the foregoing, the old constitution is
hereby repealed—not inconsistently with the object of the Sangh,
Central Board shall have the power to revise this Constitution from
time to time.
31. During the transition stage the existing organizations shall
function till changes in consonance with this Constitution are
completed.
32. This Constitution shall come into effect as from . . .
APPENDIX A

I, name, age, occupation, residence believe in the complete
eradication of untouchability as it is practised today in Hindu societyand hereby subscribe to the constitution of H. S. S. I do not consider
any human being as inferior to me in status, shall pay in advance
every half year commencing from 1st January 1935 the sum of . . . .
I further undertake to perform personal service of Harijans in
the following manner:
(State)

I shall regularly send every month a diary of personal service to
Harijans.
Date
Place

Signature
APPENDIX B

I, full name, age, occupation, residence
I believe in the mission of the Harijan Sevak Sangh and
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

477

subscribe to its constitution.
I shall carry out all the instructions that may be issued from time
to time by the Central Board or its branches.
From a photostat: G.N. 8733; also from Constitution of the Harijan Sevak
Sangh

651. LETTER TO ABHYANKAR
March 9, 1933
MY DEAR ABHYANKAR,

Here is copy of my further correspondence with Sjt. Chhapkhane.1 I suggest your seeking him and fixing up whatever is possible.
He is so definite about what happened during my visit to Sangli that it
is difficult to contradict him without unimpeachable evidence or to
believe that he is guilty of saying what is not true.
Sjt. Joshi will perhaps show my letter2 to you.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20512

652. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
March 9, 1933
MY DEAR GHANSHYAMDAS,

The English Harijan has become self-supporting already. The
subscriptions received to date from street sales and annual subscribers
leave a balance without the aid of the Rs. 1044 from the Central
Board3 . This money can, therefore, now be refunded. Will you kindly
tell me how you would want this money to be sent to you? I
understand that you have to pay something to the Maharashtra Board.
My enquiry as to the method of refunding the money is merely with a
view to saving commission on money order, draft or cheque.
Arrangements have been made to issue a Gujarati Harijan also.
It is being issued from Poona. The Bombay Board has guaranteed the
1

Vide “Letter to K. R. Chhapkhane”, 7-3-1933
Vide “Letter to Vithal K. Joshi”, 9-3-1933
3
Servants of Untouchables Society
2

478

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cost for three months in the event of any loss being incurred, but I
have no such fear.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU

[PS.]
Your letter written from Benares has arrived. You have been
postponing the operation, which I do not like.1
From a copy: C.W. 7930. Courtesy: G. D. Birla. Also In the Shadow of the
Mahatma, pp. 106-7

653. LETTER TO BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
March 9, 1933
THE JOINT HON . S ECRETARIES
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
18 BRITISH INDIAN S TREET, C ALCUTTA
DEAR FRIENDS,

I thank you for your letter of 23rd ultimo enclosing a
memorandum on the Poona Pact on behalf of the British Indian Association.2 I have been carrying on private correspondence with friends
in this matter to ascertain Bengal opinion. My own position is quite
clear. I was wholly uninterested in the number of seats reserved for
untouchables or depressed classes. Once the principle of reservation
was conceded, my own position was that the more they got the better it
was for them and for Hinduism and, therefore, for the whole of India
from every point of view. If untouchables are a part of ourselves, what
can be grander than that we reserve seats for them without any
1

The postscript appears only In the Shadow of the Mahatma, according to
which source it was written in Hindi.
2
The memorandum was prepared by a subcommittee, with Sir Bepin Bihary
Ghose as its president” appointed by the All-Parties Bengali Hindu Conference held
on the January 11, 1933, in the hall of the British Indian Association. The
memorandum inter alia said: “It will thus be seen that the caste Hindus of Bengal are
already smarting under a sense of injustice; and the Prime Minister’s acceptance of the
Poona Pact comes as a sensible addition to their grievances. Upon the basis of the
facts set forth above, it is submitted that the Poona Pact did not fulfil the conditions
for a substituted agreement laid down in the Prime Minister’s Award, and that,
therefore, the Prime Minister has ample justification for re-considering his assent to
the same” (S.N. 20341 ) .
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

479

reservation. That to my mind would be the very best method of killing
the spirit of difference. I wholly dissent from the view that the
principle of separation is left intact in the Yeravda Pact1 . On the
contrary, the principle of joint election has been the main feature of
the Yeravda Pact so far as the political side is concerned. That the
candidates for joint election have to be selected by Harijan electors in
the first instance is surely no drawback, if we have faith in ourselves
and in our regard for them, and if all the four candidates selected
happen to be anti-Hindu reactionaries it would be to me proof positive
that during the period of grace we had failed to command their
affection or esteem and we would have to thank our stars if we have to
elect from among reactionary candidates. I do not in any way share
your fear that depressed class members will not do justice to the
Hindu or the national cause. Nor have I any fear that they will not be
able to discharge their proper function as representatives of the
people. Should it prove otherwise it will mean that we are not fit for
swaraj.
All things considered, therefore, I fear that I can be no party to
the revision of the Pact, and in any case I am only one of the parties
concerned, and my opinion will be valueless if all the other parties
consent to or desire revision of the Pact in the direction suggested by
the British Indian Association.
As I do not wish to compromise your position in any way, I
have not entered into a public discussion of your position nor will I
do so now unless you wish me to. The very first person I wrote to was,
I think, Dr. Bidhan Roy, and he told me that he was seeing all the
interested parties and that he would write to me. I have not heard from
him since. I am now in your hands.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20511. Also C.W. 7931. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

1

For the full text of the Pact, vide Appendix “ Discussion whit a Friend”,
13-1-1933

480

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

654. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
March 9, 1933
DEAR SATISBABOO,

I have your letter giving me the contents of the two issues of the
Bengali Harijan. You will see the note1 that is to appear in the ensuing
number of the Harijan.
I note what you say about smallpox. I do not know however
whether it is a useful thing for us to have statistics about the
distribution of smallpox among different castes.
I am glad you are keeping in touch with sanatanists. That they
will not listen to the other things until we give up temple-entry is well
known. My suggestion is before them that they should start their own
organizations and take up the other items. If they don’t, it shows the
hypocrisy of the whole thing.
As to varnashrama, I do mean that today if we must classify the
whole of Hindus according to varna, there is only one varna possible,
and that is Shudra. Acceptance of the fourth varna by all will represent not only the true state of Hindu society, but it will at one stroke
level down all distinctions of high and low. That does not prevent
anybody from attaining divine or any other knowledge, but it does
mean that all live by their labour and all become entitled therefore to
nothing more than simple maintenance. That in my opinion is varna
dharma in a nutshell. That Hinduism has never lived up to it perfectly
is true, but in my opinion it is equally true that Hinduism has in its
purest period consciously lived up to it with success.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20507

1

Vide “A True Servant”, 11-3-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

481

655. LETTER TO VITHAL K. JOSHI
March 9, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I have heard from Sjt. Chhapkhane.1 He gives
a categorical reply confirming Sjt. Athavale’s and he also suggests
that you should have gone to Sjt. Chhapkhane to have the matter
cleared up. I suggest your doing it. Copies of the balance of correspondence are being forwarded to Sjt. Abhyankar. Of course there is
no question of a court case. I can only plead with those who hold the
money, but it is difficult for me to believe that a man like Sjt. Chhapkhane could be guilty of giving a false version of what happened
during my visit to Sangli. No theory can be built upon Sjt. Gangadhar
Rao’s recollection. He does not say anything with confidence and it is
not possible for anyone to recollect events that happened so many
years ago. Therefore, unless there is unimpeachable evidence to the
contrary, Sjt. Chhapkhane’s word must be taken, and in that event I
can only plead with him to use some part of the money at least in
connection with Harijan work.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. V ITHAL K. J OSHI
NEW PETH
S ANGLI
From a microfilm: S.N. 20514

656. LETTER TO N.
March 9, 1933
2

MY DEAR N. ,

I had hoped to hear from you today. I had your note scribbled
on the back of the telegram that was received by you. You were right
in refusing the Rs. 25. I did not like the subscription to your note.
“Your son” looks unnatural and theatrical. If the truth has really
dawned on you, you must realize the enormity of the past wrong and
1

For Gandhiji’s reply to him, vide “Letter to K. R. Chhapkhane”, 7-3-1933
An American women who later stayed at the Sabarmati Ashram for some time;
the name in this and the subsequent relevant items, however, has been omitted.
2

482

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you ought to shed all hysteria and unnaturalness. You can only become my daughter if you would be good as you have promised to me.
I had letters from S. 1 and Sir M. 2 I am therefore writing to Sir
M. a letter giving him the purport of your confession and your
promise, naturally withholding the names you have given me and I am
sending a similar letter to S. That is right, is it not? S. adds in his letter
that he would be delighted if you came under my guidance and
utilized your services.
May God bless you and give you strength to keep your
promise.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20504

657. LETTER TO M.
March 9, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter about N. She was with me for a few
days and I regret to have to report to you that her record is not what
you describe. Bit by bit she made her confession and it made a
ghastly story. She seems to have led a most extravagant and immoral
life, even from tender years. She was open to the advances of
practically any person, and she was no better after her acceptance of
Hindu religion. She has debts amounting to nearly Rs. 10,000 spread
over Europe and India. She has travelled under a false name. The
only thing I am able to say in her favour is that she has been quite
frank with me in her recital of her recklessnesses, though, as I have
said, they came bit by bit in answer to my cross-examination. She has
professed penitence and made me a definite promise to say good-bye
to her past life. I have told her that I could not take her on trust but
that if she proved true to her promise I would not hesitate to defend
her and to guide her. I do not know what capacity she has still left for
controlling herself and keeping her promises.
In giving you this painful story of her confession I am betraying no confidence, for, she was to have published a confession much
like this immediately on her reaching Bangalore. She was also to give
1

An American women who later stayed at the Sabarmati Ashram for some
time: the name in this and the subsequent elevant items, however, has been omitted,
2
ibid
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

483

up the boarding house and with her son become a beggar relying
purely upon a forgiving world’s charity and was to live in a corner in
Harijan quarters the simplest possible life giving up the governess and
letting her baby son share the privilege of her penitent life.
There are some further details, some other particulars of her life,
which I may not disclose, nor, so far as I am aware, will she.
Her confession has made me sad. I have had many boys and
girls making their confessions to me, but it has never been my misfortune to come across a case like N.’s. But I have no right to judge
her. Judgment is in the hands of God. Being myself in need of pity
from the world I only pity her and love to help her to the extent of
my ability. I felt drawn to her when she wrote to me announcing her
decision to fast with me if I had commenced the fast in the begin-ning
of the year. I had warned her against it and the correspondence became lengthened. I had hoped that she would become an excellent
member of the army of Harijan servants and her letters give all that
promise.
I thank you for your personal wishes for me and kind thoughts
about me.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 20502

658. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA
March 9, 1933
MY DEAR RAMACHANDRA,

Here is a letter which I would like you to read and hand it to N.
I would like you also to give me the full name and address of R.
of the Engineering College. I understand that he has been her chief
companion in connection with the scavenging work.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20503

484

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

659. LETTER TO R. RAMAMOORTHY
March 9, 1933
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 10th February, reminding me
of a quotation from “Santi Parva”.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. R. R AMAMOORTHY
C/ O S JT. R AMACHANDRA R AO
1 R AVANA IYER S T.
P. T. M ADRAS
From a microfilm: S.N. 20508

660. LETTER TO PANCHANAN TARKARATNA
March 9, 1933
DEAR PANDITJI,

I was amazed to receive your undated letter.
So far as your son’s visit is concerned, he was to come to me not
as one of the Shastri disputants but as one desirous of answering my
questions, enlightening me and to this end seeing me from day to day
for 10 days or longer if necessary, and he was to come to me as your
representative even as you had come 1 without imposing any conditions on me. It surprises me that now you should describe his coming
to me as one of the disputants in the nature of fulfilment of your
promise. Secondly, from the very commencement of the discussions,
untouchability as it is practised today was the subject-matter of
discussion2 , and I have a letter written by Pandits on the very date that
they came to the effect that that was the common ground between
them and me. You, your son or anybody can see the original document in my possession. But the Pandits had imposed another condition which they thought I would never accept, but in order not to miss
the discussion with them when they had come as far as the jail gate, I
1

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 30-12-1932 and “Letter to Motilal Roy”,
18-2-1933
2
With sanatanist Shastris, on January 12; vide “Note to Deonayakacharya”,
12-1-1933
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

485

waived my objection and accepted their condition retaining the words
“as at present practised”. Still they would not come. I cannot help
saying that this was unreasonable, discourteous and unworthy of
learned men. Of all the painful episodes that I have had the
misfortune to face in my contact with Shastris, this was the most
painful.
Of the other parts of your letter I desire to say nothing beyond
this that I am unable to endorse your interpretation of the Shastras as
being repugnant to common sense, universal morals and contrary to
the interpretation of the Shastras by Pandits having no less learning
and authority than the opposite school and in the presence of such a
conflict of interpretation you will not blame me if I accept that which
is more consistent with my moral sense.
As to your proposed fast, whilst I should deplore it if you ever
came to undertake it, such fasts are an everyday occurrence in
Hinduism and have always to be welcomed when they come from the
purity of one’s heart and without anger or malice.
You would not write as you have done about the two Bills now
pending before the Legislature if you had carefully studied the
contents and application of these Bills.1 In my opinion they constitute
no interference with anyone’s religion or conscience. One Bill takes
untouchability out of the domain of civil law which is what you and I
and everybody else should desire, and the other ensures the free
exercise of conscience by all, whereas today the conscience of a
growing number of people is constrained.
Yours sincerely,

P ANDIT P ANCHANAN TARKARATNA
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20509 a

1

These were unofficial Bills relating to the abolition of untouchability: one to
be sponsored in the Central Legislative Assembly by Ranga Iyer and the other in the
Madras Legislative Council by Dr. Subbaroyan. Ranga Iyer’s Bill was to come up for
introduction first on February 27 and then again on March 24. On both occasions
“protracted discussions on other non-official Bills by members who were hostile or
indifferent to the anti-untouchability movement” vitiated the attempt. —India in
1932-33

486

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

661. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
March 9, 1933
DEAR MOTIBABOO,

You have asked me to send my reply to Pandit Panchanan Tarkaratna directly. Unfortunately, you have not given me his address
and he has omitted to give it in his letter. I therefore send my reply1 to
you. You may, if you like, put it in an envelope and post it from there.
You should read the letter before posting. I patiently await your letter
promised in your postcard.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 20509

662. LETTER TO DEVA PRASAD SARVADHIKARI
March 9, 1933
DEAR SIR DEVA PRASAD,

I thank you for your letter of 3rd March and was grateful to
learn that Abdul Alim of Tipperah had already been admitted to the
institution2 and that you were having him examined by a doctor and
making arrangements for special attention being paid to him.
Let us hope that he will prove worthy of all the kindness that is
being shown to him
Yours sincerely,

S IR DEVA P RASAD S ARVADHIKARI
125 BOW BAZAR S T.
C ALCUTTA
From a microfilm: S.N. 20506

1

Vide the preceding item.
Named ‘‘The Refuge”; this was a home for the ‘‘homeless, helpless and
hopeless” of which the addressee was the President.
2

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

487

663. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
March 9, 1933
CHI. NARANDAS,

I send with this my reply 1 to the question asked by Mary and
Duncan. Read and think over it and then pass it on to them. I wrote to
you 2 yesterday regarding Lakshmi and also sent a message for the
occasion. Most probably Devdas will arrive there on Sunday.
I am becoming convinced that the source of asthma also is in
the stomach. If, therefore, Chimanlal and Jamna cling to the
experiment of milk diet with determination, their asthma is bound to
be cured. And they need not also think that they must drink a certain
quantity of milk. I think that they will be able to digest only a very
small quantity. Milk is drunk for the sake of the proteins, the ghee
and the vitamins which it contains. If proteins give strength, they also
diminish it if there is the slightest excess of them. Weak people,
therefore, can build up strength by drinking milk in a very small
quantity. The chief food of such people should be vegetables and
juicy fruits. Without trying other remedies, therefore, if they eat bhaji
and juicy fruits in plenty and drink a very small quantity of milk for
strength, they are bound to get all right. And if this regimen does not
help them, I will not mind their concluding that nothing else will and
doing nothing. They should drink the milk unboiled and mixed with
some fruit or green vegetable. In doing so, they would be eating milk
instead of drinking it, and it will then be much easier to digest. They
should also regularly do pranayamas, slowly and moderately, on an
empty stomach. Besides, they should take sun-bath. In this season,
hip-bath also is bound to be beneficial.
I have looked into Radha’s accounts. I am returning them. I
think in the present circumstances we are helpless in this matter.
1
2

488

Vide “Letter to F. Mary Barr and Duncan Greenless”, 8-3-1933
Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 8-3-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Expenses on food alone come to Rs. 30. Rs. 55 account for rent,
railway fare and other expenses during the journey, and Rs. 25 for the
doctor’s fees, maid servant, postage, repair of watch, etc., and playing
cards for bezique. There may be room for criticism in regard to this
item of Rs. 25, but there can be no criticism in regard to the Rs. 30 for
food, if the amount is for one month. The whole question of Ashram
expenses, that is, of our way of living, is a complicated one. If we
carefully watch ourselves daily and introduce greater and greater
simplicity in the Ashram, we shall learn to rely more and more on
God in our misfortunes in the shape of illness and accidents. Our
work then will shine better. We shall feel happy with ourselves and will
be safe in all circumstances. It will then be easy for us to control,
without criticizing them, those others who spend too much. “ W e ”
here means most of the inmates of the Ashram who are seekers after
truth and have dedicated themselves to its pursuit. Personally I feel
that a time is coming when we shall have to live like sannyasis
confined to the Ashram. That is, we shall have to be content with
whatever treatment we can get in the Ashram itself for any illness.
Almora was intended, is still intended, to supplement the Ashram. But
I think it would be desirable to renounce even that. But we can do all
these things only by cultivating such a climate of opinion in the
Ashram. In doing so, nobody should look to what the other inmates
do. Anybody who feels that he ought to practise such sannyasa should
start doing so. In other words, he will not go anywhere outside the
Ashram for treatment of illness or for his personal work. Just now, this
is only an aspiration. I have merely taken this opportunity to put the
suggestion before you so that you may think over it at leisure and
discuss it with other senior inmates.
Sitla Sahai has attacked me too. But I have thrown the responsibility for the whole thing on you. He also has complained that I have
shifted the responsibility. I will put up with that charge. Ask Purushottam to write a detailed letter to me. The doctor’s remarks in regard to
Kanu seem justified to me. If he has carefully learnt how to do the
massage, if he gives complete rest to the affected part and if it is
gently massaged every day, it will certainly be cured. The improvement will of course take time.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

489

Parashuram seems to have joined the Ashram to test your
capacity for endurance. But you are strong enough and so we need
not worry. You may give him divorce when you can bear it no longer.
Personally, I am now ready to accept this reform in Hindu marriage.
Millions of poor Hindus do have the custom of divorce. Their lives
would become unbearable without it. I see no dharma in people
regarding themselves as belonging to the twice-born class and forcing
women to accept their ideal. Spiritual bonds must be indissoluble. But
when the ideal is forced upon people through law, it ceases to be
dharma. I was discussing the question of marriage with the Ashram,
but I digressed and discussed the problem of ordinary marriage.
Those who join the Ashram marry it, and say so. The Ashram is the
wife and the person who joins it is the husband. When, however, the
bond becomes unbearable to the poor wife, she has every right to ask
for divorce. You may use this right whenever you wish to.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C. W. 8330. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

490

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDICES
APPENDIX 1
TALK WITH SADASHIVRAO AND SHINDE1
January 13, 1933
BAPU :

Even after this Bill is passed the majority should not exercise their

right to frighten away the minority. The temple should be kept open for a few hours
daily for the sake of the minority. They too have a certain sentiment for the image
and believe in its importance and power. I would say to them that they should have
darshan to their heart’s content before the temple becomes ‘impure’; I would go in
after that.
SADASHIVRAO :

But would it not hurt their inferiority complex?

BAPU : The question of inferiority arises only in the case of Harijans. If the
reformists are in a majority, the Harijans should act like seniors, and should do out of
their free will what they are not bound to do by law.

I don’t want separate temples erected. But I would say to them [the
sanatanists]: ‘I shall make the necessary arrangement for you. You should not go
away. I do not want to pay you in the same coin. You had regarded us as low. You
asked up to be content with having darshan of the tower. But we are not going to
regard you as low. We shall let you precede us and we shall respect your sentiments
regarding the purity of the image.’ Man compromises either through weakness or
because he is strong. As a votary of truth I would make a compromise on the basis of
my strength. Only yesterday I dealt with the sanatanists in this way. They asked me
to sign some document. Normally I would not endorse such a statement. But in order
to satisfy them I affixed my signature, but after making a couple of most essential
changes. If I disclose what took place between them and me, it is not going to shed
lustre on Hinduism.
I have learnt a lot from my involvement in this issue. I came to know what the
Shastras had to say. Without knowing all this I could not have issued such
statements. I would not have at any rate been able to write with such authority. Even
the thought of this compromise would not have occurred to me had I not had all these
interviews with them.
SHINDE :
BAPU :

1

But they think this is where the hitch comes in.

I do not look upon it as any hitch. I do not believe that all those who

Vide “Letter to S. Nagasundaram”, 13-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

491

raise objections are insincere. I don’t want to drive them out of the temples. The
lives of those who go to temples with a sincere heart are linked with the temples. I
say this on the strength of my mother’s example. She would not put a grain in her
mouth without having darshan in a temple, however ill and bed-ridden she might be.
She used to derive strength from this practice of hers. I do not want to exercise the
right I have acquired as though I were a demon or a bully. I have to give a thought to a
true mother. All the women who visit temples are but mothers to me. If they want to
preserve the purity [of the images], they may do so. The Harijans should be charitable
enough to let them do it. In fact they should let them do it of their own free will. Take
the instance of spectacles and injections which are in vogue. Our ancestors would
regard these as superstitions. Tomorrow there may come up somebody who may
regard praying as so much superstition. Even then we ought to respect people’s
sentiments. Therefore the compromise I have suggested is absolutely correct. The
sanatanists would not admit it but I do see they are coming closer to me. I am myself a
Harijan and I have influence over them.
SHINDE : The Harijans will of course listen to you. They are bound to listen to
you. When I ask you not to make any compromise, I do not mean that there will never
be any compromise.
BAPU :

Mate wanted a segregated space for having darshan. That was an unfair

compromise.
SHINDE :

From the spiritual point of view your compromise is no compromise
at all. It will gradually wear out.
BAPU :

Yes, it takes for granted mutual respect and sincerity. Only then does a
temple become a true temple. In the same way the sanatanists can, if they want to,
have tables reserved in restaurants. While I suggest all this I take it for granted that
we are in the majority. If the sanatanists are in the majority we may not set foot in the
temples.
I have found out a new way of looking at compromises. The initiative for
compromise should come from the stronger party. Only he who has truth on his side
can arrive at such a compromise.
SHINDE :

Yes, the same is true of forgiveness, which only the strong can

practise.
BAPU :

This compromise in no way detracts from your principles, or mine or
anybody else’s. One that would do violence to other’s principles can only be called
cruel.

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 47-9

492

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX II
DISCUSSION WITH A FRIEND1
January 13, 1933
Q.

What is meant by the Inner Voice?

A . The Inner Voice is the voice of the Lord. It is a voice other than our own. It
could be the voice of Satan or of God. In order to ensure that it is God that speaks from
within us, we should correctly observe the yamas and niyamas. Millions of men may
claim to hear the Inner Voice but the true Inner Voice could be heard in very few. We
cannot adduce proof in its support. But it does have its influence. The Inner Voice is a
power beyond us but it is not an outer force. ‘Beyond us’ means ‘a power which is
beyond our ego’. When the ego is lying dormant there are two forces which act upon
it, the real and the unreal. When we are one with the power that is real it is said, in the
language of mysticism, that God is speaking through us. When we are one with sat
our ego is reduced to zero.
Q.

When can man claim to have heard the Inner Voice?

BAPU : That depends upon the man. When he experiences that he is not acting
on his own he can make that claim. Supposing I constantly try to hear the Inner
Voice, I constantly pray to God that He should act through me and reduce me to a
cipher, a moment will come when I shall feel that the Lord is letting me hear Him. At
such a time I can even say that I am hearing the voice of the Lord. But how can I prove
it? It is for my conduct to prove it. But that too will not be the final test. Supposing a
man lies buried in a cave in the Himalayas and God sends me there to see him.
Supposing I reach the place, I dig a little and meet the man. Even then quite likely it
may not be that I heard the Inner Voice. It could be a mere accident or even my
illusion or someone might have said it to me. The world will no doubt judge me from
the result. If the result is favourable the world will say that it was a miracle. But indeed
there can be no final proof in this case. Man himself does not know when he is
deceiving himself, or when he is pretending. There is a greater danger in hypocrisy
than in self-deception.
We find further proof when there are many instances pointing towards the
same conclusion. This includes all the great men, Buddha, Krishna, Mohammed. It
was not with their own power that they uttered the truths. But some occult power urged
them to such utterance. Some people are worthy enough, and through them the occult
power works. But we cannot be sure when it will happen.

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 49-50

1

Vide. “Letter to aGeorge Joshph”, 13-1-1933.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

493

APPENDIX III
DISCUSSION WITH DHARMADEV1
January 17, 1933
BAPU : I accept heredity to the extent that the progeny of a pure Brahmin man
and a pure Brahmin woman should be a Brahmin. If such a Brahmin raises his children
as Shudras he should be regarded as fallen from his varna. He becomes a fallen
Brahmin.
DHARMADEV :

But why at all call him a Brahmin?

BAPU :

There is no high and low among the varnas. We may call him only
fallen because he can return to his varna by quitting his fallen state. Leave aside the
talk of high and low. Suppose a carpenter gives up carpentry and takes up the work of
cleaning lavatories. The Gita would describe him as fallen from dharma. “Better is
death in the discharge of one’s duty.” A carpenter may not go after the work of a
goldsmith. Similarly, if he tries to get instructed in the Vedas, even then I would call
him a carpenter who had fallen. We want to bring about harmony between dharma and
karma (i.e., practical life). Will it do if we talked of making people adventurous and
asked them all to embark upon trade? Hence occupations came to be hereditary. We
may only ask them to apply their talents and powers for society’s enduring welfare.
Today we admire those who assault the Kanchanjungha. My heart does not admire
them; it censures them. It is not that we never made any discoveries. Patanjali is
responsible for the scientific discovery of ahimsa.
DHARMADEV : Does it mean that one may not develop in oneself any quality
appropriate to [any other] varna? I am a Kshatriya but I have no Kshatriya quality.
You are a Vaishya, but where is your Vaishya conduct?
BAPU :

I was talking of a pure social order. No such order exists today. There is
today a confusion of varnas because the ashrama system has disappeared. Only one
ashrama remains now—the householder’s. And that too not based on dharma but on
self-indulgence. And the varna that remains is the Shudra’s. Today we are slaves under
an alien rule because there are no more Kshatriyas, no more Brahmins, no more
Vaishyas. The Vaishyas are busy making money. And can we describe ourselves even
as Shudras? We serve only under compulsion, not regarding service as our dharma. A
Shastri admitted to me that we are all Chandalas by our actions. What should this
Chandala community do? Should it attempt to bring about varnadharma? I don’t say
that this varnadharma should have the same name. The Shastras have described
1

494

Vide “Letter to A College Student”, 17-1-1933.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

dharma as without beginning but they do speak of organization into varnas. I am yet
doing my sadhana. I cannot speak in this matter with any self-confidence because my
sadhana is not adequate.
DHARMADEV : Then why don’t you say that you don’t believe in any varna, as
there is no varna today? You have maintained that a Brahmin is born, but
Brahminhood is not acquired by birth. “A man is born a Shudra.”1
BAPU : I don’t agree with you on this point. The Arya Samajists have restricted
their reason. My language is aphoristic, it lacks precision. It is therefore open to
several interpretations.
DHARMADEV :

You say that Brahmins should regain the high position they

held of yore.
BAPU :

Quite correct. I was born a Vaishya, but people see in me certain
qualities worthy of a Brahmin and say that I am a Brahmin. But I must earn my
livelihood through my qualities as a Shudra. At the Ashram everyone works eight
hours a day to earn his food. This communism of mine is deduced from Hinduism.
Ruskin also taught the same thing. But today the Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya,
Shudra all want to become multi-millionaires. Hence I maintained that everyone
should have equal payment, whether a barrister or a Shudra. Everyone should dedicate
his talent to the service of the community. If the whole community made sacrifices
the people would not starve. Even gamblers have everything in common. We are
worse than the gamblers. I have come across such generous gamblers on board who
pocket nothing as their personal gains but spend it off in the company. My heart
weeps at our present condition. Tears may not fall from my eyes but my heart does
weep. I cry when anyone commits an untruth or succumbs to passion at the Ashram
which runs on public funds. I wish that the experiment which I am carrying on at the
Ashram is tried in the whole world. If I fail in this I would not mind taking a thousand
births to fulfil it. Whoever employs his talent for personal gain is good for nothing.
One’s talent ought to be utilized for one’s own community. I must express my
thoughts in a new language.
DHARMADEV :

But you also say that you accept both varna and karma [one’s
actions as deciding one’s caste].
BAPU :

Look, here is a matter of justice. What can we do if people do not lend

us their ear however much we may carry on our propaganda? That is why man has been
advised to observe silence. What else can be propagated except truth? I have declared
what varnadharma is, but now I don’t propagate it because it is irrelevant. There is no
feeling of high and low in varnadharma, but it is very much there in untouchability.
1

The second half of the verse says, “He becomes a twice-born (Brahmin)
through-his sacraments.”
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

495

Therefore untouchability is an excrescence on varnadharma.
DHARMADEV :

It was born of caste.

BAPU :

Yes, from caste; but with the disappearance of untouchability the
feeling of high and low among the castes will also go. The greatest reptile is the
serpent of untouchability. I don’t care if the rest, such as the scorpion and so on
persist. When untouchability goes . . . .
DHARMADEV :
BAPU :

But it will not go unless we break the barriers of caste.

Why did I undertake this fast? only to do away with that feeling of high

and low.
DHARMADEV

Why don’t you say it plainly? You mix up the issues of heredity

and actions.
BAPU :

But I do proclaim myself an enemy of caste; I am a champion of the

varnas.
DHARMADEV : But you do mix up [the issues of] heredity and actions. Why
should we regard Harijans as Shudras? But you have said as much.
BAPU : Now I would not repeat that statement. Now I would only say that we
may not regard him as Chandala.
DHARMADEV :

Why don’t you clarify the sanatana dharma? Sanatana dharma is

the eternal dharma.
BAPU :

Sanatana dharma might contain the eternal dharma, but if the people

would not accept this position how will it remain eternal? I subscribe to the Jain
theory of anekantavada. I do not accept any one thing as admitting only one
solution. Hence I call this dharma the true dharma. But I would not call it sanatana—
as long as the world does not accept it.
DHARMADEV :

Where did you find this interpretation?

BAPU :

This is the historical interpretation. The historical interpretation of
goghna 1 is different from its actual meaning.
DHARMADEV : No. You are not clarifying your position to the sanatanists. You
ought to tell them that sanatana dharma means the eternal dharma, the Vedic dharma;
all that is opposed to it is adharma. “There is no dharma higher than the Veda.” You

have said in one place that the Shastras should be acceptable both to the reason and to
the heart. Nothing in the Vedas is contrary to reason.
BAPU :

Say, there are two Shastris quarrelling over the interpretation of the
word duhitri. One says that it means a daughter, the other says it means one who
milks the cows. Both of them went far in the dispute and the judge ordered both of
them to be sent to the gallows because one talks of one thing and the other talks of
1

496

Slaughterer of cows
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the same thing in a different sense. Similarly we cannot carry on a discussion by each
of us offering a different interpretation of sanatana dharma. Therefore I say that you
are making nonsense of sanatana dharma. They say there is a sanatana dharma to
marry off a ten-year-old girl. Now if the people would not support such a thing, who
would call it sanatana dharma? They say they have millions of men behind them, I say
there are millions of men behind me. I emphatically say that I talk of nothing but the
ancient dharma which I interpret as above. Someone said that I should declare myself
an Arya Samajist. I said, “Why? Is it because people might stop agreeing with me?”
Should I give up the Smritis, Itihasas, Puranas? I have a different interpretation of
image-worship in which I believe. I even maintain that there is image-worship in
Christianity and even Islam. According to my dharma I should preserve all that is
worth preserving and reject all else. Hence I say that I don’t want a new name. The
name Hindu dharma is enough for me. For me Hindu dharma is an unfathomable ocean.
It includes many things. Therefore I call myself neither an Arya Samajist nor a
Brahmo Samajist but only a Hindu.
DHARMADEV : In what sense do you believe in image-worship? Acharya
Ramadev maintains that since the temple is a public place it should be open to all.
However, we should try and persuade the priests to give up image-worship.
BAPU :

Here I differ with you. I believe that those who have the darshan of the

Lord in Kashi Vishwanath [really] see Him. My mother never took a meal without
having darshan of the Lord in the temple. She used to tell me that she went there to
become pure, to fulfil her dharma. I bow to her. I wondered what dharma I could teach
this mother. All these things are imaginary and are sustained only by faith.
DHARMADEV :
BAPU :

But would one agree to see bread in stone?

Yes, if a man looked upon stone as bread and ate it he will no doubt

have peace at the moment. Vishwamitra took the flesh after stealing it. He bathed and
performed sandhya, and then threw it away. But did he not have peace when in the first
instance he took it? I am a votary of truth, I am in quest of God, I find new gems daily
which I go on distributing to others. The same thing is to be found in my recent
statement about civil disobedience and untouchability. It may look incomprehensible
because the science of satyagraha is new, people are not used to it.
DHRMADEV:

Some say that you are promulgating a new Veda with the help of

your Inner Voice.
BAPU : Let them say so! I believe there can be no new Veda. The Vedas are
endless. Anybody’s utterance at the inspiration of the Lord within is nothing but
Veda. What Mohammed has said could also be Vedic utterance. That is precisely why
truth is Veda.
DHARMADEV :

Veda is truth.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

497

BAPU : All right, but Vedas mean pure knowledge and pure knowledge cannot
be opposed to truth. If you come across a statement opposed to morality or truth you
should say that it is an interpolation. Or if it is a Vedic statement you do not accept it.
DHARMADEV :
BAPU :

Do you still find Satyarthaprakash a disappointing work?

I have not yet said that I don’t. What should I do?

DHARMADEV : At the time when you said it you wanted to bring about
Hindu-Muslim unity by any means. That is why you said so.
BAPU :

That means I told a lie?

DHARMADEV :

No. But the atmosphere had influenced you. I request you to
please read the book again. I have read it many times and every time I read it I find
something new in it.
BAPU :

This I can accept. But at present where can I find the time to read? But I

shall see.

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 62-6

APPENDIX IV
INTERVIEW TO “THE HINDU” CORRESPONDENT1
POONA ,
January 14, 1933
“Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof” cryptically remarked Mahatma
Gandhi when your correspondent met him this afternoon in the shade of a mango tree
in the jail compound and asked him what would be his attitude if the Government
decided on some dilatory course of action to gain time and refused immediate sanction
to Dr. Subbaroyan’s Bill.
The Mahatma’s general health, I was told, is fairly good. I learn that no
specialist has yet been called in to examine his right elbow. He was signing
numerous replies to letters, which Mr. Mahadeo Desai had prepared earlier in
consultation with him. At one corner was sitting Gandhiji’s Madrasi typist.
Gandhiji said that he would await the Government of India’s decision. He
stated that he had decided to express his views on the much discussed proposition to
send round a committee to gauge opinion in respect of temple-entry.
Gandhiji wanted the lawyers to examine the legal issue and pronounce their
1

Vide’Telegram to “The Hindu” , 18-1-1933 and “Interview to Associated
Press”, 18-1-1933

498

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

opinions irrespective of the Government’s decision on the question of giving
sanction to the Bill. If the Government decided against giving sanction to the Bill,
he was sure matters would not be allowed to rest there. He would try to unsettle a
settled question, in the same manner as he had done in the case of the Premier’s
Award. He would enter into correspondence with the highest authority and would
resist with his life, if necessary, what he considered to be a piece of injustice to a
section of humanity.
The Hindu, 16-1-1933

APPENDIX V
STATEMENT BY MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA 1
The object of the special session of the Sanatana Dharma Mahasabha is to
focus and voice the most informed and most esteemable orthodox opinion on some
questions, including those relating to the removal of untouchability and temple-entry
which has been agitating the sanatanist world on one side, and those who are
described as reformers on the other. I have been distressed to note differences between
the two sides becoming acute, and it is evident that if these differences are unsolved,
the Hindu community would be further divided and weakened. The differences are
largely due to misunderstanding, and this, in its turn, is due to a great extent on
imperfect knowledge of what the Shastras have laid down for our guidance in
important matters in question. It should not be necessary to say that Mahatma Gandhi
cannot desire to injure sanatana dharma. He has proved to the world that he is willing
and determined to throw away even his life in the attempt to serve the country by
removing disabilities under which the vast number of those who belong to it labour,
so that they may enjoy the full benefit of being Hindus and remain contented and
happy members of the community.
It is equally necessary to say that sanatanists who do not agree with Mahatma
Gandhi’s proposals or methods are not wanting in sympathy with the depressed
classes. This being so, I am confident that it is possible to arrive at a solution of the
problem in conformity with the Shastras which should be acceptable to both sections
of sanatanist opinion—more advanced and less advanced—and which should
establish peace and religious unity among the Hindu community on a basis that will
endure.
From statements recently made by Mahatma Gandhi, it is clear that he is not
only willing, but anxious to show every respect for the orthodox opinion.
1

Vide “Letter to Madan Mohan Malaviya”, 20-1-1933 and “Agreeing to
Differ”, 18-2-1933
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

499

From utterances of several esteemed exponents of sanatana dharma, it is also
clear that they are willing to move forward to bring about an understanding which will
be consistent with the Shastras. This being so, I believe that, by dispassionate
consideration of the Shastras by those who claim to expound them, it will be
generally conceded, rules of action can be laid down which would secure the most
liberal and practicable advance for the humblest Hindu and satisfaction to the most
orthodox conservative opinion which is willing to act in conformity not merely with
the letter, but also with the spirit of the Shastras. I have convened the Mahasabha
with the conviction that such a unity can be brought about among the sanatanist
Hindus and appeal to all of them to make such contribution to the success of this
effort as lies in their power.
To prevent misunderstanding, I wish to make the position clear. Speaking in
1923 as the President of the Hindu Mahasabha of Holy Kashi in the presence of great
gathering of learned and pious men, I pleaded that opportunity should be afforded
even to the humblest Hindu to have a purifying and ennobling darshan of the deity
whom we adore in our temples and offer his prayer to Him. I urged that this may be
done in conformity with rules which may be laid down in that behalf and further urged
that other disabilities from which the depressed classes suffered should be removed. I
still hold the same opinion and have publicly repeated it many times during the last
few years and last few months, but have never been able to approve of recourse to
satyagraha with the object of getting the temple opened to the depressed classes. I do
not think it right that this kind of pressure should be exerted in a matter where
religious convictions and practices come into play. Those who adhere to the
orthodox view have also got their convictions which are deep-seated and come down
through the ages. I believe that it is the sacred duty of those of us who differ from
them to do our best to bring about a change of those convictions. But by the very
nature of the case, this duty demands that we should attempt it by resort to peaceful
persuasion only.
This was laid down in a resolution which was passed by the Bombay public
meeting held immediately after the Poona Pact over which I presided, and at which,
the All-India Anti-untouchability League was established for the purpose of carrying
on propaganda against untouchability. That resolution stated that “for this purpose
steps should immediately be taken to secure as early as possible that (a) all public
wells, schools, roads, sarais, dharmashalas, crematoriums, burning-ghats, etc.,
should be declared open to the depressed classes and (b) all public temples should be
open to members of the depressed classes provided that for carrying out (a) and (b) no
force or compulsion be used but resort shall be had only to peaceful persuasion.” It is
both just and expedient that the solution of such a question should be one that would
satisfy the community as a whole. In my opinion, such a solution can be reached only

500

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

by the method of argument and persuasion with the help of those scholars who are
versed in the Shastras and who desire the good of every section of the community. It
is to bring about such an agreement and solution that I have invited the special
session of the Sanatana Dharma Mahasabha, and I am hoping and praying too that
God will bless the attempt and crown it with success.
Towards this end, I intend to place the following concrete proposal before the
Mahasabha, that for the uplift of the depressed classes, the following plan may be
adopted:1 (a) Samskar and updesh—initiation and instruction—known as diksha. This
will consist (a) of prayashchittam—penance and purification;
(b) tyag—giving up carrion and beef, leavings of dishes (uchchhishta), wine;
(c) diksha—receiving mantram, either ashtakshar mantram (with or without
wearing tulsi bead); panchakshar mantram (with or without wearing rudraksha bead);
(d) Achara grahana—daily bath and daily prayer (morning and evening), daily
reading of the sacred book (teaching every man, woman and child to read and write
will be an integral part of the scheme);
(e) vrata—vows—observing five necessary vows which are prescribed for all
castes, ahimsa, satya, asteya, shaucham and indriyanigraha, (hurtlessness, truth,
non-stealing, purity of body and mind, and control of senses);
2 (a) freedom to join public meetings and public schools;
(b) use of public wells, roads, parks, sarais, dharmashalas, burning-ghats,
etc.; and
(c) entry into public temples for devadarshana and stuti.
NOTES . If the scheme is approved, the giving of diksha should be completed
within a month. The carrying out of this scheme will mean a great social, religious
and spiritual uplift of the classes. It will mean making them Harijans in the full sense
of the term. This will be only one of the proposals to be placed before the gathering
of Acharyas and learned men. There will be many proposals before them for their
consideration. There is every hope that with God’s grace result of deliberations will
be one which will be welcomed with joy by all followers of sanatana dharma and all
well-wishers of humanity.
The Bombay Chronicle, 19-1-1933

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

501

APPENDIX VI
TALK WITH M. G. BHANDARI1
January 24, 1933
The Superintendent read the statement. When Gandhiji woke up he said, “What
do you propose to do now? Let me know so that I may inform the Government. . . .
But it would be better if you do not go on a fast now.”
BAPU :

There is no Inner Voice urging me to go on a fast forthwith. It would be
regarded as an arbitrary action if I went on a fast now. I am perturbed at the Viceroy’s
decision, no doubt, but it is likely that my perturbation might be only temporary. A
fast might be in the offing but not now. If it comes up in its natural course let it. I
cannot say when it will come. I shall have to go on a fast only if I feel helpless—as I
had been at the time of the Award when I resorted to a fast. You can inform the
Government that it is not my intention to go on a fast in the immediate future. You
have already seen my statement. I have nothing in my heart over and above this
statement. Today I woke at 3 in the morning, and my mind was absolutely clear about
what I had to write. The beautiful Chitra star was shining above.

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, p. 86

APPENDIX VII
TALK WITH DUNCAN GREENLEES2
January 25, 1933
BAPU :

Whatever the non-Hindus might do is not likely to touch the core of

this injustice because the Harijans are still clinging to Hinduism. I know how much
they are inter-twined with Hinduism. That is why I had poured out my heart in my
speech at the Round Table Conference. In India the villages are mostly populated by
Hindus. All the untouchables say that they are Hindus. Quite a few do not even feel the
injustice. They are in such a miserable plight that the thought of renouncing their
faith would not occur to them. But I shall not be surprised if some day they set out to
kill the Savarnas.
G.

1
2

502

Would they be suffering from inferiority complex?

Vide “Letter to Abegum Mohammad Alam”, 23-1-1933
Vide “Letter to Viriyala Venkata Rao”, 25-1-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

BAPU : No, worse. In the case of inferiority complex there is the consciousness
of injustice being done. But these people are not even aware of it. That is why I say
that if a non-Hindu happens to be interested in this movement he should be prompted
only by compassion. If a non-Hindu wants to help, he should associate himself with a
Hindu organization before doing so.
G.

I have been to the temples of South India.

BAPU : I want to stop this parody of Hinduism. I want pure gold. There will be
political consequences of this activity, but I don’t at all think of political
consequences. I would engage myself in this activity even if there were to be no
political consequences, I don’t care for them. I want to bring about spiritual results
and for that I am willing to sacrifice thousands of lives including mine. This is a great
injustice being done to a large section of the community. To remove it we ought to
work with a sense of atonement. One should work with the feeling that one has
committed an injustice and one must remove it oneself. I don’t want a Gengiz Khan to
descend upon us and threaten to cut the throats of the obstinate Savarnas and bring
about this reform.

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 89-90

APPENDIX VIII
DISCUSSION WITH C. RAJAGOPALACHARI AND OTHERS1
January 30, 1933
Today Rajaji, Devdas and Ghanshyamdas arrived and discussed the situation
arising from the Viceregal sanction to Ranga Iyer’s Bill. Bapu explained that the
whole question was religious and had nothing to do with politics.
My position is wholly religious. I cannot look at this thing from a political
viewpoint. I must have the Bill withdrawn if people are really opposed to it. Then
someone will tell me with the promptness of an arrow what I should do. We certainly
do not wish to enter temples stealthily. Temple-entry is definitely a spiritual act and
it must bring about a revolution in society. This whole idea of my fast is based on the
belief that a large section of the people favour temple-entry, but they do not voice it.
If people are on our side but the law is not, we can ask the trustees to break the law and
to put up with it if someone were to bring an action against them under this law.
Bapu then stated that they should obtain a clear referendum in this regard. . . .
But Bapu thought that even if it were to take three months the work must be
1

Vide” Letter to K. Kelappan”, 28-1-1933 also footnote 3, “Letter to
Ranachhoddas Patwari”, 11-1-1933
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

503

accomplished in the area chosen.
BIRLA : In that case the best referendum is that there should be fresh elections
to the Legislature on this issue.
BAPU : We would easily win them. But that will not give us the ratio of the
temple-going Hindus’ vote.

. . . Acharya invites us to go to the Varnashrama Swarajya Sangh. He is
involved in it. And if we want to do so, we can, by capturing the Sangh and defeating
him as it happened in 1921 when the Hindu Mahasabha was captured. But whatever it
is, it is intolerable that the Bill should hang fire for two years simply because it was
being circulated among the members.
RAJAJI :

Why should we object to it if the delay was due to the circulation of the
Bill among the members?
BAPU :

Because we know it is only an excuse and it is dishonest. If as a result
of the referendum public opinion suddenly sways in favour of the Bill I would press
for its early passage. . . .
Then they discussed the subject of Harijan Sevak. Rajaji’s objections were: (1)
our journal will be read only by our own people whereas at present your statements are
published in all the newspapers. (2) The journal might prove useless.
BAPU : It is very necessary for training our workers and also for tying up all
loose ends. There are so many things which cannot be conveyed through A.P.I. In
fact I wonder why you did not feel the necessity of a journal till now.

For conducting the referendum Birla suggested having pandits instead of
laymen but added few men of character could be found among them.
BAPU : Then they are not needed. Character means clinging steadfast to one’s
beliefs. The beliefs of a man who changes them for a higher fee have no worth. I
would of course choose to have a sincere pandit, but I would prefer a layman to a
pandit who lacks character.

B
January 31, 1933
Vallabhbhai had a heated discussion continuing from the previous evening
about a referendum and about utilizing Rajaji in upper India for this purpose. . . . [He
argued] that a referendum as such could be of no use unless we have our further aims
clarified.
BAPU :

My doubt increases whether the people are firmly behind us.

VALLABHBHAI :

We never had the opportunity to show it. . . .

Yesterday Bapu had said to Rajaji that he would be able to advise him in this
matter to a certain limit only.

504

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

RAJAJI : Since you have started this movement we must work for it. . . . But if
the movement would work only if I were out of it I would prefer to quit.
BAPU : If you independently and dispassionately feel that you alone would be
my representative in this movement you should regard this as a clear call to work for
the movement and ought to continue the work without caring for public criticism. But
I always recite the verse: “Whoever, leaving secure things etc.”1 to those who have
the slightest doubt in their minds and tell them that they ought to give the benefit of
the doubt to their initial pledge of civil disobedience. But if you feel you have a clear
call, and it seems you do, you must do Harijan work.
RAJAJI :

Is the fast yet impending?

BAPU : Yes, it is unavoidable. Looking at the happenings around I think the
sooner it comes the better. I have heard about a case at Kanpur. Three Harijan
candidates contested the Municipal Corporation election. The other party sponsored
none but three Harijan candidates to oppose them. With the result that no Harijan was
elected. This has deeply hurt me. I had girded up my loins against having reserved
constituencies. But now I think that had I been in Ambedkar’s place I would have
opposed it much more violently. In this Kanpur case they prevented the Harijans from
winning only to safeguard their own interest. The people should have only seen to it
that three Harijan candidates win the election either for their own party or for the
opposition. This case is a clear violation of the Poona Pact. I wrote to Hariji (Pandit
Hriday Nath Kunzru).

He attempted to explain it with cool unconcern and informed me that he would
further investigate it. But I want no such investigation. I have already told him to set
right this injustice.
Birla and the others told Bapu that the Kanpur case was only an exception. The
Hindu society was undergoing a speedy change for the better.
BAPU : I do know it. Such instances should not precipitate the fast. But such
incidents do upset me. I am however consciously striving to postpone the ordeal of
fast.
BIRLA :

But once these Bills are passed wouldn’t there be an end to this question

of the fast?
BAPU :

No, my friend, not at all. The fast does not depend solely on the Bills.
The question before me is not merely that of temple-entry but the whole question [of
untouchability]. Day after day I feel more and more that the likelihood of my fast is
not diminishing but growing. I cannot say why it is so. I do not even know what will
1

The verse runs as follows: “Whoever, leaving secure things runs after
insecure ones loses the former, the latter being as good as lost.”
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

505

precipitate it but this feeling is slowly but certainly growing. I know this much that I
am not at all at ease. All these incidents taken as a whole fail to make a good
impression on me. True, some good things are also happening. I cannot shut my eyes
to them. On the contrary, I try to close my eyes to unfavourable things. For instance
look at this nasty correspondence I am carrying on with these religious teachers and
legal pandits.
BIRLA :

But you should be content with the speed at which the reform is

proceeding.
BAPU : Yes, those who have patience will be content. But it does not at all
comfort my heart. I know our workers have plunged into activity, there is no lethargy
in them. But looking at the whole thing there is hardly anything that can satisfy my
heart.
RAJAJI :

. . . To cut a long story short I may say that you have grown impatient.

BAPU : I know, as a practical man I must hold my patience. There is no reason
to be impatient. Let me assure you that I entertain no such feeling. I had taken no
time to come to the decision before January 2 that I should not go on fast. And let me
inform you that some of my co-workers are sore because I didn’t begin my fast on
January 2. Only a few days ago a friend argued that no reasons had come up to
postpone the fast which had already been decided upon.
RAJAJI :

You have pampered all these co-workers. (Loud laughter)

BAPU : That is all right. But there are others too who have condemned this
postponement and they are not at all known to me. One gentleman even went on an
eleven-day fast protesting against me. I sent him a severe wire telling him that his
fast was a sin and nothing less; only then did he give it up. Hence as far as this
question goes please believe me that I am struggling within myself. Yet I cannot say
to you that there will be no fast. When I say this my friends in England do not get
angry with me. Whenever they have a doubt in their mind they try to believe that
there must be God’s hand behind. Andrews had written to me several times expressing
his doubts. Afterwards he wired to me cancelling all his letters and assured me that he
had then understood the whole thing correctly.

Alluding to people’s superstitions, Rajaji said: Some people really believe
that hitherto Gandhiji used to bring the rains but now he is committing an act owing
to which the rains may fail.
BAPU : You are talking about the ignorant people. But I have heaps of letters
from people with B.A. and B.L. degrees, which are full of anger, bitterness, venom
and abuses, besides superstition.
RAJAJI : This looks like a misalliance between legal expertise and a low class
master. (Laughter)

506

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

BAPU :

My present feeling is that the possibility of the fast is not very far

away.
How can I say when the fast will come up? When I started my fast in Bombay
in 1921, I abruptly woke up Mathuradas who was sleeping by my side and told him:
‘Don’t argue with me, this is my resolution., The same was the case with my 21-day
fast—Hakimji, Mohammed Ali all were dazed. But will anyone on that account say
that the fast was wrong? I for one think that the fast did achieve its object then, it will
prove useful even after 5000 years.
Mathuradas then asked what a worker should do who felt bound to offer civil
disobedience but was tired.
BAPU : It is difficult to tell. But why shouldn’t such a person
do Harijan work? Of course there will be one condition, that he must declare
that he is tired and that therefore instead of going to jail he wants to do Harijan
work. He cannot do Harijan work by concealing this fact. Rather than doing
Harijan work while concealing the truth he had better sit at home doing
nothing. There is courage in humbly confessing the truth. Those who want to
rest should declare it and say that they want to improve their health and till then they
will do Harijan work. The point is that one should not practise deceit. Deceit will
benefit neither Congress work, nor the work of civil disobedience nor untouchability
work.

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 100-6

APPENDIX 1X
LETTER FROM GOVERNMENT OF INDIA1
[Before February 17, 1933]
The Governor-General-in-Council has carefully considered the points urged by
Mr. Gandhi in his letter of the 1st February 1933, addressed to the Private Secretary to
the Viceroy, in which he requests that, for the reasons stated therein, the Government
of India should facilitate the progress and passage of the Bills regarding
temple-entry, which will be introduced in the Assembly by Mr. Ranga Iyer and
others. He is unable to accept the arguments developed by Mr. Gandhi relating to the
Poona Pact, and notes that the Resolution he has quoted did not form part of the Pact
as communicated to the Government of India. In the matter of the Pact, Government
1

This was received on February 17. Vide “Letter to C. F. Andrews”, 1-2-1933,
“Letter to C. F. Andrews”, 17-2-1933 and “Letter to Home Secretary, Government of
India”, 19-2-1933
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

507

were concerned merely to accept a modification of the representation in the
Legislatures which had been provided in the Communal Award by His Majesty’s
Government. But quite apart from the Pact, the Government for many years have
taken an active interest in the improvement of the conditions under which the
depressed classes live. That interest has been directed to the matters referred to in the
Resolution which he quotes, such as education and the provision of the normal
facilities of life, which were placed in the forefront of the Resolution but appear not
to be regarded by him as the vital part of it. The Government have naturally taken no
initiative in matters which specifically affect religious practice. In regard to that,
they have nothing to add to the statement issued to the Press on 23rd January. They
must reiterate that in their opinion it is essential that the consideration of a measure,
which so closely affects the religious customs and usages of the Hindu community,
should not proceed unless the proposals are subjected to the fullest examination in all
their aspects, not merely in the Legislatures, but also outside it, by all who will be
affected by them. This purpose can only be satisfied if the Bill is circulated in the
widest manner for the purpose of eliciting public opinion, and if adequate time is
given to enable all classes of Hindus to form and express their considered views.
Gandhi-Government of India Correspondence. Courtesy: National Library,
Calcutta

APPENDIX X
DISCUSSION WITH B. R. AMBEDKAR1
February 4, 1933
Discussing the propriety or otherwise of Ranga Iyer’s two Bills [Ambedkar]
said: The one-paragraph Bill is a very simple one. Its fair point lies in admitting that
this custom is immoral. There is no such admission in the second Bill.
BAPU: No, it is there in its preamble.
A. But it is not clear. . . . I also think that the two Bills do not go together. . .
BAPU: The one-paragraph Bill is certainly superior to the other. But the other
lengthier Bill was brought forward because the first one could not be introduced in the
Provincial Legislature. There is no contradiction in the two Bills. In one Bill
untouchability ceases to be a disability and the law refuses to accept the argument
based on untouchability. As a result of the second Bill, temple authorities are obliged
to take steps under certain circumstances. If we can get both the Bills passed the
trustees will not be able to put up any kind of obstacle. I take it upon myself to have
all the temples opened within one month if we could get both the Bills passed. The
1

508

Vide “Dr. Ambedkar and Caste”, 7-2-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

sanatanists would prefer the second Bill. But speaking as a sincere sanatanist I would
prefer the first Bill.
A. . . . Now the Government will have to issue orders against the sanatanists
under Section 144 because they would be regarded as interfering with untouchables’
rights.
BAPU :

However, I want you now to emphatically proclaim your ideas in very

clear words.
A. . . . As far as we are concerned we have no immediate concern other than
securing political power . . . and that alone is the solution of our problem.
. . . We want our social status raised in the eyes of the savarna Hindus.
There is another point of view also. The object of this effort could be that you
want the depressed classes to be retained in the Hindu religion, in which case I am
inclined to believe that it is not sufficient in the present awakened state of the
depressed classes. . . . If I call myself a Hindu I am obliged to accept that by birth I
belong to a low caste. Hence I think I must ask the Hindus to show me some sacred
authority which would rule out this feeling of lowliness. If it cannot be I should say
goodbye to Hinduism. . . . I am not going to be satisfied with measures which would
merely bring some relief. . . . I don’t want to be crushed by your charity.
BAPU : I have nothing to say if you have come with a final decision that you
are not going to move your little finger to have this Bill passed.
A . We have not made any decision. However, I have shown you how my mind
is working.
BAPU

: I told you that I could have nothing to say if you have already taken a

decision.
A.

We cannot ask the savarna Hindus to decide for themselves whether or not

we are a part of them. You ought to demonstrate your determination by getting these
Bills passed. . . .
BAPU : I am not asking you to do anything. I never wanted the depressed
people to go on their knees to the savarna Hindus and ask them to get these Bills

passed. Unfortunately, the solution of this problem is in the hands of a third power
which is in a position to mend or worsen the situation.
A.

I can set right the thing.

BAPU : That is right. Of course I agree with you that it does not behove your
dignity to approach the Hindus. I take the position—you might remember since I
made the speech at the Round Table Conference—that we should atone for this. If you
repudiate us and go away I would think that we only deserved it.
A . The Bill mentions temple-entry but it makes no mention of entry into the
sanctum sanctorum. Will they let a member of the depressed community place flowers

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

509

on the idol, or will they let him offer a tray containing oblations? Malaviyaji has
already declared that question of offering puja does not arise.
BAPU : Temple-entry is meant for puja if anything. But if the language of the
Bill is not right it can be amended and we can say ‘entry for the purpose of puja’. It

seems there has been some misunderstanding somewhere in the case of Malaviyaji.
He would not say what you attribute to him. Flowers, sweets or any other offerings
from Harijans will surely be accepted. So we two agree on this point that there is no
question of your imploring the savarna Hindus. When some savarna Hindus tell me
that Harijans do not want to enter the temples I ask them to throw open the temple
doors for the Harijans whether or not they wish to come in. They ought to have the
satisfaction that they have done their duty. They ought to discharge the debt which
they owe whether the creditor keeps it or throws it into the gutter. But I must say that
you ought not to say that you are not a Hindu. In accepting the Poona Pact you accept
the position that you are Hindus.
A.

I have accepted only the political aspect of it.

BAPU : You cannot escape the situation that you are Hindus in spite of your
statement to the contrary.
A . We ask of you that our silence should not be misconstrued. After that I
accept your point.
BAPU : I go one step further. You will not be able to go ahead a single step
unless you maintain your position absolutely correct. I regard temple-entry as a
spiritual matter through which everything else will bear fruit.
A.

The Hindu mind does not work in a rational way. They have no objection to
the untouchables touching them on the railway and other public places. Why do they
object to it only in the case of temples?
BAPU : We are well caught on this point. I take up the question of temple-entry
first of all because these people want to cling to untouchability in the temples. Many
sanatanist Hindus say that they would admit Harijans in schools and public places but
not in temples. I ask them to grant the Harijans equal status before God. It will raise
their status.
A.

Supposing we are lucky in the case of temple-entry, will they let us fetch
water from the wells?
BAPU :

Sure. This is bound to follow it. And it is also very easy.

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 117-22

510

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX XI
A TALK 1
February 13, 1933
Like Angada and Krishna who had gone with the message of truce, we approach
these legislators and the Government. Justice can be demanded from any source and
that, too, forcefully. We fail in dharma if we do not demand justice. What does the
pledge taken at Bombay imply? [It implies that] as far as possible we will abolish
untouchability by law before the attainment of swaraj. We do not want to accomplish
anything by force. I do not want to achieve it by undertaking a fast—God will make
me undertake one [sooner or later]—for it is likely that I might be deluded into
describing it as inspired by God. Kelappan had said to me that the temple would be
thrown open within a couple of days. Yet I told him that though it might help throw
open the temple immediately how could we continue a fast that was initiated on unjust
grounds.
Now remains the question of the law. I for one want no laws. I am an anarchist.
Bat I want to act within the limits of the law. In this case we want a law enacted in
order to undo another. At present the decision of the law-courts has become as good as
the shruti (Revelation) and the Government is the God who reveals it. Therefore we
ask the Government to repeal it. Let us take the first Bill. The Invisible Power will
punish breach of a religious commandment, a ruler does not have this authority. The
wholly Hindu State might acquire this authority. But in the present case it is the
Government which inflicts punishment for breach of a religious injunction. This is
gross injustice. We must have it removed and thus follow our dharma. How long can
we keep it pending? Whether it is a mixed legislature or even a Muslim Government,
we should have it passed by them. Today we cannot follow our dharma. Even where
the trustees are willing to throw open the temple the law forbids them from doing so.
Now have I any other course open? Hence the Bill. With the passage of this Bill no
one believing in untouchability will be compelled to give it up. I am this day
prepared to give in writing that unless the sanatanists are willing to throw open the
temples they will not be forced to do so.
By fighting we can get justice even from anti-national Government— rather it
becomes our dharma. Malaviyaji is a Yudhishthira. He is always in doubt. In his
perpetual anxiety to follow the dictates of dharma, he often fails to follow it at all.
Vyasa had such wonderful power. He depicts Yudhishthira as a rather weak person; yet
1

On Madan Mohan Malaviya’s objection to the Bills; vide “Drafta Telegraam
toa C. Rajagopalchari”, 13-2-1933
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

511

he is Dharmaraja. In the same sense Malaviyaji also is a Dharmaraja. We can never
give him up. He has boundless love for me and whenever he loses in an argument he
thinks that there must be some truth in what I say.

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 140-1

APPENDIX XII
TELEGRAM FROM MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA 1
February 15, 1933
THANKS TELEGRAM. MUCH AS I DESIRE, REGRET HEALTH DOES NOT PERMIT
JOURNEY (TO) POONA AT PRESENT. (I) REGRET (I) DON’T AGREE (THAT)
RANGA IYER’S BILLS (ARE) NECESSARY EVEN IN TERMS (OF THE) BOMBAY
PLEDGE.

PART ONE

(OF

THE)

RESOLUTLON

PLEDGES US (TO)

SUPPORT

LEGISLATLON TO ENSURE THAT THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN HITHERTO REGARDED
AS UNTOUCHABLE WILL HAVE THE SAME RIGHTS AS OTHER HINDUS REGARDING
(THE)

USE (OF)

PUBLIC WELLS,

PUBLIC SCHOOLS, PUBLIC ROADS,

AND

ALL OTHER PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS. THESE MEANT DHARMASALAS, BURNING
GROUNDS, ETC. REMOVAL DISABILITY (OF) DEPRESSED CLASSES IN RESPECT
(OF) ADMISSION (TO) TEMPLES (IS) DEALT WITH SEPARATELY IN SECOND
PART. UNDER IT, (IT IS) THE

DUTY (OF) HINDU LEADERS WHO (ARE) PARTY

(TO) RESOLUTION OR ACCEPTED IT TO

SECURE BY EVERY

LEGITIMATE

(AND) PEACEFUL MEANS EARLY REMOVAL (OF) ALL SOCIAL DISABILITIES
NOW IMPOSED UPON (THE) DEPRESSED CLASSES INCLUDING (THE) BAR IN
RESPECT (OF) ADMISSION (TO) TEMPLES. BY CONTRAST WITH FIRST PART
EVIDENTLY SECOND PART DID NOT CONTEMPLATE LEGISLATLON IN THIS
CONNECTION. PLEASE ALSO NOTE PROVISO RESOLUTION PASSED (AT THE) PUBLIC
MEETING, BOMBAY, 30TH SEPTEMBER. PYARELAL’S ‘EPIC FAST (PAGE) 195,,
WHICH SAYS, PROVIDED NO COMPULSION OR FORCE SHALL BE USED WITH
REGARD EITHER (TO) OPENING WELLS, ETC., OR TEMPLES, BUT PEACEFUL
RESUASION WILL BE ADOPTED AS THE ONLY MEANS. RANGA IYER’S FIRST
BILL

REQUIRES CAREFUL EXAMINATION.

(IT

IS)

ONLY

FAIR (THAT

IT)

SHOULD BE CIRCULATED. HIS BILL RELATING (TO) TEMPLE-ENTRY SHOULD
BE WITHDRAWN. AM OPPOSED ON PRINCIPLE TO EVEN INDIRECT INTERFERENCE
BY LEGISLATURE IN MANAGEMENT (OF) OUR TEMPLES. AM ALSO OPPOSED
1

Vide “Telegram ato Madan Mohan Malaaviya”, 14-2-1933, “Letter toa C.
Rajagoapalachari”, 19-2-1933, “Letter to C. Rajagopalachari”, 22-2-1933, “Letter to
Madan Mohan Malaviya”, 24-2-1933 and “Letter to Mathurdas Trikumji”, 26-2-1933

512

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

TO

BILL

BECAUSE

OF

VERY

WRONG

PRINCIPLE

IT

LAYS

DOWN

THAT (THE) QUESTION (OF) THROWING OPEN TEMPLES TO ANY CASTE WHICH HAS
HITHERTO

BEEN

EXCLUDED

FROM

IT

SHALL

BE

DECIDED

BY

VOTES OF (A) MAJORITY OF HINDU VOTERS OF THE AREA IN WHICH IT IS
SITUATED AND THAT THEIR OPINION SHALL BE BINDING ON TRUSTEES OF
THE TEMPLE AND ALL WORSHIPPERS THEREIN. I CONSIDER IT ABSOLUTELY
WRONG AND UNJUST TO DECIDE A QUESTION WHICH IS ONE OF RELIGION
AND CONSCIENCE BY VOTE OF MAJORITY. THIS WILL BE NOTHING BUT
COMPULSION. WE MUST SOLVE THIS QUESTION BY WAY OF RELIGION (I.E.,)
BY PEACEFUL PERSUASION ONLY. I AM CERTAIN WE SHALL SUCCEED BY
THIS METHOD. AM EQUALLY CERTAIN (THAT THE) METHOD OF LEGISLATION
WILL BE STRONGLY OPPOSED TO (THE) LAST AND WILL DELAY FULFILMENT
OF

OBJECT

WE

HAVE

IN

VIEW.

IN

VIEW

(OF)

TOTALITY

(OF)

CIRCUMSTANCES CONSIDER YOUR RELEASING MY LETTER AND THIS WIRE FOR
PUBLICATION DESIRABLE. IF YOU THINK IT FIT, YOU MAY SUPPORT PROPOSAL
FOR CIRCULATION IN VIEW OF (THE) FEELINGS AROUSED AND (OF THE) JUSTICE
OF PROCEEDING WITH GOODWILL (AMONG) ALL SECTIONS (OF THE)
COMMUNITY.

MALAVIYA
Harijan, 18-9-1933

APPENDIX XIII
B. R. AMBEDKAR’S STATEMENT1
Although the controversy regarding the question of temple-entry is confined
to the sanatanists and Mahatma Gandhi, the Depressed Classes have undoubtedly a
very important part to play in it, in so far as their position is bound to weigh the
scale one way or the other, when the issue comes for a final settlement. It is,
therefore, necessary that their viewpoint should be defined and stated so as to leave
no ambiguity about it.
To the Temple-entry Bill of Mr. Ranga Iyer as now drafted, the Depressed
Classes cannot possibly give their support. The principle of the Bill is that if a
majority of municipal and local board voters in the vicinity of any particular temple
on a referendum decide by a majority that the Depressed Classes shall be allowed to
enter the temple, the trustees or the manager of the temple shall give effect to that
decision. The principle is an ordinary principle of majority rule, and there is nothing
1

Vide “Interview to Associated Press”, 14-2-1933 and “Letter to C.
Rajagopalachari”, 22-2-1933
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

513

radical or revolutionary about the Bill, and if the sanatanists were a wise lot they
would accept it without demur.
The reasons why the Depressed Classes cannot support a Bill based upon this
principle are two. One reason is that the Bill cannot hasten the day of temple-entry
for the Depressed Classes any nearer than otherwise would be the case. It is true that
under the Bill, the minority will not have the right to obtain an injunction against
the trustee, or the manager who throws open the temple to the Depressed Classes in
accordance with the decision of the majority. But before one can draw any satisfaction
from this clause and congratulate the author of the Bill, one must first of all feel
assured that when the question is put to the vote, there will be a majority in favour of
templeentry. If one is not suffering from illusions of any kind, one must accept that
the hope of a majority voting in favour of temple-entry will be very rarely realized if
at all. Without doubt, the majority is definitely opposed today—a fact which is
conceded by the author of the Bill himself in his correspondence with the
Shankaracharya.
What is there in the situation as created after the passing of the Bill, which can
lead one to hope that the majority will act differently? I find nothing. I shall, no
doubt, be reminded of the results of the referendum with regard to the Guruvayur
Temple. But I refuse to accept a referendum, so overweighted as it was by the life of
Mahatma Gandhi, as the normal result. In any such calculations, the life of the
Mahatma must necessarily be deducted.
If Hindu religion is to be a religion of social equality, then an amendment of
its code to provide temple-entry is not enough. What is required is to purge it of the
doctrine of chaturvarnya.
The Bombay Chronicle, 13-2-1933

APPENDIX XIV
LETTER FROM JAWAHARLAL NEHRU1
DEHRA DUN JAIL ,

January 5, 1933
MY DEAR BAPU,

Your letter is always a tonic, and when it comes after a long interval, it brings
a thrill with it and its effect is all the more exhilarating. I recognized Mahadev’s
handwriting on the envelope. Yours did not seem as of old. Perhaps your left hand was
functioning and I am not so familiar with it.
1

514

Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 15-2-1933
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am following of course with great interest your campaign against
untouchability, as far as I can from The statesman and the Pioneer. Anything that you
may do is bound to interest and fascinate. The subject itself has tremendous
possibilities. Not being a man of religion, my interest is largely confined to the
social aspect and to the wider issues involved.
Of course Sarup should do untouchability work if she feels like it. My
suggestion about a short holiday in Ceylon was made chiefly in the interest of
Krishna. I am a little worried about her. After a year in prison, with our home
practically broken up, she feels rather at a loose end and does not know what to do.
Ever since her childhood the poor girl has been deprived of real home life and proper
education because of our preoccupations and repeated visits to prison. She grew up a
rather lonely girl not having as much friendship and sympathy as she was entitled to.
Father’s death shook her up a great deal. I tried to soothe her and win her
confidence and I am glad to say that I succeeded to some extent. But 1931 was for all
of us a year full of work and worry and anxiety. Then came a long spell of prison for
her, and for a young girl this was a far greater ordeal than it could be for most of us. As
her release drew near I sensed how she must be feeling and how life in Anand Bhawan
as it is today would be no joy to her. She would feel out of joint. She would want to do
something and yet not know what to do, and this would rob her of peace of mind. I
was myself not clear what to suggest to her. Latterly she has begun to look upon me
almost as a kind of refuge in a friendless world. If I had been out I might have been of
help to her but I could do little from Dehra Dun Jail.
I felt that a short holiday in neutral surroundings would ease her mind and
remove the tension. Hence my proposal about Ceylon. Three weeks in Ceylon would
not have solved any problem but she would have freshened up and returned with a
brighter outlook on life. These were my reasons. I was thinking more of mental
health than of physical health. But the proposal seems to have fallen through as
nobody seems to be keen on it. In the present, therefore, Ceylon is off.
Perhaps Krishna will go to Poona to see you and you might be able to advise
her about her work. I might see her also. It is easy enough to suggest odd bits of work
but this must appeal to the person concerned.
As for my interviews, it is now nearly seven months since I had one. I have
missed them greatly but the U. P. Govt. had been very discourteous to Mother and
Kamala and I felt that I had no alternative; besides I have not yet got rid of my
obstinacy—a hereditary failing in me of which you cannot be unaware. The
Government made some partial amends and the Home Member, the Nawab of
Chhatari, came and expressed his concern. All this was more or less beside the point
and the graceful thing and the right thing was not done, but then the right thing is
seldom done. I wrote again to Government. Still I decided in my mind that should
VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

515

special necessity arise I would withdraw my prohibition and consent to an interview.
So matters have stood for the last few weeks. I did not suggest an early interview as
there was some talk of my transfer back to Naini Prison.
Now that you have also written about it, what can I do but immediately to
capitulate to you? So henceforth, and unless something untoward intervenes, I shall
take my usual interviews. Kamala may not be able to see me for several weeks still.
She [ is] in Calcutta under Bidhan’s treatment. But I shall see Mother and Indu and
Sarup and Krishna or such of them as can find me.
The stopping of interviews has made me retire a little more into myself. But I
have had pleasing and a friendly neighbour—the Himalayas. The sight of their
outline against the sky, and now their summits and sides covered with fresh snow,
have meant a geat deal to me. They seem to rouse in me ancient memories of the long
ago when perhaps my ancestors wandered about the mountains of Kashmir and played
in their snow and glaciers. I have had companions here but largely I have been left to
myself, and I have grown a little contemplative, in defiance of heredity and family
tradition and personal habit! But that is a thin veneer which I am afraid will rub off at
little provocation. How can the Ethiopian change his skin?
I have read a lot, and if wisdom could be had in books I would be wise. But
wisdom eludes me, and big question-marks confront me wherever I look. Sometimes I
think of Prince Siddhartha’s old question and no answer comes:
How can it be that Brahma
Would make a world and keep it miserable,
Since, if all-powerful He leaves it so,
He is not good, and if not powerful,
He is not God?
From all accounts in the papers you are as ever the slave of industry and are
over-working yourself even in prison. The new industrial system of the West is often
criticized and blamed because it makes man a machine for ceaseless work and robs him
of all leisure. You are supposed to be no lover of this system. And yet, you seem to
personify to me often this very industrial system !
I am intrigued at your remark that eye-witnesses have told you that I am
keeping fit. The information is correct but who could these eye-witnesses be who
have managed to reach you? I have had no interviews for a long while and, except for
a colleague who was discharged a month ago, I can think of no other likely recent
eye-witness. It is true that I am poorer by four teeth. I have sacrificed them at the altar
of modern science to appease the goddess of physical health.
This is a long letter for gaol. But this I am writing to you after over a year and I
have not seen you for over sixteen months. My last glimpse of you was when you

516

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

were sailing away to the far West and your figure grew smaller and smaller as the ship
bore you away and left us, feeling rather lonely and forlorn, on the pier.
With my love to all the happy family of yours in Yeravda.
Yours affectionately,
J.
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1933. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

APPENDIX XV
TALK WITH MATHURADAS1
February 18, 1933
[BAPU]: It is true that according to the Vedas the Shudras have no privileges;
mainly they speak of only three varnas. However, the Vedas which are available to us
are not the only ones. Of the thousands of books only a few have come down to us.
There is religion as well as history in the Vedas. And history is not religion. The part
dealing with religion is timeless and eternal whereas the one dealing with history
describes the circumstances then prevailing. Who knows how long I have to live? But
if I had no other task to demand my attention, I would certainly wish to take up the
work of varnashramadharma. But the establishment of varnadharma needs the
foundation of ashramadharma without which the whole structure would necessarily be
weak. There is contentment at the root of varnashramadharma. It implies willing
acceptance of one’s dharma and karma. Therefore varnashramadharma is a divine way
of life whereas all the others are demoniac ones. Varnashramadharma has nobility as
its predominant quality whereas the others are dominated by calculated selfishness.
Once this law is understood many other things will follow. If we know how to
drink water but do not know the science behind it, then it is of no use. If we know the
various forms of water such as snow, vapour and hydro-electricity, then we can be said
to have understood the science of water. Similar is the case with varnashrama. This is
a principle applicable in all cases.
[M.D.]: In other words, as Muslims claim that Islam means peace, and that it is
the universal law meant for the whole world, you say that varnashramadharma is the
universal law.
BAPU: Yes, it is in the same sense. Every religion has some eternal principles
and the followers of a particular religion follow their dharma in that measure. The rest
of their religion is related to the circumstances of time and place.
I would give up varnashramadharma this very day, were it not connected with
1

Vide “Letter to Motilal Roy”, 18-2-1933.

VOL. 59 : 13 JANUARY, 1933 - 9 MARCH, 1933

517

birth. What would otherwise be left in it? I would maintain that the correct thing
would be that the son of a carpenter should be a carpenter and not a blacksmith. If as a
result there are to be hundreds of castes, let there be. So long as there is inter-dining
and intermarrying among them let there be any number of castes. The restrictions
about dining and marriage have turned the whole thing into a wretched affair.
I would certainly say that Dronacharya had fallen from dharma. What I mean is
not that a member of one varna may never follow the profession of another varna, but
that it is not proper. This varnashramadharma as I propound it is for everybody to
follow not blindly but after due deliberation. Like Hindus, Muslims also may follow
it. It was in this sense that I described it as ‘Hinduism’s greatest gift to mankind’.
With the observance of this dharma the entire community will be saved and it will
become invincible.

[From Gujarati]
Mahadevbhaini Diary, Vol. III, pp. 152-3

APPENDIX XVI
THE CLEANSER1
(A free rendering, from the Bengal;, of Satyendranath Datta’s “Scavenger”)
Why do they shun your touch, my friend, and call you unclean?
Whom cleanliness follows at every step, making the earth and air sweet for our
dwelling, and ever luring us back from return to the wild?
You help us, like a mother her child, into freshness, and uphold the truth, that
disgust is never for man.
The holy stream of your ministry carries pollution’s away and ever remains
pure.
Once Lord Siva had saved the world from a deluge of poison by taking it
himself.
And you save it every day from filth with the same divine sufferance.
Come friend, come my hero, give us courage to serve man, even while bearing
the brand of infamy from him.
RABINDRANATH TAGORE
Harijan, I 1-2-1933

1

Vide “Letter to Rabindranath Atagore”, 20-2-1933 and “We Do Not Hate”,
25-2-1933

518

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

