1. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
P HOENIX,

[March 12, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

The above1 is soul-stirring. I was teaching one of the boys this
morning and came upon it. I thought it so fitted your case at many
points that I would have it copied. Please read and reread and come
out of Doubting Castle after having killed Giant Despair.
With Love,
UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
I have not written to the Countess2 . I thought I would await Mrs.
Mayo’s letter. As you will soon be on the tramp I am not sending the
agricultural books. It is right?
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

2. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
Phagan Sud 6 [March 14, 1913] 3
CHI. HARILAL,

After many months I have has a letter from you. Every time yu
express regret and say you are sorry for not writing regularly.Your
repentace has no meaning either for you or for me. Repentance will
bear fruit ony when it relates to one’s failure to do a thing despite
one’s best effort and when it is followed by greater vigilance in
guarding against further failure. Your regret amounts to mere
formality. Do children naveto be formal with parents?
As soon as I knew of yur examination [result] from another
1

An extract from John Bunyan’s allegorical work The Pilgrim’s Progress.
Presumably Countless Tolstoy
3
In his letter to Harilal Gandhi of January 26, 1913 (p. 449), Gandhiji had
discussed Harilal’s examination result and asked for the question-papers. Here he
repeats the request and adds that the two letters are being posted together. This was,
therefore, written shorlty after the letter of January 26.
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

1

source, I wrote you a letter 1 . But it could not be posted until now,.
because the diary2 containing your address had been misplaced. You
will therefore get that letter as well as this one about the same time.
I am not the only one to wait anxiously for a letter from you. Ba
keeps on inquiring, and so do Miss Schlesin and the others.
Your mind has not become calm even there. I do not understand
what it is that you want. All that I can make out is that you want to live
in Ahmedabad and with Chanchi. Perhaps you wrote to the Doctor 3
too, about this, You may live as suits you best.
In reply to the second portion of yur letter, I shall say only this:
“Live in any way that suits you,.[but] strive to realize God anyhow.”
I shall not argue.
Our paths may well be different. If our destination is the same,
we shall meet there. What would it matter even if we should follow
contrary paths? I am not so arrogant as to believe that I am wholly
right and others, in the wrong. Of course, I hold on to the idea that I
must do what seems to be my duty. Though I know that we do not
become equal even if I give you this freedom, because, in following a
course opposed to my ideas, you have to depend on me for money. I
wish I could release you even from this situation [of dependence] and
then argue with you as an equal. But how is this possible? If, impelled
by my sense of duty, I have erred in giving up the source of my
income, I shall of course have to repent for that. Have I not, however,
done an injustice because in doing this I failed to take my sons’
interests into account? My answer is “ N o ” I did consider their
interests, too, accordingly to my own lights. Whether my judgement
was right or wrong time alone will show to us both.
I observe that England is still on your lips. Please overcome the
desire. Your time is not yet.
Send me the question-papers of your examination if you have
preserved them.
Manilal is deep in his studies. He is interested in them. I give
him an hour and a half every day. Let me know what books you
read—for your examination, I mean. Send me some samples of your
1
2
3

2

Vide “Letter to Harilal Gandhi”, 26-1-1913.
Vide “Diary, 1912”, end of 1912.
Dr. Pranjivan Mehta
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

English composition.
Blessings from

BAPU

PS.
Ramdas and Devdas also study fairly well, but they have
developed no interest in their studies. Ba is well, more or less.
Anandlal has left Phoenix that he may be able to look after
Abhechand’s business.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 9539

3. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Phagan Sud 6 [March 14, 1913] 1
CHI. JAMNADAS,

The letters you wrote from India have arrived now. They were
read with great interest. I know the restrictions you have placed. But in
these letters you have given me permission to show them to
Chhaganlal and Maganlal. They were also shown to Manilal. I thought
it was in his interest that he should read them, so admirable they
appeared to be. I shall not show them to anyone else. If any letter of
yours contains only personal reflections of an intimate nature, I alone
will read it and then destroy it.
Your boils must have disappeared by now. You will continue to
have one ailment or another till your blood is completely purified and
you have suitable diet as dictated by experience. With effort, this
[trouble] can be overcome. This desire [that you should recover] was
one of my reasons for wanting you to be with me.
Ginger, according to our rule, need not be avoided, but it is not
beneficial either. Its undesirable effects will be immediately observed
in those who live on a fruit diet.
“If we must know English we should know it well”—from this
we cannot conclude that if we must travel by railway, we should travel
first or second. Studying English is not bad in itself, travelling by
railway is wholly so; if we must travel, therefore, we should just huddle
1
Jamnadas Gandhi left South Africa on December 14, 1912 and any letter
from him could not have reached Gandhiji before January 15 of the following year at
the earliest. In 1913, Phagan Sud 6 corresponds to March 14.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

3

ourselves in and mind no discomforts. Moreover, where countless
people are forced to put up with hardships, we should submit to them
voluntarily—that is, on occasions when it is not immoral to suffer.
All the items of the diet on the Farm may not be suitable in
Phoenix. You fell ill because you did not wait long enough for
necessary adjustments to be made.
A ship is bound to look after the needs of deck passengers.
I agree that you should not give up milk or curds, but do not
give them the chief place. They make us more indolent. Our friend
Kotwal is now in India. Cultivate contact with him. He still lives on
fruit diet. You may profit by his experience. He is likely to go deep
into the matter and discover things which you will not.
While doing honour to Brahmins, one must maintain a
reverential attitude and not treat them with contempt, in the same way
that we would respect a person born in a noble family even while we
pity him. We would, naturally, feel no respect for a prostitute’s son. I
do not mean, however, that we should support any Brahmins in their
wicked ways. If you interrupted your studies to offer some little flour
to Brahmin beggars who had no business to go begging, you would
only be sacrificing your studies. I would not think that in doing so
you had done honour to the Brahmins; I would rather count it as your
timidity or want of judgement. Question me again if you have not
followed this.
Give up the afternoon nap, forcing yourself if need be. When
you feel the urge coming over you, take a bath.
I am not against schools or against education, but against the
stamp. This is one ground of objection against government schools.
A second objection is the lack of character in teachers and the
fact that pupils have no intimate contact with them. The wasting of
time over certain subjects is the third objection, and the fourth that
quite often these schools become symbols of our slavery.
The Parsi cap is not the Parsis’ but ours, though an adopted one.
Our forefathers may have erred in adopting it. The error, however, is
not one that need be corrected now. But why should we take the
trouble of adopting a fresh one? Putting on a Hungarian or Moghul
cap is suggestive, in a way, of pride and conceit—that we are different
from others.
4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I imagine that even after my going [to India] the press 1 will
continue as before. There is a possibility that Miss Schlesin and Miss
West may go over to India ultimately. Mr. Polak and Mr. Ritch will of
course practise and live on in South Africa. About Mr. Kallenbach,
nothing is certain. Kotwal, it seems, will remain with me. Manilal,
probably, will be where I am. He is going strong with his studies. They
will still continue. I cherish the fond notion that no one else can, and
will, teach him as quickly and as well as I. Jekibehn keeps well
enough. She is, for the present, my only adopted daughter. She is
mine more than Dr. Mehta’s so that it seems likely she will remain
with me.
Do not be eccentric in your dress. The head should be covered,
a shirt may be worn, if needed, and so also slippers. These latter,
however, only when you go out. At home, keep bare-footed, and
outside, too, except when it is very hot or cold. One need not be too
particular about these things, but such of them as one has grown used
to should be kept up.
All the questions raised in your letters have now been answered.
I have no time to write more. I pray that all my hopes in you be
realized, that you remain firm in your mind and that God may help
you.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 5642. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

International Printing Press, Phoenix

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

5

4. A PUBLIC EXAMPLE
A question was raised that the election of Mr. Gokhale to
represent the non-official members of the Bombay Legislative
Council in the Viceregal Council was invalid, as he was an “official”
drawing remuneration from the public treasury as a member of the
Public Services Commission. Mr. Gokhale has, we understand, set the
matter at rest, in characteristic fashion, by declining to accept the
remuneration to which he would have been entitled. Such things are
expected from such a man whose whole life has been one of selfabnegation in the service of the public. We do not congratulate him
upon what he would himself regard as a perfectly natural act, but we
sincerely congratulate the Motherland upon the possession of so rareminded a son. Whilst it is true that an incident of this particular
character could not occur in South Africa, where members of
commissions are statutorily exempted from the disabilities otherwise
attaching to the receipt of remuneration for their services in that
capacity, Mr. Gokhale’s example is one that might well be followed
even in this self-governing Dominion, where, on the contrary, such
instances of public morality have been, at least of late years,
practically non-existent.
Indian Opinion, 15-3-1913

6

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

5. BRITISH NAVY
Millions of Englishmen think that British rule is maintained by
the strength of the British Navy. Many people is Europe believe this
and the idea is impressed upon the minds of all citizens of the British
Empire. Associations have been established for this purpose.
Newspapers are full of it. A huge association named the Navy League
has been formed. Expenditure on the Navy is rising every day. British
children are taught from the earliest age that there is nothing at all
wrong in this. The British sailor is glorified. The colonies are even
asked to pay a share of the expenditure. There was a debate in the
Union Parliament last week on this question of contribution, when Mr.
Merriman made a very biting and thought-provoking speech. He said
in so many words that Europe had gone crazy. It had simply become
possessed by the idea of armies. The desire for bigger and bigger
armies, it would seem, was a kind of disease. The poor get crushed in
consequence, Mr. Merriman believes. He argues, therefore, that South
Africa should not join in this craze. Though himself an Englishman,
he has not much use for British greatness based on the Navy. His own
view is that it is not from their armed strength that the British derive
their greatness. He told General Botha and the rest that South Africa
should not in any way participate in the British scheme for the
[Imperial] Navy. Mr. Merriman holds also that the British Army
stationed in South Africa should be withdrawn.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinions, 15-3-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

7

6. GENERAL BOTHA’S SUGGESTION
There is no doubt that General Botha is a real farmer. Everyone
knows that he holds land running into thousands of acres. But that
would not by itself make him a farmer. There is a big company in
Natal which owns hundreds of thousands of acres of land; none of the
members, however, is a farmer. They only want to make profits
through farmers. But General Botha, it seems, lives like a farmer. He
himself works on the land, is well informed about matters connected
with the land and knows all about the various crops. On horses and
sheep he is an expert. Besides, even his speeches touch upon the great
importance of agriculture. In his heart of hearts, he seems to be
convinced that South Africa’s future does not lie in its gold mines.
There are some who even believe that the gold mines will be
exhausted in a few years, and that Johannesburg and other cities will
be reduced to the same condition as some American cities. Be that as
it may, General Botha has recently made a speech which is worth
noting. He has expressed himself in favour of expropriating the land
of the white landlords who do not themselves work on it and
transferring it to worthier hands. Of course, other whites will not allow
him to take such a step and the idea will not be implemented.
Nevertheless, it is valuable in itself. Botha, with his enthusiasm for
agriculture, can give it a strong impetus through his influence and
authority. We would like to see something of the same spirit among
us. We, too, would do well to turn our minds to agriculture.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 15-3-1913

8

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

7. WHO IS ENTITLED TO ENTER TRANSVAAL?
During our representative’s tour a number of leading people
wished to know who can enter the Transvaal. Hence, though this has
been stated earlier, we repeat it below.
Only those Indians who hold certificates under the Registration
Act of 1908 or 1907 can now enter the Transvaal without an
application or other formalities. Apart from showing their certificates
on the border and producing evidence that they are their own, there is
nothing they have to do.
If, however, anyone is accompanied by a wife, or minor under
16 years, he is required to produce evidence in respect of them. Very
often, the officer is high-handed and does not allow one to proceed
further. This means one’s being kept waiting on the border. It is
sometimes even necessary to approach the magistrate. One has to pay
lawyers. To save oneself from this harassment one method that is
adopted is to flatter the Registrar and take out a permit in advance.
But method has had an undesirable consequence: the pressure in that
direction has increased. Even a person with excellent evidence is put
to difficulties. An alternative way is to put up with the difficulties for
the time being and obtain redress through the regular procedure. This
may mean inconvenience in the immediate present but things will be
smoother afterwards. If all Indians adopt this course, the matter will be
put right quite soon. If only some do so, it might take longer. In this
connection, a question has also been raised as to what minors and
women coming in should do. The Transvaal officers require evidence
on the following lines in respect of minors:
(i) A certificate from a first-class magistrate to the effect that the
minor holding it is in fact the child of the person represented to be the
father.
(ii) The thumb-impression of the minor and the father on the
certificate for purposes of identification.
(iii) Evidence as to the child’s age. This need not be very
precise in every case. When it can be seen from the child’s physique
that the age is without doubt below 16, no evidence as to age is
necessary.
(iv) It should be clearly stated in the magistrate’s certificate that
he has fully satisfied himself that the child is in fact the son of the
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

9

person concerned.
In a genuine case, evidence on these points can be easily secured
and a father who wants to take his son with him to the Transvaal would
do well to carry such evidence. It should, however, be remembered
that those who have not brought any such evidence do not on that
account lose their rights. Poor people cannot sometimes get in India
evidence that they can in South Africa.
We hear that such certificates are also required from women. It
is our emphatic advice, however, that women must not give their
thumb-impressions. The Government has no authority to be so
rigorous in regard to the identification of women for the simple
reason that there is no need for that. There have not been many
instances of Indians trying to bring in women who have no genuine
rights. About women therefore, we must put up a fight. We believe
that in the case of women the marriage certificate would suffice and
we know that the right of a woman holding such a certificate can be
legally established.
The explanation we have given above relates to the Transvaal.
The question, too, was about the Transvaal. But, by and large, it holds
for Natal also. We know that there is greater strictness in Natal. The
Natal officer has more power. But it should be enough for anyone to
have evidence as indicated above. It should also be remembered that
we are carrying on a fight against the strictness in Natal. If any Indian,
in his selfishness, submits to the high-handedness of an officer there,
he will to that extent strengthen the officer’s position and weaken the
struggle. This is a simple rule: where there are no slaves, there are no
slave-drivers. It is only where people seem prepared to submit to
slavery that others set themselves up as masters.
Our condition in South Africa is such that vigorous action will
bring about an immediate improvement in it. But weakness will reduce
it to the lowest level. This is not so in other colonies because
conditions there are neither too good nor too bad so that people do
not even realize that they are held in fetters. Here, on the contrary,
every Indian feels he is a captive in chains.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 15-3-1913

10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

8. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XI]
We have seen that certain things should be avoided altogether. It
remains to be shown that there are others which, for quite different
reasons, should either be given up or consumed only in limited
quantities. Postponing this discussion for the moment, we shall
consider what our diet ought to be.
We can divide mankind into there very large categories on the
basis of diet. To one class belong the people who, by choice or
necessity, eat vegetable products only. This is the largest class. It
consists of most persons in India and Europe and considerable
numbers in Japan and China. Of these people, a few are vegetarians as
a matter of religious principle, but the majority do without meat
because they are unable to obtain it, though, if they get it, they eat it
with relish. Among these latter are included Italians, Irish and Scottish
people and the poor of Russia as well as of China and Japan. Thus, the
chief food of Italy is macaroni, of Ireland potato, of Scotland oatmeal
and of China and Japan, rice. People of the second category eat a little
meat or fish in addition to vegetable products, once or more than once
a day. The majority in England comes under this category, as do rich
Muslims in India and Hindus who are unorthodox, besides the well-todo Chinese and Japanese. This division, though quite large, is very
much smaller that the first one. The third division consists of primitive
tribes inhabiting the Arctic regions, as well as some Negroes who live
on flesh alone. Their number is very small and even these, as they
come into contact with European travellers, are learning to add
vegetables to their diet. The conclusion to be drawn from all this
simply is that man can live in all the three ways; what we have to
consider, however, is the question as to which diet is the most healthgiving.
The structure of the body would seem to indicate that Nature
intended man to be a vegetarian. A comparison which other animals
reveals that our body structure most closely resembles that of fruiteating animals, that is, the apes. The diet of the apes is fresh and dry
fruit. Their teeth and stomach are similar to ours. The teeth and the
stomach of predacious beasts, such as the lion and the tiger, differ in
structure from ours. We do not have claws as they have. We have,
moreover, something in common with non-carnivorous beasts—the
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

11

ox, for instance. We do not, however, possess intestines like theirs and
in the same number, for digesting large quantities of grass. From this,
many scientists conclude that man is not by nature carnivorous nor is
he formed so as to be able to eat every kind of vegetable food. Even
from among vegetable products, fruit alone should be his staple diet.
Chemists have shown by experiment that fruits contain all the
elements necessary for the maintenance of human life. Fruits such as
bananas, oranges, dates, figs, apples, pineapples, almonds, walnuts,
peanuts and coconuts contain all the elements necessary for health
and energy. These scientists say that this food need not be cooked,
and as animals maintain health by eating sun-ripened fruit, so should
we. They go so far as to assert that cooking removes certain essential
properties of vegetable foods and reduces their nutritional value. The
stimulating quality peculiar to vegetable products is partly lost in the
process. They even advance the argument that vegetable products
which cannot be eaten raw are no diet for us.
If this argument is correct, surely much of the time spent in
preparing and eating food be saved and we could finish our meals in a
shorter time. Much of the time of our womenfolk and the space take
up by kitchens, etc., in our homes would then be saved and we would
be free to attend to many other matters by putting to good use the
time and money thus saved.
The idea that all cooking will stop, that women will be set free
from the prison-house of the kitchen, that women will themselves
desire such freedom—all this will, I am afraid, seem a mere dream and
some may ask why at all we should discuss things which are
impossible. We are, however, not concerned at the moment with
whether everyone can put this into practice. We are only thinking of
what is best to do. If we know what is perfect health, we shall achieve a
more or less satisfactory level of health. If we know what the ideal diet
is, we shall know what we should generally eat.
Many books have been written on this subject in Europe. One
even comes across Europeans who experiment with fruit diet. Some
of them have recorded their experiences. These men take to a fruit
diet not from any religious consideration but purely for the sake
of health. There is a German named Just who has written an
excellent book 1 in which he has proved, with numerous examples,
1

12

Return to Nature
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that fruit diet is the best. He has cured many patients merely
with the help of fruit diet and fresh air. He even claims that men can
get all the nourishment they need from the fruit growing in their own
regions.
It will not be out of place if I here describe my own experiment.
For the past six months, I have eaten nothing but fruits. I have not
taken even milk or curds. My diet has consisted of bananas, peanuts,
olive oil, lemon or similar citrus fruit, and dates. I do not claim that
the experiment has proved completely successful. Six months is not
enough to gauge the results of such a big change, but I can say this at
any rate, that when others fell ill I remained well. I have greater
physical and mental energy, than before. As regards physical strength,
I may not be able, I admit, to lift as heavy weights as I could formerly,
but I can work for longer periods at a stretch without fatigue. Of
mental work I do much more at present and cope with it all. I have
recommended this diet to some patients and the results have been little
short of miraculous. I intend to describe these in the chapter on
diseases. In fine, then, the experience of others and of myself and
what reading and thinking I have done seem to suggest that a fruitdiet is superior to all other kinds of diet.
I do not for a moment expect that anyone reading this will
straightaway take to experimenting with fruit diet. What I have will
scarcely have any effect on the reader. But, if I am to tell the truth, as I
wish to, I think it is my duty to present only my own conclusions, such
as they are.
If, however, any reader does plan to experiment with fruit diet. I
would advise him not to rush into it but to go slow. After first reading
all the chapters, he should draw his own conclusions and then do
whatever he wants to with full deliberation.
In the following section we shall consider the diet of the second
category. I think the conclusions of that section will be more
acceptable and also that, after he has perused it, he will find it easier to
understand the present section.
To those who have been following these chapters seriously, my
request is that they form their own opinions and that, too, after
reading the entire series.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 15-3-1913
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

13

9. LORD AMPTHILL’S ADVOCACY
Lord Ampthill moved, the other day, in the House of Lords, for
papers regarding the visit of the Hon’ble Mr. Gokhale to South
Africa.1 We have expressed more than once the gratitude of the Indian
community to this nobel man for his great and unremitting zeal in our
cause. He has never allowed a single opportunity to be missed
whenever he could usefully occupy the attention of the House of
Lords. And every Indian knows how helpful his Lordship’s work has
been and how it has encouraged us in the midst of our troubles. His
latest effort, a full report of which we publish elsewhere, was based on
Mr. Gokhale’s visit. Lord Ampthill was not satisfied to allow the visit
to pass out of men’s minds without tangible results. He was anxious
that the good tone produced by the visit should be fully utilized for
the purpose of securing legislation or administration of existing laws
that might relieve the pressure that is continuously being put upon us.
Incidentally, he paid a glowing tribute to Mr. Gokhale’s personality
and worth. Lord Emmott, who represented the Government, we regret
to say, did not rise to the occasion. He missed the excellent and
friendly spirit of Lord Ampthill’s remarks, and, therefore, returned a
chilling reply. He was as secretive as he well could be, and would
commit himself to nothing. It is this disposition to over-regard
colonial sentiment and disregard Indian sentiment that so exacerbates
us and makes us realize, as nothing else does, that we have to depend
upon our own resources.
Indian Opinion, 22-3-1913
1

On February 11, 1913, Ampthill had asked in the House of Lords whether
the Imperial Government had received official information in confirmation of Press
reports that Gokhale’s visit to South Africa had been successful, and if there was hope
of an early and satisfactory settlement of the British Indian question. He also moved
for Papers. In the course of his speech, Ampthill said that it was an Imperial question
“of the first magnitude” and had caused discontent in India which came to a climax at
the Indian National Congress of 1911. The Imperial Government, he said, had
approved of Gokhale’s visit. He further wanted to know what the Government had
now done “to acknowledge and encourage and take advantage” of the resulting “spirit
of reasonableness and conciliation and goodwill”. Lord Emmott, Under-Secretary of
State for the Colonies, in the course of a “frigid and cautiously official” reply said
that Gokhale’s visit was unofficial, that his representations to the South African
Ministers were “informal” and that he had no Papers to lay before the House. Indian
Opinion, 22-3-1913.

14

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

10 HINDUS AND MAHOMEDANS BEWARE
The whole question was whether a wife, married by Mahomedan custom,
was wife within the meaning of the Immigration Act. His Lordship held that
the application must be refused as the marriage did not satisfy the requirements
of the Immigration Law.

Thus the Cape Argus report. Indians of South Africa will never
get a clearer or more important judgment to deal with. Hitherto the
judgments that have been given affecting the question of marriage
have been more or less enigmatic. On the occasion in question, a
clear-cut issue was presented. The case was admitted to be a test case
and judgment has been given against us Indians.1 This is not a
judgment given against an individual. The Judge was, no doubt,
helpless. The Immigration Officer could not be held to blame. He had
to administer an Act and he has done so. The meaning of the
judgment is that every Hindu and Mahomedan wife is in South Africa
illegally, and, therefore, at the mercy of the Government, whose grace
alone can enable her to remain in this country. And no one will be
blamed but ourselves if the future Indian wives—Hindu, Mahomedan
or Parsee—are turned out. This is a state of things which our selfrespect forbids us from tolerating. We hope that every Anjuman, every
Association, and every Dharma Sabha will send respectful
representations to the Government urging that the new Immigration
Bill should be altered so as to admit the legality of marriages
celebrated according to the recognized Indian religions. This request
should be promptly granted, not merely because we are part of the
British Empire, but even because of the law of comity of nations.
It is, indeed, a serious question for passive resisters to consider
whether they ought not to include in their requirements a redress of
this unthought of but intolerable grievance. Anyway, it is a question
which demands, on the part of the Indians, sacrifice of their all—their
businesses, their money, their ease—which will have been dearly
bought at the price of the nullity of their or their brethren’s
marriages. No consideration should be allowed to come in the way of
their taking prompt and energetic action.
Indian Opinion, 22-3-1913

1

Vide the following item

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

15

11. ATTACK ON INDIAN RELIGIONS
We have never read or heard of a judgment as important as the
one concerning women recently published in the Cape Times. A
woman named Bai Mariam had been married according to Muslim
rites and her husband brought her from India. The Immigration
Officer stopped her. The only reason he gave was that her marriage
could not be recognized as legal. This was admitted to be a test case.
There was only one point at issue, whether or not a marriage
solemnized according to the Muslim rites or under any religion other
than Christianity was legal. The Judge decided that such a marriage
was not legal and that therefore the woman had no right to enter the
Cape. She has been ordered to return. This decision means that as
from today all Hindu or Muslim wives living in South Africa lose their
right to live there. In other words, a Hindu, Muslim or Parsi wife can
live in this country only by the grace of the Government. It is quite on
the cards that the Government will not permit any more wives to come
in or that, if it does, it will be entirely as a matter of favour. We cannot
conceive of a more degrading state of affairs.
The remedy is entirely in our hands. Every Anjuman, every
Dharma Sabha and every one of the other associations must respectfully submit to the Government that the law should be amended
and that marriages solemnized under the rites of Indian religions
should be recognized as legal. Any nation that fails to protect the
honour of its women, any individual that fails to protect the honour of
his wife is considered lower in level than a brute. We know that many
battles have been fought to protect the honour of women. And so it
would not be too much if we, for the same purpose, embrace poverty.
We cannot offer the advice that this case should be taken to a
higher court. What can a court of appeal do? Nor do we think this a
case in which we should not approach the Government till a decision
has gone against us once again.
It will be nothing extraordinary if right now we sacrifice our
wealth, our stocks, our businesses and start the fight. All these things
are intended for our happiness. If we lose our honour, what remains
of happiness? And if we do not spend what we do not spend what we
have earned for our happiness, where shall we find beggars like us?
This is a situation over which even satyagrahis should ponder. It
is worth considering whether they ought not to include among their
16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

demands one that might help to ward off this unexpected blow. We
hope that in this situation not a single Indian will give in.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 22-3-1913

12. GOVERNMENT’S ATTITUDE
We can know the Union Government’s attitude from a number
of instances. Mr. Ibrahim Mahomed Cassim has a thirteen-year-old
son named Hassan. There seems to be no reason to doubt his age.
Even then Mr. Smith refused him permission to land and informed his
lawyer that he had instructions not to permit the entry of any minor
without a certificate of birth from India. The boy’s father, therefore,
has obtained an interdict. The matter will now go to a court. The case
is of interest to us only in so far as it reveals the Union Government’s
attitude towards us. Since it is not the practice in India to get births
registered, for hundreds of children it will be impossible to obtain
certificates giving precise information. The Union Government is not
likely to be unaware of this fact. If, despite this, it has laid down that
no one should be permitted to enter without a certificate, it can only
mean that it wants to increase the difficulties in our way in order to
stop the entry of children altogether. We have already written about
women. Children, too, are to be harassed. This can have only one
result in the end, namely, that we shall have to leave this country. The
remedy lies in our own hands.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 22-3-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

17

13. OUR QUESTION IN THE HOUSE OF LORDS1
A detailed report is now available of the discussion in the House
of Lords when Lord Ampthill raised our question once again. This
noble gentleman does not miss a single opportunity of advocating our
cause. His speeches indicate, moreover, his unremitting zeal
on our behalf. Utilizing the opportunity afforded by Mr. Gokhale’s
visit to this country, Lord Ampthill initiated a discussion on our
question. In the course of his speech, he paid a glowing tribute to Mr.
Gokhale and criticized the administration of the laws passed here. The
only regret is that Lord Emmott, who spoke on behalf of the
Government, missed the spirit of Lord Ampthill’s remarks and gave a
half-hearted reply. The impression that the reader gathers from this is
that his Lordship stands in awe of the Colonies and that he disregards
Indian interests when the interests of the former are at stake. This is
and overbearing attitude, indeed, and it is such behaviour which
embitters Indians. We can also realize from Lord Ampthill’s speech
how very useful is the Committee in England. As we have already
pointed out, we have no funds left for that Committee. We have also
said that Mr. Gokhale is prepared to shoulder this responsibility. But it
is necessary, all the same, that we send him something at least for the
maintenance of the Committee. The response to our appeals to
Indians has so far been disappointing. We hope those who realize the
Committee’s value will now bestir themselves a little.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 22-3-1913

1

18

Vide also “Lord Ampthill’s Advocacy”, 22-3-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

14. MALAY LOCATION DISPUTE
It happens sometimes that, when two big parties fight, a third
party, which is weak, gets the benefit. This is what is likely to happen
in the case of the Malay Location. Indians in Johannesburg must be
aware that a portion of this Location has been handed over to the
Railway. Hitherto, the Town Council used to collect rent from the
Location on behalf of the Railway. The latter’s intention is to drive us
out, in course of time, from the portion it has acquired. Because of
this uncertain state of affairs, the improvements which the Town
Council wished to effect in the Location could not be proceeded with.
It tried hard to arrive at an arrangement with the Town Council and its
Railway Committee has proposed a resolution to the effect that the
Council should not act [as agents] for the Railway any longer. The
Committee wants the Council to go ahead with the improvement
already undertaken and also to refuse to collect rent on behalf of the
Railway. If the resolution is accepted and if the Indians play their part
well, no one will be able to touch the Malay Location. The Indians’
part consists in seeing to it that they desist from creating filth. We
should not allow ourselves to mar the buildings out of greed for rents,
and we should maintain the utmost cleanliness that we possibly can.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 22-3-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

19

15. VREDEDORP CASE
In this case Mr. Buckle has given judgment, with costs, in favour
of the Chinaman.1 Mr. Buckle says in the course of the judgement that
the Chinaman cannot be said to reside in Vrededorp; he was only an
employee of a white. The business belongs to the white, who attends
the store in person. It is the white, therefore, who should be treated as
a resident. If a contrary meaning were given to the expression “to
reside”, a Coloured who happened to be in someone’s house and
occupied a chair for five minutes would have to be treated as having
residedthere. There is no reason to believe [he says] that the framers
of the law had intended any such meaning. If the Chinaman had his
boarding and lodging in Vrededorp or had his own business there, he
would have been liable to prosecution. The Vrededorp law does not
forbid the employment of Coloureds as shop assistants. All that
follows from this judgment is that a white carrying on business in
Vrededorp can employ any number of Coloureds for that purpose.
No Coloured, however, can have his home in Vrededorp and live
there.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 22-3-1913

1

The Vrededorp Municipality had sued for the ejectment of Ah Kai, a Chinese,
from Stand 495 on the ground that he was an Asiatic and, at the time, not a bona-fide
servant of a white. Judgment in this case, described by Indian Opinion,
22-3-1913, as “an important test case”, was given, with costs, in favour of Ah Kai.

20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

16. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XII]
On the next level and below fruits, comes vegetable diet. This
consists of all kinds of vegetables, cereals, pulses, beans, milk, etc. Just
as fruit-diet contains all the elements that man needs, so too does
vegetarian diet, though the two do not have the same effect. Some of
the elements we obtain from food are also to be found in the air; yet
we cannot obtain them from air and do without food. Moreover, all
vegetable products lose something of their original nature when
cooked and are to that extent robbed of value, one would have cooked
food and cannot go without vegetables, it has to be considered what it
would be best to take.
Among grains, wheat is the best. Man can live on wheat alone. It
contains all the nutritive elements in good proportion. Many
preparations can be made of it, and it is also easy to digest. Children’s
foods available in the market also contain a proportion of wheat. In
the same category with wheat are millets and maize, from all of the
which rotli1 or roti2 can be prepared, though these cereals cannot
compare with wheat. It is important to understand what the best way of
taking wheat is. Wheat flour, which we know as mill-flour, is
absolutely worthless, devoid of all nutritional value. Dr. Alinson says
that a dog he kept exclusively on such a diet succumbed as a result,
but another flourished on bread from a different variety of flour.
White flour is entirely devoid of bran, which is the source of the taste
and energy-giving property of wheat. White bread is in such demand
because, eaten with it, other tasty things are most enjoyed. For
instance, those who eat cheese derive energy from it but they eat it,
and can eat it, only as an adjunct to bread. Rotli, too made of such
flour is bad; it is tough and offers neither taste not nutrition. The best
flour is that which is obtained by grinding clean wheat at home and if
in addition, it is ground by hand in a quern, it is considered to be the
very best. If, however, one cannot secure a quern, one can purchase at
a low cost a handmill to be kept in the home and grind wheat for
1
2

Unleavened bread
ibid

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

21

personal use. Or one can buy unsifted Boer-meal and use it. The flour
should be used as it is, unsifted, The roti made of this flour is tasty and
nourishing and the flour is more economical to use than maida, since,
being nutritious, it cannot be consumed in the same quantity as
maida.
It should be borne in mind that ready-made bread is quite
worthless. Whether white or brown, it is adulterated. Moreover, it is
prepared from flour fermented with yeast. This is a great drawback. It
is the opinion of many experienced people that bread made of such
flour is harmful. Then again, during preparation. the loaf is covered
with tandul or fat; hence it should be unacceptable both to Hindus
and Muslims. To eat shop bread in place of roti prepared at home is
nothing but a mark of laziness.
Another easy and pleasant way of eating wheat is to grind it
coarse and make porridge from it. Porridge, if well cooked in water
and taken with milk or sugar, tastes delicious and is much superior to
other kinds of food.
Rice seems to contain no nutriment and it is doubtful whether
man could live on it alone, unless pulses, ghee and milk are added to
it. Wheat, on the other hand, cooked in water alone is enough to
maintain one in good health.
Vegetables are eaten mainly for their taste. They have a laxative
effect and thus help purify the blood. However, they are of the nature
of grass, they are difficult to digest and give excessive work to the
stomach. Everyone must have noticed that those who are given to
consuming vegetables in excessive quantities are of the delicate
constitution and are called pepchidas1 . They frequently suffer from
dyspepsia and are always swallowing medicines for indigestion. That
some varieties of vegetables are a form of grass is plain enough to us.
Vegetables, therefore, should certainly be eaten but, be it remembered,
only in small quantities.
Pulses—beans, val,2 tuwar,3 vetches, tare, lentil—are regarded as
good tonic foods. They are difficult to digest as they require much
1
2
3

22

Gujarati colloquial expression meaning “milksop”
Varieties of pulses
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

heat in the stomach. The fact that a person who has eaten a quantity of
pulses frequently passes wind only means that he has not been able to
carry it. It is for this reason that pulses are regarded as causing vayu
[excess of wind]. One characteristic of pulses is that they keep one
going for a fairly long time. A person who has to undertake much
physical labour can tolerate pulses more easily and even derive some
benefit from them. We, however, who do limited physical work
generally cannot afford to eat an excess of pulses. Those who loll in
cushioned seats cannot eat the same type or quantity of food as
labourers.
A famous writer in England named Dr. Haig has proved with
numerous experiments that pulses are a very unwholesome food.
They produce an excess of a particular acid in the body which causes
many ailments and brings on premature old age. He has given many
reasons to explain why this happens, which there is no need to
consider here. My personal experience, at any rate, indicates that it is
harmful to eat pulses. Those, however, who cannot master their palate
may eat them, but with care.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 22-3-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

23

17. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY
TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR1
P HOENIX,
NATAL ,

March 24, 1913
THE P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO
THE HON ’BLE THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR
C APE TWON
DEAR SIR,

There are two matters of urgency in which I feel that I should
now write asking for information. Being aware of the illness of the
Hon’ble the Minister of the Interior from which I hope Mr. Fischer is
recovering, I have been reluctant to trouble the Minister acting for Mr.
fischer. But as I have been pressed by inquirers I venture to ask for
information on the following:
Some considerable time ago the Registrar of Asiatics wrote to
me saying that he forwarded to the Hon’ble the Minister the
correspondence regarding permits for educated British Indian entrants
for the past year, in terms of the provisional settlement. The Registrar
has rejected two out of the six names of entrants submitted by me
after consultation with passive resisters and the British Indian
Association.2 I have requested that the names might be restored as it is,
I respectfully submit, part of the compromise that the names of
entrants should be submitted by those in whose name and for whose
sake the settlement was arrived at. I shall therefore be glad to learn
that the Hon’ble the Minister has directed the Registrar to include
among the entrants the two omitted names.
And may I know whether the proposed Immigration Bill
embodying the terms of the provisional settlement will be brought
forward during the present session of the parliament?
I remain,
Yours faithfully

[M. K. GANDHI]
From a photostat of the handwritten draft with corrections in Gandhiji’s hand:
S. N. 5746
1

For the reply to this, vide Appendix “Letter from secretary for interior to
Gandhiji”, 4-4-1913.
2
This letter to the Registrar of Asiatics listing the entrants’ names is not
available.

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

18. THE MARRIAGE QUESTION1
We dwelt at some length last week upon the momentous decision
given by the Cape Provincial Division of the Supreme Court on the
question of the validity of non-Christian marriage among Indians.
This week we publish valuable information regarding the action of the
Master of the Natal Provincial Division. This officer has questioned
the validity of Mahomedan marriage for the purpose of assessing
succession duty. 2 We need not go into the particulars about the
difference in the duty chargeable. But the great issue raised by the
Master, so far as we are concerned, is that of the validity of marriages
performed according to the tenets of the great faith of India. It might
be here remarked that this totally unexpected calamity—it is nothing
less—has overtaken us not because of any new law but because of the
new interpretation that is being placed upon an old law. Ever since the
settlement of Indians in South Africa, Indian marriages, celebrated
according to Indian religious custom, have been recognized. The
issues of such marriages have inherited considerable properties as
lawful heirs of their deceases parents. It is the new spirit of the Union
breathed upon the officers administering old laws that has brought
about the present intolerable situation. Indeed, the logical result of the
new interpretation is that even past acts might be impugned and heirs
in possession of the inheritances might be dispossessed. Indian society
has suddenly been plunged into confusion from which it can extricate
itself only by a mighty effort. For, if the policy of the Government, as
foreshadowed in the cases we have published from time to time, is
continued, they will be able without resorting to new legislation either
to exterminate us or to paralyse us as a progressive community, unless
we are prepared to offer stubborn opposition.
We may now, perhaps, understand the reason for the very
cautious reply3 made by Lord Emmott to Lord Ampthill. These cases
explain his Lordship’s reticence, but they cannot be allowed to excuse
1

Vide also “Hindus and Mahomedans Beware”, 22-3-1913 and “Attack on
Indian Religions”, 22-3-1913.
2
In Natal, a Mahomedan had left by his will his entire property to his
surviving wife. For assessing the succession duty, the Master of the Provincial
Division of the Supreme Court had called for proof apart from the husband’s statement
and suggested that the parties concerned should get the Supreme Court’s ruling on the
point. Indian Opinion, 29-1-1913.
3
Vide 1st footnote of “Lord Ampthill’s Advocacy”, 22-3-1913.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

25

it. If he knew that the Union Government were to remain unbending,
and if he had any regard for us, he should have, when Lord Ampthill
gave him the opportunity, strongly disapproved of the attitude of the
local Government.
Indian Opinion, 29-3-1913

19. INDIAN MARRIAGES
Last week we dwelt upon the marriage case in Cape Town.
Another case of the same nature, regarding one Bai Janubie, has come
to our knowledge. This lady is a widow, whose husband has left her
his property by a will. The Master of the Supreme Court, however,
refuses to execute the will. He states that Bai Janubie’s marriage
cannot be recognized as valid. The marriage question, thus, is
assuming a serious aspect day by day and we shall find ourselves quite
helpless afterwards if we are not vigilant and fail to act in time. The
effects will be felt by all Indians. Some people argue, we hear, that
there can be no satyagraha in a matter concerning women, for they
cannot be asked to go to gaol. We leave aside the question whether or
not they can be. Cannot men go to goal for women’s honour and
their own? There may be no need whatever for women to go to gaol
or to be asked to do so. What is needed is that men should be men
enough. Satyagraha, moreover, is far off yet. Where is the question of
satyagraha in taking counsel together, parting with a little money,
holding meetings and sending petitions? If we take cover behind the
argument that there can be no satyagraha and sit back with folded
hands, we shall only bring ridicule upon ourselves and our
womenfolk.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 29-3-1913

26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

20. LICENCE CASE IN ESTCOURT
When licensing officers do not harass us, we find white traders
waiting to do so. On the Licensing Officer issuing a licence to Mr.
Khamisa Ibrahim, the white traders of the locality appealed to the
Licensing Board. Since the members of the Board had expressed
views hostile to Indian traders, Mr. Khamisa’s lawyer raised an
objection against them. This was ruled out and the Board, reversing
the decision of the Licensing Officer, rejected Mr. Khamisa’s
application for a licence. We assume that Mr. Khamisa will take the
case further. All such cases should also be forwarded to Lord
Ampthill’s Committee so that redress may be obtained from the
Imperial Government on the issues involved.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 29-3-1913

21. ARE SYRIANS ASIATICS?
The Registrar refused to register a piece of land1 in
Johannesburg in the name of a Syrian, arguing that, since Syria was a
state in Asia, Syrians were Asiatics and the Asiatics Law of 1885
should apply to them. The Syrian has thereupon moved the Supreme
Court for an order that the land be registered in his name. He has
argued as follows:
True, I was born in Asia. But I am a Christian. My skin is white.
The framers of the laws of the country could never have
intended that the law of 1885 should apply to me, a white
Christian from Asia. If it applies to me, it should also apply to
white Jews from Asia. But in fact the law has never been
applied to white Jews. If, again, the law of 1885 is applicable to
me, I should be subject also to the Registration Act of 1907. If
it should be held that I am, there would follow a result which
could never have been contemplated by the framers of the law.
The Judge before whom the case was heard has reserved
judgment, holding that this was an important case, which no doubt it
1

Two Stands in Wolhuter Township

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

27

is. Indians will await the judgment eagerly. If the Judge confines
himself to the letter of the law alone, Asiatic Syrians will be placed on
par with us, even if they are Christians or whites.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 29-3-1913

22. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XIII]
We shall now consider what vegetables should be avoided. In
almost every part of India, it is customary to use chillies together with
spices such as coriander seed, black pepper, etc. The practice does not
obtain in other parts of the world to the same extent. If we offer any
of our spicy dishes to the Negroes here, they also will hesitate to eat
them as they do not care for their taste. Many white who are unused to
spices are totally unable to eat our pungent food and, if they force
themselves to eat it, their digestion suffers and the mouth gets
inflamed. I have witnessed this myself in the case of some whites. We
may conclude, therefore, that spices are not themselves appetizing but
that, having become accustomed to them by long use, we like their
smell and taste. We have already recognized, however, that eating
anything for the sake of its taste is harmful to health.
Let us then examine why people eat spices. They do so, it will be
readily admitted, in order to be able to eat more and digest more.
Chillies, coriander seed, cummin, etc., produce heat in the stomach
and in consequence we seem to feel more hungry. If, however, we
imagine from this that the food we have thus consumed is all digested
and transformed into pure blood, we shall be sadly mistaken. Many
people indulge in over-spicy food. Their stomachs become very weak
in the long run and some even get attacks of sprue. A certain man
used to eat large amounts of chillies, a habit which he could not
overcome, and he died in his youth after a long illness which kept him
on bed for six months. It is imperative that we eliminate spices from
out diet altogether.
This stricture applies equally to salt. No one will like this
idea and some may even be aghast at it, but its truth has, nevertheless,
been proved by experience. An association has been started in
28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

England whose creed is that salt is even more injurious than most
spices. Our diet supplies salt to us in organic forms, and that is all that
we really need. Sea-salt and rock-salt, on the other hand, are
superfluous and when consumed are expelled again through
perspiration and otherwise. This means that salt has no specific utility
for the body. One book goes so far as to say that consumption of salt
has a toxic effect on the blood and that one who has abstained from
salt for many years and has otherwise kept his body clean has his
blood stream so pure that even snake-bite will do him no harm; for
the blood of such a person develops a resistance to the venom. We
cannot ascertain the truth of this statement but from experience I can
at least say that ailments such as cough, piles, asthma, bleeding, etc.,
respond immediately to a saltless diet. A certain Indian had long
suffered from asthma and cough. These were cured by the adoption
of a saltless diet together with the use of the usual remedies. I have not
come across any undesirable results from giving up salt. I myself gave
it up over two years ago and have felt no ill effect; on the contrary, I
observe some beneficial effects. I need less water and feel less
lethargic. The incident which occasioned my giving up salt was
somewhat unusual, too. The person1 whose ailment was responsible for
my doing so has had her illness under control ever since. I am
confident, too, that had the patient been able to give salt completely,
her malady would have been entirely eradicated. I have observed
during numerous experiments that people find it difficult to give up
green vegetables and pulses together with the salt but this has to be
done. I think these articles prove hard to digest without the addition of
salt. This does not mean that salt stimulates digestion; on the contrary,
just as chillies merely give the illusion of aiding the digestive process
and are found to be harmful in the long run, so it is with salt. It
follows, therefore, that those who adopt a saltless diet must give up
green vegetables and pulses as well. Anyone can make this experiment
and watch the effect on himself. Just as an opium addict who tries to
rid himself of his habit feels out of sorts and weak at first, so is the
case with one who refrains from salt. One should not, however, lose
heart on this account. If the person who gives up salt is patient
1

Kasturba Gandhi.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

29

enough, he will be rewarded by and by.
The writer has been bold enough to assert that even milk is
among the articles to be avoided. One basis for this opinion is his own
experience, but that should be kept out of consideration. We entertain
so strong a superstition as to the value of milk that it would be a vain
effort to combat it. The writer does not expect that his readers will
agree with all the opinions he expresses in these articles, nor does he
expect either that all those who approve of them will put them into
practice; his object is only to present his ideas, leaving it to others to
accept whatever they will. There is nothing wrong, therefore, in his
writing even about milk. Many doctors have stated that milk is the
cause of typhoid. Pamphlets have been published on this subject. Milk
gets easily contaminated with airborne germs and those which are
inimical to health multiply rapidly in it. We have to take a great deal
of trouble to keep it in good condition. In South Africa there are
special laws for [the protection of] consumers of milk. Very many
recommendation are made for the preservation and storage of milk
and cleaning of utensils. It seems reasonable to question whether it is
worth while using an article which needs so much care to keep and
which, if not so guarded, may do harm.
Moreover, the goodness or otherwise of milk depends on the
condition of the cow and what she eats. Doctors cite instances of
persons drinking the milk of a tuberculous cow and themselves
developing tuberculosis. It is difficult to find a perfectly healthy cow,
and the milk of a diseased cow is unwholesome. It is well known that a
sick mother’s milk makes the baby also sick. When a baby which has
not yet been weaned falls ill, vaids treat the mother, so that through
her milk the medicine may act on the baby. What is true of woman’s
milk applies also to cow’s milk. In this way, the food and the health of
the giver of milk have an intimate bearing on its consumer. Would not
the right course be to avoid this milk, the consumption of which
demands so much trouble and carries so much risk? The strengthgiving property of milk is to be found in other substance as well.
Olive oil is a good substitute for milk in many ways. A preparation of
sweet almonds made by soaking them in hot water, peeling and
grinding them to a fine paste and mixing this thoroughly with water,

30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will have all the beneficial properties of milk and none of its risks.
Finally, let us consider the law of Nature: a calf gives up sucking after
a few months and, as soon as its teeth are developed, it turns to food
which requires their use; this should be the rule with human beings,
too. We are meant to take milk only so long as we are infants. We, too,
should, when our teeth are grown, employ them in chewing fresh fruit
such as apples and dry fruit such as almonds, or rotli. This is not the
place to calculate how much money and time can be saved by anyone
who has shaken off his slavery to milk, but each one will be able to
find out for himself. Milk-products, too, are unnecessary. The acid
content of whey is available from lemon and its other nutrients from
almonds, etc. As to ghee, thousands of Indians consume oil instead.
Let us now turn for a while to the third type of diet. It is a
mixture of vegetarian and non-vegetarian elements. This diet is
adopted by a large number of people, of whom many suffer from
various ailments and many others are found to be healthy. That we are
not meant to be meat-eaters, each one of our organs and the
constitution of our bodies make evident. Dr. Kingsford and Dr. Haig
have vividly described the ill effects of non-vegetarian diet on the
body. They have proved that the acid produced by consumption of
pulses is also produced by that of meat. Meat-eating damages the
teeth and causes rheumatism. It makes a man more prone to anger,
and therefore a sick man. According to our definition of health, one
who is quick to get angry cannot be counted a healthy person.
Those who eat the fourth and last type of diet, that is, who
subsist exclusively on flesh, need not detain us here. Their state is so
vile that the very thought of them should be enough to put us off
meat-eating. They are not healthy in any sense of the term. As soon as
they come up a little and get some knowledge, they tend to accept a
vegetarian diet.
What all this adds up to is that very few people will be found
ready for an exclusively fruit diet, but that a diet of dry and fresh
fruit, wheat and olive oil is worth a trial, it being possible to maintain
sound health on it. Among fruits, bananas occupy the first place.
Besides, dates, plums and figs are strength-giving fruits. Fresh grapes
improve the blood. Orange, lemons and apples can be mixed with
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

31

bananas and eaten with rotlis. The addition of olive oil to rotli does
not impair its taste. Such a diet costs very little trouble or money and
does not require salt and chillies, milk or sugar. Plain sugar is an
absolutely useless article of food. People who are very fond of sweets
lose their teeth early and the sweet food does them no good in any
way. Wheat, almonds, peanuts, walnuts, fresh fruits—from every on of
these a number of edible preparations can be made.
What we have now to consider is how much food to eat and
when; this we shall do in the next chapter.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 29-3-1913

23. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Phagan Vad 7 [March 29, 1913] 1
CHI. JAMNADAS,

I got your three letters together. You want to have a letter every
week but, since I do not have one from you so frequently, I do not
know how I can meet your wishes. However, I shall try to write
oftener.
After the stipulated period of six months is over, you need not
persist in saltless diet. It is not intended that in clinging to it one
should sacrifice one’s life. We have adopted diet without salt and
sugar in the belief that we should be healthier without them. If that
does not happen, we are not bound to give up either. For us, a saltless
diet is not, like vegetarianism, a matter of ethical principle. When we
come to think of it as such, we will not eat salt. About milk, I do feel
that way. Speaking for myself, I seem to do very sell without salt,
sugar, vegetables, pulses, etc.
I am rather unhappy that you cannot have sour lime, etc., there.
I can see many defects in your experiments. You are not in the least to
blame, though. Not being conversant with the thing, you have not
1

Judging from the contents this letter appears to have been written after
Jamnadas Gandhi left South Africa for India on December 14, 1912.

32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

been able to make any changes, Moreover, you cannot make your
own independent experiments. If, therefore, you are still going on
with the saltless diet, etc., and if it does not suit you, do please give up
the practice.
To enable you to preserve my letters, I shall try to use paper of
uniform size when writing to you. Some of the letters may possibly
deserve being read a second time. Moreover, as you are very eager to
know my views, in case you do not get a letter from me in any week,
you can re-read instead the latest ones received in preceding weeks.
Do not hesitate to ask me any questions in any words.
Let it not worry you that you went [to India] against my advice.
My only concern in trying to stop you was that you, all by yourself,
would not be able to strengthen your ideas. But when I observed your
keen desire to serve Khushalbhai1 and Devbhabhi,2 the other thought
appeared of secondary importance beside this desire. It was therefore
all to the good that you went. Moreover, the bitter experience you are
getting is also a kind of training for you, for your ideas are noble, all
of them, and you aspire to raise yourself up.
Our use of Urdu words like madari jaban 3 is perfectly in order.
If we would preserve Gujarati as simply a branch of Sanskrit, Parsis
and Muslims should not be regarded as Gujaratis. This is not possible
even if we wish it to be so. Gujarati has, and will continue to have, a
number of Urdu and persian words in use. The language used in the
Opinion must be such as will find favour with both Hindus and
Muslims. I making it so, we may use Allah4 and Parameshwar5 both,
as occasion may require. If any Englishmen settle in Gujarat, we may
even introduce some English words into our language. The English
words being taken over at present are just so much ostentation,
ignorance of flattery, Behind this borrowing there is no thought of
developing the language.
If the Hindus are faced with anything similar to the Turkish War,
1
2
3
4
5

Parents of the addressee
ibid
Mother tongue
A Muslim name for God
A Hindu name for God

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

33

they too should raise a row. Italy and the Balkan States are both in the
wrong in this war and we do nothing amiss in pointing to the fact of
their being so. There is no ill will towards Italy in this. Many of the
journal’s readers being Muslims, it is our duty to give them as much
news of the invasion as possible. We claim the Opinion to be a
medium of moral education, but how could it serve that purpose if
there were no readers? By giving the news about the war, we humour
readers in harmless fashion. Moreover, readers ought to keep
themselves informed about the war and to that extent the issue
involves a moral principle. Finally, though morals and publicity to our
hardships are its chief concerns, it is not the intention that the paper
should carry no news at all. Maybe, you have more racial
discrimination there, but it does affect the masses. Here it is they who
are specially affected.
The reason why in the sacred centres of pilgrimage oil is
forbidden and ghee is regarded as pure can be explained by the
conjecture which I have made. At one time, India was entirelya meateating country but, when someone converted the land to
vegetarianism, ghee came to be considered specially sacred. And so
we use unlimited quantities of ghee in our diet. The more ghee there
is in any preparation, the more highly we value it. Can there be a
greater instance of ignorance than this! And yet this is what people
believe. In consequence, ghee is assigned a high place in holy centres
of pilgrimage as well. The reformer must have imagined that if people
consumed plenty of ghee they would not miss meat very much. With
this object, in England, too, vegetarians take eggs in excess in the
absence of meat, and even fall ill. There are hardly any preparations
of theirs in which eggs are not used. They have assigned almost a
sacred place to eggs.
It would have been very good if you had undertaken to teach
the bania. You would have been partly cured of your restlessness and
the earnings would have been some help.
Do not take my going there as in any way certain. There is a
possibility that satyagraha may be revived on issues affecting wives
and minors. In that case, I think I shall have to stay on. Should
satyagraha be revived, how could you join it now? I do not think it
34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will be right for you to come away from there. Your purpose in going
away was service to your parents. With that as your chief concern, do
whatever is best. For this same reason, you cannot go to Baroda or
elsewhere to learn weaving.
I knew the verse you have quoted about controlling the palate.
My criticism applies all the same. One verse can make no difference.
They attached no importance to this subject. Had they done so, there
would have been no feeding on delicacies in the havelis 1 and other
places on every pretext and no gifting of provisions with ghee and
jaggery on every sacred occasion, nor the feasting of Brahmins either.
These days, even rishis and sadhus do not master their palate, but are
found to have been mastered by it. This is a long story. If we said
these things by way of fault-finding, we would incur sin. When,
however, our chief object is our own and others’ welfare, it is our duty
to take into account whatever imperfections we observe even in the
most respected personages.
This closes the reply to one of your letters. As to the other
letters, I shall try to answer them later, that is, next week, so that I may
have something to write to you every week.
Here, so many things happen which it is impossible to write
about. I do not have so much time. But some of the things will find
their way in as I deal with the questions you have asked.
Manilal is fully engrossed in his studies. I leave him not an
hour free, so that it is in vain to expect him to write to you. He may
possibly answer your letters. Jeki, too, is busy; but, apart from this, she
is disinclined to write letters and does not quite know how to. Do not,
therefore, put much hope in her either.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5643. Courtesy: Narandas
Gandhi

1

Vaishnava temples

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

35

24. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Monday [March 31, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I have your two letters. My cold is a thing of the past. I was
living during the damp weather on abnormal food and treating too
many patients and having no exercise. The food was mainly monkeynuts and lemons. There was no physical exercise. I gave myself
exercise, I left off monkey-nuts, took hot water and lemons and
blanched almonds. The effect was magical: the cough vanished in 48
hours. I have now returned to monkey-nuts, cannot afford almonds
and do not want to eat them myself when I cannot share them with the
children, nor do I need them now. The boy’s cough I have not been
able quite to trace the reason for. But they too are better. I agree that
we all could do with much less than we eat. It is not possible to force
the boys to eat so much and no more. I try to coax them.
Herewith draft reply for Heymann. I think it is better to rest on
your last letter and not now agree.
Hope you will get a better price for the mules and wagon.
Did you get the book I sent you? If you are stopping there long,
I could send you the other books you mentioned.
Your commission for Dar-es-salaam is receiving attention.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE,

[PS.]
The Free Age Press may reprint the letter. We have nearly 10,000
copies which they may have at the cost price.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India.

36

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

25. LETTER TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR1
[PHOENIX,]

April 1, 1913
[TO
THE MINISTER OF INTERIOR
C APE TOWN ]
DEAR SIR,

Mr. Justice Searle’s decision2 regarding the validity of Indian
marriages and the statement said to have been made by the
Immigration Officer in Natal, to the effect that no boys or girls
claiming to be the children of resident Indians would be admitted
unless they or their parents produce certificates of birth, have created
great consternation among my countrymen. And passive resisters have
also felt compelled to examine their own position.
According to Justice Searle’s decision, no Indian marriage
whether celebrated in South Africa or elsewhere can be recognized
unless it is in accordance with the marriage laws of the Cape Province,
i.e., every Indian marriage is invalid that is not registered before a
Marriage Officer or celebrated according to the Christian rites. This,
in my humble opinion, is an intolerable position and disturbs rights
hitherto exercised by Indians. I need hardly draw the attention of the
Hon’ble the Minister to the fact that marriages celebrated according
to the Hindu, Mahomedan or Parsee rites are fully recognized in India
by Indian law.
With reference to children, it is a well-known fact that very few
births are registered in India. Registration of birth is not universally
compulsory. And it is practically impossible to produce certificates of
birth except in rare cases.
The practical result of both the cases is almost completely to
prevent the entry of wives and minor children of domiciled Indians.
In the circumstances, I venture to submit that, apart from other
considerations, it is necessary in order to give full effect to the
1
This was published in Indian Opinion, 7-6-1913, under the heading
“Correspondence with Mr. Fischer”.
2
Vide Appendix “Text of Searle’s Judgement”, 21-6-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

37

provisional settlement1 to so frame the new Immigration Bill as to
restore the position as to wives as it availed before Justice Searle’s
decision and to revoke the instructions regarding children. May I also
suggest that it would be better if the leading members of the
community were consulted regarding proof required by the
Government as to marriages or the age or sonship of boys. I am sure
that the Indian community has every desire to co-operate with the
Government in facilitating the examination of relationships of wives
and children so as to avoid fraud or deception.2
I remain,
Yours faithfully,

[M. K. GANDHI]
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5747

1

For the terms of the settlement, vide “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 22-4-1911.
To this the following reply dated April 10 was received: “. . . I am directed
by the Minister of the Interior to state that it does not appear that any new principle
has thereby been laid down, as from the earliest times, following the introduction of
European civilization into South Africa, the law of the land has only recognized as a
valid union the marriage, by a recognized Marriage Officer, of one man to one
woman, to the exclusion, while it lasted, of any other. A very old established section
of the Cape population, and a large one in point of numbers, viz., the Cape Malay
community, has always followed the Mahomedan faith and conducted its marriages
according to the tenets of that religion; but such unions, unless solemnized by a
Marriage Officer, are not recognized under the Marriage Order-in-Council or officially
recorded in any way.
“You will note that the law does not demand that unions before Marriage
Officers should be in accordance with Christian rites in order that they may be duly
recognized as marriages. The unions effected before such officers are by no means
exclusively confined to persons holding the Christian faith. It is not possible,
therefore, to accept your contention that marriages according to Indian custom, but
not celebrated before a Marriage Officer, have hitherto been recognized as valid here;
nor is it possible to consider the introduction of any law which would have the effect
of disturbing the position so far as it affects the Cape Malay or the Indian sections of
the population.
“As has already been intimated, the Government has no intention of departing
from the present practice in regard to the introduction of the wives and minor children
of British Indians lawfully resident in South Africa, and Immigration Officers have
been so advised.”
2

38

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

26. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Thursday [April 3, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I was unconsciously addressing you Upper House. 1 I note you
are angry. I carried the information to you from here as soon as I
could. For Johannesburg will you blame me? And yet you may. Why
did I not specially ask Miss Schlesin to do so? Well, I expected her to
keep you informed. I shall, I hope, know better next time. Now please
get from Miss Schlesin a copy of the letter I have written myself to the
Interior.2 I have no spare copy with me.
You are hard on Mr. Gokhale. Your defence of Mr. Hosken does
your heart the greatest credit. I agree with all you say about him. I
wish you would forget in our relations that I am an Indian and you a
European. There are undoubtedly moments when those who are the
nearest to me do not distract my attention at all. You have given me
the privilege of considering you to be one of the nearest.
I am interrupted. More next time.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1
In the superscription Gandhiji had begun to write “Upper”, but scored out
the letters “Upp” for “Lower”.
2
Vide “Leter to Minister of Interior”, 1-4-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

39

27. THE STORM SIGNAL
Johannesburg, as was quite proper, has given the storm signal.
The mass meeting 1 , called by the British Indian Association, was a
thorough success. Mr. Cachalia 2 has given a respectful but firm
warning that there are some Indians in South Africa who are prepared
to give their all for the sake of their and their country’s honour. The
meeting passed resolutions which we doubt not would receive
Government’s earnest attention.
Indeed, it would appear that the meeting has already produced
some effect on the mind of the Government. Reuter’s report of the
Johannesburg meeting is quickly followed up by an inspired
explanation of the Searle judgment. The wire 3 , which we publish in
full, is a lame and poor attempt to whittle down the full effect of
Justice Searle’s judgment. The bonafides of Bai Mariam is
questioned. The question of polygamy has been quite gratuitously
introduced. But the Searle judgment is too clear and too precise to
need any explanation. The learned Judge himself said that it was a test
case. It was treated as such by both the parties, and the only issue
before him was whether marriages solemnized according to the. tenets
of Islam could be recognized by the Cape courts for the purposes of
the immigration law. His Lordship’s decision on the point is
unequivocal and emphatic. Such marriages are invalid. It is on this
that the protest of the Johannesburg meeting is based. The Government may not, they dare not, follow up the case to its logical extent.
But the legal possibilities are there. They were clearly brought out by
Mr. Ritch4 in his speech before the meeting. There are some things
which we may not worry over until the actuality stares us in the face;
but there are some other things whose possible happening, too, must
be avoided at all cost. No Indian husband can rest under the possibility of his wife’s status being questioned and all the consequences of
1

This was held on March 30, 1913; for the resolutions passed at the meeting,
vide Appendix “Resolutions at Vrededorp Mass Meeting”, 30-3-1913.
2
Ahmed Mahomed Cachalia, Chairman, British Indian Association
3
This is not reproduced here.
4
L. W. Ritch, barrister, an active associate of Gandhiji.

40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the possibility becoming an actuality.
It was, therefore, we consider, a most proper thing for Mr.
Cachalia to convene the meeting, whose demand cannot be abated by
reason of the so-called explanation. It was fitting, too, that, in point of
time the Tamil meeting should have been the first. The Tamils were
the greatest sufferers during the late struggle. They are now in the
forefront. We hope that the other towns of South Africa will follow
Johannesburg’s lead and support its action. Above all, we sincerely
hope that the Government will not miss the golden opportunity they
have, during the passage of their Bills of conceding the very just
request of the mass meeting.
Indian Opinion, 5-4-1913

28. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XIV]1
6. HOW MUCH AND HOW OFTEN TO EAT

We have considered what the ideal diet should be. It is necessary
to inquire how much and how often to eat, and the topic calls for a
separate article. To some extent the two questions, “How much should
one eat?” and “How often should one eat?” are interrelated. I say
“to some extent” because one cannot, and one should not, eat at a
single meal the total quantity of food to be consumed in one day, so
that “how much to eat” and “how often” are not so closely interrelated.
Doctors differ widely on the question: how much one should
eat. “In plenty”, says one doctor, and he recommends different
amounts of various foods according to their properties. Another
1

Articles in this series were later published as a book which was translated
into Hindi and other Indian languages. Based on the Hindi version was A Guide to
Health, an English adaptation by A. Rama Iyer, published by S. Ganesan, Madras, in
July 1921. The book was translated into several European languages.
In August-December 1942, during his incarceration in the Agakhan Palace at
Poona, Gandhiji wrote in Gujarati what became, in its English translation by Dr.
Sushila Nayyar, Key to Health, published by Navajivan Publishing House,
Ahmedabad, in 1948. While this book was not based on the series of articles
published in Indian Opinion, according to Gandhiji, it did not fundamentally differ
from them.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

41

doctor says that physical and mental workers should eat different
kinds and quantities of food. A third opines that a labourer and a
prince should eat the same quantity of food—that it is simply not true
that a prince can make do with less but a labourer must have more.
Everyone knows that a weak man and a strong man need different
quantitiesof food. The diet of a man differs from that of a woman.
There is a difference in the quantities of food for adults and children,
for the aged and the young. Lastly, there is one writer who even states
that, if the food is so thoroughly masticated that it turns into liquid
and is swallowed with ease like saliva, we would find two to four
ounces of food quite sufficient. He has carried out thousands of
experiments. His book has been sold by the thousand and is widely
read. Such being the position, it is useless to recommend definite
quantities of food; most doctors have said, however, that 99% eat more
than they require. Even otherwise, the thing is simple enough to be
obvious to us all. This being so, it is not necessary to prescribe a
minimum diet for fear that people might eat loo little. To tell the truth,
what needs to be emphasized is that, while planning a diet, all of us
should cut down on the quantity we consume.
As mentioned above, food should be thoroughly masticated. By
this means, we shall be able to extract the utmost nourishment from
even a small quantity of food and gain in every way. It has been
shown that the faces of one who eats only as much as he can
comfortably digest are small, well formed, darkish, sticky, dry and free
from bad odour. One whose faeces are not so formed must have eaten
excessive and unsuitable food and failed to masticate it and mix it with
the saliva in his mouth. Thus, from the appearance of our faeces we
can make out if we have eaten too much. He whose tongue is coated
on rising, who sleeps uneasily and dreams frequently, must have been
eating too much. One who has to get up often at night to pass urine
must have taken too much liquid. By such detailed observation,
anyone can decide the quantity of food required by him. Many
people have offensive breath. Clearly, they have not digested their
food. At times, those who over-eat get boils and pimples on the face
and in the nostrils. But we do not take these affections seriously. Some
get continuous hiccups. Others suffer from flatulence. The simple
meaning of all these ailments is that we have turned our stomach into
a commode and that we carry this commode with us wherever we go.
If we could spare the time to think quietly about this matter, we would
thoroughly despise our own habits. We would definitely eat less and
42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

put an end to dinners and feasts, would make it a rule never to attend
or give community dinners. Our hospitality would take an altogether
different form, much to our own relief and that of the guest. As for
dinner parties, one would forget the very mention of them. We do not
invite people to join us when we clean our teeth or when we drink
water. Eating a meal is a similar bodily function. Why do we go
fussing all over in performing it? Every time we have a guest, we must
not make things unbearable both for him and us. The explanation is
that our palate has been spoilt through constant indulgence, so that we
trump up one excuse after another for eating something. We feed our
guest sumptuously in the hope of being similarly treated at his house.
Actually, we seek such occasions so that we can have more
opportunities of feasting on rich dishes. If we asked someone with a
whole-some body to smell our mouth about an hour after we have
indulged in such eating and heard his comments, we would certainly
have cause to be ashamed of ourselves. There are even some young
gourmets who, in order to be able to enjoy eating, take fruit salt
immediately after a meal or vomit out what they have already
consumed and then fall to eating the sweets again.
To a greater or lesser extent, we all behave like this. That is why
our great men laid down for us certain religious observances like fasts,
rozas1 , etc. There are numerous fast days among Roman Catholics too.
There is nothing wrong whatever in anyone fasting completely or
partially once in a fortnight purely for the sake of good health. It will
do him a world of good indeed. The practice followed by many
Hindus of eating only once a day during the chaturmas2 is based on
considerations of health. When the air is humid and the day is overcast
most of the time, the digestion becomes slack and one should, therefore, eat less at such times.
Let us now consider how often one should eat. Most people in
India eat only twice a day. Those who eat thrice will be found to
belong to the labouring classes. People learnt eating four times only
when they began to ape English ways. Recently, certain societies have
been formed in England and America. Their function is to persuade
the public to refrain from taking more than two meals a day. They
1

Fasts observed by Muslims from sunrise to sunset, during the month of

Ramzan
2

The four monsoon months, from about mid-July to mid-November, during
which pious Hindus observe partial fasts
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

43

advise us to go without breakfast. The night’s sleep serves the purpose
of food. At daybreak, therefore, we are ready not for food but for
work. They believe that we are ready for food only after two or three
hours of work. These men, therefore, eat only twice a day and do not
even drink tea, etc., between meals. A well-known doctor called Dewey
has written a book on this subject in which he has described in a
convincing manner the benefits accruing from fasting, cutting out
breakfast, generally eating less, etc. My own experience during the
past eight years is that, after the period of youth is past, there is
absolutely no need for anyone to eat more than twice a day. Once a
person’s body is fully grown and further development has stopped, he
has no need to eat either much or often.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 5-4-1913

29. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
April 5, 1913
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I cannot plead guilty this time. I have undertaken nothing new.
But I must discharge the burdens already taken on whether I like the
thing or not. My work is so well concentrated and divided and regular
here that practically even a minute counts. But I hope some day to
have some rest from this toil. As to food, I can do no more than I am
doing. I simply have not the heart. Anyway I do not suppose anyone
here is keeping better health on the whole than I am. Then why
grumble? More anon.
You shall have the books.
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

44

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

30. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Monday [April 7, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I have your letter. It was Miss. Schlesin’s ordinary duty to
inform not only you but everyone interested in the movement. But I
hope to do better next time.
Ritch is entirely wrong. The feeling cannot be inflamed. I have
drawn attention to what is a fact. The idea is certainly to educate the
people into knowing how invidious distinctions are drawn. If truth
costs the advocacy of Lord Ampthill or one greater, we must pay the
price. Was I now prepared to sacrifice the goodwill of both Lord
Ampthill and Mr.Gokhale? In these matters Ritch cannot be followed.
I never received the wire you refer to. I see you are getting bitter
against Mr.Gokhale. He certainly never considered you to be
unworthy and how could he who knew everything consider you to be
in any way interested? On the contrary, he used to think of you as the
only entirely disinterested European of the inner circle. Now you are
showing your morbid sensitiveness which sometimes attacks you when
you are at your weakest. Your attack on him in defence of Mr.Hosken
was good. But your attack on him in regard to yourself is unworthy of
your better self. You have become like Cassius brooding too much. I
hope you have not also like him because lean on that account.
I hope your books will leave with this. No, Miss Schlesin now
goes nothing for all she is doing. Geevers was here to say good-bye. I
extended the usual hospitality to him but did not have many words
with him. We talked platitudes for a few minutes and I left him alone.
He understood the situation. I did not interrupt any of my work.
When he left he abruptly asked for 25/10 which I gave as I did not
want to enter into discussion with him. He said he would return the
money. I do not even know his London address.
The concern that Dr. Mehta and Sorabji show about my health
shows what a low opinion they have of me. If they gave me any credit
for being a hygienist, they would never show that concern. Now you
want to add your quota. Is it not too funny for words? How can I be
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

45

[a] hygienist if I do not show good health? I assure you it is not being
neglected.
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

31. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[April 7, 1913] 1
The largest and most important book leaves today. Then there
remain:
1. Rural Hygiene
2. The Earth in Connection with Preservation of Contagia
3. The Dwelling House
4. Hints on Fruit Growing
These will follow. Do you want the educational books also which
I took with me? They are most of them worthless. I have looked into
them. But The Dwelling House, noted above, you as an architect
should study. It is a good book. It will leave tomorrow not today. I am
having an extract made from it.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1
Although the text of the note is placed in the source as post-script to the
following item, dated April 9, it appears from the contents that it was written on this
day, following the letter on pp. 118-9.

46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

32. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR1
[PHOENIX,]

April 9, 1913
INTERIOR
[CAPE TOWN ]
HAVE

JUST

SERIOUS

READ

IMMIGRATION

OBJECTIONS

CONTRARY
RIGHTS.

TO

A

SECTION

DICTION

FROM

PROVISIONAL
THREE

HITHERTO
SEEMS

TO

INDIANS

WHO

HAVE

PREVIOUSLY

REASON

PLATES

THE

ALTHOUGH
TEST.
RICTS
TO

OF

THEIR

AT

ANY

INDIANS,

RESIDENCE
SECTION

FIVE

REGISTRATION

THE

STRICTLY

OF

RIGHTS

RESTRICTS
CERTIFICATES

1,

LEGAL

AND

NATAL

STATE,

EDUCATION

CAPE

SECTION

OF

RESIDENTIAL

DEPRIVES

OF

POSSESSED.

RESTINDIANS

FIVE,

BUT

EFFECT

NATAL
CONTEM-

FREE

THE

THE

DOMICILED
HITHERTO

OR

MATERIALLY

AND

1,

EDUCATED

ALSO

THE

FOUR,

THE

OF

CAPE

PASSED

NATAL

JURIS-

SUB-SECTION

RIGHTS

INTO

EXISTING

COURT’S

CLAUSE

HAVE

PORT. SUB-SECTION

NOT

THEREIN,

ENTRY

TO

DISTURBS,

SEVERAL

THE

SAME

SECTION

BY

OPEN
IT

(A),

THE

ENTERED

MAY

THREE,

POSSESSED

RE-ENTER

OF

IS

SUPREME

CLAUSE
AWAY

EDUCATION.

IMMIGRANT

SUB-SECTION
RIGHTS

NATAL

TAKE

PROHIBITION

THE

AWAY

POSSESSED.

FOUR

IT

STANDPOINT.

SETTLEMENT,

TAKES

SECTION
BY

BILL.

INDIANS

LONG
PROVISO

TRANSVAAL
CERTIFICATES.

BILL DOES NOT APPEAR TO PROTECT RIGHTS OF INTERMIGRA- TION TO THE CAPE
OR

NATAL

OF

EDUCATED

INDIANS

UNDER

EXISTING LEGISLATION AND SOUTH AFRICA-BORN INDIANS TO ENTER THE CAPE
UNDER
SEARLE
ZING

THE

EXISTING

JUDGMENT
INDIAN

RELIGIONS

IN

CHILDREN.

HOPE

REQUIRES

MARRIAGES
ORDER
ABOVE

TO

CAPE

AMENDMENT
CELEBRATED
PROTECT

OBJECTIONS

LAWS.
OF

WIVES

MEET

LASTLY

BILL

ACCORDING

LAWFUL
WILL

THE

THE

RECOGNI-

TO

INDIAN

AND

MINOR

SYMPATHETIC

1
It appears that similar telegrams were sent also to Sir Thomas Smartt and
Drummond Chaplin, Members of Parliament. It was later passed on, to and published
in Indian Opinion, 7-6-1913, with corrections and the following words in Gandhiji’s
hand: “Mr. Gandhi’s telegram to the Minister, 9th April 1913.” A copy of this
telegram was cabled to G. K. Gokhale. Gandhiji made it a practice to send him such
important communications to keep him informed. A similar telegram was sent by
Cachalia on behalf of the British Indian Association on April 15.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

47

CONSIDERATION

OF

THE

MINISTER

AND

THUS

REVIVAL

OF

PASSIVE

RESISTANCE AND ALL CONSEQUENT SUFFERINGS MAY BE AVOIDED.1

GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy with corrections in Gandhiji’s
hand: S. N. 5752

33. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
P HOENIX,

April 9, 1913
INTERIOR
C APE TOWN
REFERRING
THAT

TO

SUB-SECTION

DOES

NOT

WILL

BE

STATE,

BILL

KNOW

TRADE,
WHY

FARMING

WORDS

ARE

AND

NOT

FROM
THEY

OF

SECTION

WIVES

ALSO

REQUIRED

ALTHOUGH

TO

TELEGRAM 2
(G),

PROTECT

ENTRANTS.

AS

MY

CLEAR

AND
ADDED

REMAIN

I

JUST

UNLIKE

MINOR

EDUCATED
WILL

TODAY,

FIVE,

CHILDREN
THAT

OF

NO

ENTRANTS
LIABLE

TO

OF

IN

SCHEDULE

BILLS

EDUCATED

DECLARATIONS

INTO

OWNERSHIP
SECOND

OBSERVE

PREVIOUS

THE

FREE

RESTRICTIONS

LAND.

COULD
TO

I

EXTEND

REPEAL ACT 2, 1907, WHICH DON’T APPEAR IN THE LAST BILL?3

GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy with corrections in Gandhiji’s
hand: S. N. 5753

1

For the reply from the Minister of the Interior, vide Appendix “Telegram
from Minister of Interior”, 15-4-1913.
2
Vide the preceding item.
3
For the reply from the Minister of the Interior, vide Appendix “Telegram
from Minister of Interior”, 15-4-1913.

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

34. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
P HOENIX,
NATAL ,

April 9, 1913
DEAR MR. LANE,

The papers have given the information that General Smuts1 will
be in charge of the Immigration Bill whose text I have only just seen.
I enclose herewith copy of the telegram2 I have addressed to the
Government which will show General Smuts how seriously open to
objection the Bill is, examined purely from the passive resistance
standpoint. You will see that my telegram covers practically the whole
ground. You may remember that some of these objections were
discussed thoroughly, and General Smuts, so far as I am aware,
promised to meet them all. One thing has been omitted from the
telegram. In the correspondence between us of last year, I questioned
whether declaration would be required from educated entrants under
the Free State reservation clause. If it be eligible, the clause will have
to be altered so that, whilst the prohibition against the ownership of
fixed property, farming, etc., continues, the declaration is dispensed
with as regards those who enter under the proposed measure as
immigrants into the Union.
The question about Indian marriages might conceivably be
treated as a new point, but is it in reality? I certainly never dreamt that
Indian marriages that have been hitherto recognized by the Courts of
Law in the Union were unlawfully recognized. It cannot for a moment
be denied that the Searle judgment shakes the existence of Indian
society to its foundation.
Will you place this letter before General Smuts and, even if he is
not to be in charge of this Bill, may I look to him for support? I know
he will accept my assurance that I am not itching for passive
resistance, indeed, I was so sure of the Bill carrying out the provisional
settlement both to the letter and in the spirit that I was preparing for a
visit to India in June, but I fear that, if the objections are not met, a
1
Jan Christiaan Smuts (1870-1950); South African soldier and statesman;
Prime Minister, 1919-24 and 1939-48
2
Vide “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 9-4-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

49

revival of the awful struggle is a certainty.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

E. F. C. L ANE , E SQ.
P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO GENERAL S MUTS
C APE TOWN

[PS.]
You will see that I have sent a further telegram1 to the Interior as
a new discovery has been just made. In it I have brought out the Free
State difficulty.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5754

35. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Wednesday [April 9, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I like yours to Dr. F. but not to Mrs. Mayo. Was it dictated? It is
cold and prosaic. Both the letters show in what mood you are at
present. The best of you is that you can conceal nothing. More when
we meet. My letter to Lane and wires to the Government2 you will get
from Miss Schlesin. The Bill as published is rotten and there seems to
be no help from passive resistance. 3 I sent off The Dwelling House
yesterday.
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

Vide the preceding item.
Vide “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 9-4-1913 and “Letter to E. F. C.
Lane”, 9-4-1913.
3
ibid.
2

50

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

36. TELEGRAM TO BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
[PHOENIX,

After April 9, 1913]
BIAS1
JOHANNESBURG
READ

BILL

UNACCEPTABLE

SENT

FULL

TELEGRAMS2

CAPE.

HOPE

ALL READY FIGHT.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5759

37. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY
TO GOVERNOR-GENERAL
21-24, C OURT C HAMBERS,
R ISSIK S TREET,
JOHANNESBURG ,

April 10, 1913
THE P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR -GENERAL
P RETORIA
SIR,

I have the honour to enclose herewith, in triplicate, copies of
Resolutions3 passed at a Mass Meeting of British Indians held at the
Hamidia Islamic Hall, Vrededorp, on the 30th ultimo; and to request
that His Excellency will be good enough to have same forwarded to
the Hon’ble the Secretary of State for the Colonies and the Hon’ble
the Secretary of State for India.
I have, etc.,

A. M. C ACHALIA
C HAIRMAN ,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Colonial Office Records: 551/39
1

Telegraphic address of the British Indian Association.
The reference, apparently, is to the telegrams to the Minister of the Interior
dated April 9, 1913; vide “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 9-4-1913.
3
Vide Appendix “Resolutions at Vrededorp Mass Meeting”, 30-3-1913; also,
“The Storm Signal”, 5-4-1913.
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

51

38. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
P HOENIX,

April 11, 1913
TO

THE S ECRETARY FOR THE INTERIOR 1
C APE TOWN
SIR,

I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 4th instant. I beg to thank the Minister for accepting the two
names that were rejected from among the educated entrants for the
past year.
It is not my intention that the names of entrants submitted by
me in future should always. be accepted. But I do respectfully submit
that the names of such entrants up to six for the Transvaal should be
submitted by me in my representative capacity and that they should
be accepted by the Government so long as the settlement remains in a
provisional state. As soon as it becomes final, as I hope it will be
during the current session, no doubt, some arrangement, satisfactory
alike to the Government and the Indian community will be made for
the selection.
Personally, I think that the Government of India can have no
voice in the selection for the simple reason that they cannot judge the
wants of the local community. I venture to think that, if after the
settlement becomes final, different Indian associations and groups
submit too many different names, it will be for the Government to
give due weight to each representation and select from the names so
submitted the number, previously determined, of entrants for any
particular year.
I note that your letter seems to suggest that the entrants will be
restricted to certain provinces. I beg to point out that the settlement
contemplates the ability of educated entrants, under a general Bill
governing the whole Union, to enter and settle in any province of the
Union subject, nevertheless, to the local disabilities not connected with
immigration. It is submitted that it is the essence of the compromise
that, as to immigration, new Indian immigrants are not to suffer any
1

52

E. M. Gorges
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

disability not imposed upon any other section or race. This, however,
is a matter which is now, I note from your wire, among the other
points raised by me, under the consideration of the Government.
I am now asking the Immigration Office, Pretoria, to let me have
permits for the two gentlemen whose names have been accepted.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5762

39. LETTER TO REGISTRAR OF ASIATICS
[PHOENIX,]

April 11, 1913
THE R EGISTRAR OF ASIATICS
P RETORIA
SIR,

We understand that the proof you require in case of wives of
registered Indians is a certificate from a first-class magistrate in India
to the effect that the person claiming to be the wife of a registered
Indian is, to the knowledge of the magistrate gained from the evidence
before him, the wife of such Indian and that such certificate should
bear the thumb-impression of such registered Indian, if he is then in
India.
We understand further that the proof you require in respect of
minor children is a certificate from a first-class magistrate that the
child appearing before him is to his knowledge, gained from the
evidence before him, the child of the person claiming to be its father
and that the certificate should bear the thumb-print of the child as also
the father, if he be there.
We shall esteem it a favour if you will be good enough to let us
know whether we are correctly informed. We may state that we have
already published the information in our Gujarati columns but, if we
would have it authentically from you, it will materially assist Indian
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

53

claimants and obviate trouble and delay in future.
We remain,
Your faithfully,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5764

40. THE NEW BILL
The long-promised Immigration Bill has at last seen the light of
day. We might say, at once, that it is disappointing, it is worse than its
predecessor, and fails in material respects to give effect to the provisional settlement. Elsewhere will be found a detailed list of the
points1 in which it falls short of the settlement. It is a pity that this is
so. The Government have so often declared their intention of carrying
out the terms of the settlement that the Bill will come as a rude shock
to those who have at all cared to follow that settlement. The Bill
confirms the suspicion that the Government only want to give us what
they must, that they wish ill even to those who have established rights
in the Union, and that, by hook or by crook, they desire to compass
our ruin. In carrying out this ruthless policy, they have gone as far as
they dare in their precious Bill. If it becomes law in its present form, it
will whittle away some of our cherished and existing rights and make
our position, insecure as it already is, doubly so. The Bill plays with
words regarding the Free State difficulty and is quite on a par with the
Immigration Act of the Transvaal in unscrupulous subtlety. The
immigration law of the Transvaal, as we have pointed out so often, has
created a legal racial bar without anyone, save those well versed in the
Transvaal laws, knowing it. So it seems to us, does this Bill create a
legal racial bar without a superficial reader being able to detect it.
Unless the Government yield and amend the Bill materially,
passive resistance must revive, and, with it, all the old miseries, sorrows
and sufferings. Homes, just re-established, must be broken up. Those
passive resisters who have resumed their ordinary vocations, must
exchange them for that of becoming once more His Majesty’s guests
in his gaols in South Africa. We do still hope that the Government will
1

54

Vide “ Its Effect”, 12-4-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

see their way to grant relief. But, if they do not, we must learn the
lesson again of finding pleasure in pain.
Indian Opinion, 12-4-1913

41. THE MARRIAGE IMBROGLIO
The letter on the marriage question from the Master of the
Supreme Court, Natal Provincial Division, and Counsel’s opinion obtained thereon, both of which will be found in another column,1 show
clearly what an important issue faces the Indian community. The
Master himself realizes the full significance of his attitude and, therefore, suggests to the European Executor of the deceased that the Supreme Court should be moved in order to determine the position. This
case shows, in a manner in which it could not be shown otherwise equally vividly, how absolutely necessary it is for the Indian community
to secure an amendment of the law as to non-Christian Indian marriages.
Mr. Cachalia has received an apparently soothing reply from the
Government on the resolutions of the recently held Johannesburg
mass meeting. The Government assure Mr. Cachalia and, through him,
the community, that they do not intend to disturb the practice that has
hitherto existed, in spite of the Searle judgment. We accept the
assurance but it is not worth much. In vital matters, assurances which
are in conflict with an actual legal position can afford little relief. For
the question is not, in the present case, that of introducing a few
Indian wives into the Union per year, but it is one of determining the
theoretical status of Indian women. In plain language, the Searle
judgment reduces their status from that of being honoured and
honourable wives of their husbands to one of concubinage. In the eye
of the law, now Mrs. Cachalia, Mrs. Naidoo, Mrs. Cama and Mrs.
Gandhi are concubines, and their offspring not honoured and beloved
sons or daughters of their parents but illegitimate children. What
comfort can it be to these husbands that, though the law may consider
their dear ones as the lepers of society, the Government will
condescend not to do so? So much for the sentiment of the matter,
which, to us, is the reality. It often happens that what hurts the
sentiment also hurts the matter. At any rate, such is the position in this
1

These are not given here.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

55

marriage question. The Janubie case1 illustrates our point. The
Government’s condescension is of no avail to the poor widow. The
Master of the Supreme Court has no discretion to do otherwise than
carry out a law which he has to administer. So long as the Searle
judgment stands, he must treat Janubie, not as the widow of her
husband but as a kept woman, and as such disentitled to remission of
succession duty. With all the good-will in the world, the Government
can grant no relief, for they cannot direct the Master as they can an
Immigration Officer. Hence it is absolutely necessary to amend the
law as requested by the great meeting of Johannesburg. The
Government have a golden opportunity of granting the necessary
relief. They can do so by slightly amending the Immigration Bill they
have just published, and it will be the best earnest of their good-will.
Indian Opinion, 12-4-1913

42. ITS EFFECT
The above Bill2 fails to carry out the provisional settlement
because it takes away, contrary to the settlement, existing rights, i.e.,
(1) Section 3 takes away the Court’s jurisdiction, hitherto
exercised in terms of existing statutes now to be repealed. (2) Clause
(a) sub-section l of Section 4 seems to take away rights acquired by
educated Indians who may have entered the Cape or Natal by passing
the education test.
(3) Sub-section 3, Section 4 restricts rights possessed by the
Natal and the Cape Indians to re-enter at any port.
(4) Sub-section (f), Section 5 deprives Natal Indians, not
strictly domiciled, but of long residence therein of domiciliary rights
hitherto possessed. (This may turn thousands of Indians now resident
in Natal into prohibited immigrants.)
(5) Proviso Section 5 very largely nullifies the legal effect of
Transvaal registration certificates. (These, in spite of treble
registration, in most cases, cease, under the Bill, to constitute, in Lord
Milner’s words, “an indefeasible title to residence in the Transvaal”;
for three years’ absence from the Transvaal would, under the Bill,
1
2

56

Vide “Janubie Case”, 12-4-1913.
The reference is to the Immigration Bill.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

destroy the title to residence created by the certificates.
(6) The same proviso invalidates the Natal
certificates, after three years’ absence by the holders.

domicile

(7) The same proviso restricts the right of Cape or Transvaal
Indians to enter Natal by passing the present education test of Natal,
and of the Natal and the Transvaal Indians to enter the Cape by
passing its education test.
(8) The same proviso takes away the right of South
Africa-born Indians to enter the Cape under its existing statute.
Further examined from the passive resistance standpoint only,
the Bill is also defective in that:
(1) Sub-clause (a) sub-section I of Section 4 seems to
contemplate the prohibition of the entry into the Free State of new
immigrants who may pass the education test.
(2) Even if it does not prohibit such entry, the Bill seems to
require a declaration from an educated immigrant which would not be
required from any other immigrant as an immigrant.
(3) Sub-clause (g) of Section 5 does not recognize the right
of the wives and minor children of new immigrants to enter the Union
with their husbands.
(4) And the Bill does not correct the defect, discovered by the
Searle judgment, in the existing South African laws as to Indian
marriages and minor children born of such marriages.
Indian Opinion, 12-4-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

57

43. THE NEW BILL AND THE OLD
There are many points of difference and of similarity between
the above Bill and the abortive draft of 1912 1 . The structure of the
new Bill is very dissimilar to that of the 1912 measure. Section 1
corresponds with sub-sections 1 and 2 of Section 3 of the 1912 Bill,
but sub-section 3 of Section 3 is elaborated and extended, both as to
scope and methods of administration, in the twelve sub-sections of
Section 2 of the new Bill, providing the machinery for appeals to
Immigration Boards, which are to have, subject to instructions to be
given them by the Minister pursuant to the general terms of the Bill,
final jurisdiction except on questions of domicile, and Section 3,
excluding the jurisdiction of the courts of law, except in matters of
domicile, is entirely new.
Section 4 corresponds generally with Section 4 of the 1912 Bill,
but it also includes the Provincial restrictions of Section 7 of the old
Bill. There are, however, two provisions which radically distinguish it
from that measure. First, there is the clause providing for exclusion, at
the will of the Minister, upon economic grounds, and secondly, the
education test is to be that of the existing Provincial statutes. Subsections 2 and 3 are new.
Sections 5 of the two Bills correspond, except that sub-section
(f) confines the exemption to persons domiciled in any Province,
persons otherwise resident not being protected. No provision is made
for the recognition of non-Christian Indian marriages or for the
protection of the children of these marriages. South Africa-born
Indians, who have today the right to proceed to the Cape Province
unmolested, are deprived of that right by the first proviso of this
section, whilst the second proviso enables the authorities to prevent the
return to South Africa of any Indian who has been absent from the
country for more than three years. This proviso is new. Sections 6 of
each Bill, though differing considerably in language, have substantially the same effect in each. Section 7 corresponds substantially with
sub-section 2 of Section 28 of the 1912 Bill. Sections 8, 9 and 10 of
each substantially correspond. Chapter III of the new Bill corresponds
1

Vide “Extracts from Immigrants’ Restriction Bill (1912) and Orange Free
State Constitution”, 3-2-1912.

58

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in the main with Chapter II of the 1912 measure, and deals with the
special powers for preventing the entry of and dealing with prohibited
immigrants at the ports of entry. Section 19 appears to be intended to
cover the provisions of Sections 18 and 19 of the old Bill, but the new
Bill provides that any person found within the Union is liable to an
inquisition by the Immigration Officer, and may be, unless he satisfies
the Immigration Officer that he is not a prohibited immigrant, dealt
with as such, subject to his right of appeal to a Board. Sub-section 2
provides a new procedure not contemplated in the obsolete measure.
Section 20 of each Bill is the same. Sections 21 and 22 of the new Bill,
whilst including the same general provisions as those of the
corresponding sections of the 1912 Bill, exempt from their operation
persons born in South Africa. Sub-sections 1 and 2 of Section 23 of
the new Bill correspond with the similar sub-sections of the old
measure. Sub-section 3 is new. Section 24 is the same. The first part
of sub-section 1 of Section 25, giving the Minister the power to exempt any person from the provisions of Section 4, is new. Sub-section
2 speaks of a “certificate of identity”, and not of a “permit”, as does
the corresponding sub-section of the 1912 Bill, and the period of its
validity is not limited. But this advantage is nullified by the second
proviso of Section 5. Section 26 corresponds, generally, with Section
26 of the old Bill, and provides for the issue of regulations by the
Governor-General. Section 27, providing for penalties, is the same.
Section 28 corresponds generally with sub-section 1 of Section 28 of
the old measure, save that any Asiatic not exempted from the provisions of Section 4, all of whose tests he may have passed, is required
to register under Act 36 of 1908. Section 29 corresponds with Section
l of the 1912 Bill, and sets forth the measures to be repealed. Section
30 is generally identical with Section 2 of the old measure. Section 31
brings the Bill, if enacted, into force on July 1st next.
Indian Opinion, 12-4-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

59

44. JANUBIE CASE
We have commented on this case before now.1 This time we have
received more important documents which we reproduce in the
English section.2 Among these is a letter from the Master of the
Provincial Supreme Court in which he states that, though there are
affidavits by Mr. Ismail Bhayat and other gentlemen, he cannot accept
these as evidence. The trustee has to prove that the marriage is legal,
failing which no rebate will be allowed on account of the wife’s share.
The Master has also advised the trustee to consult a lawyer, as the case
is important for the Indian community as a whole. Accordingly, the
case was referred to a lawyer for his opinion. Mr. Tatham, the lawyer,
is of the view that Bai Janubie’s marriage cannot be treated as legally
valid. A marriage can be considered legally valid only if it has been
either registered or solemnized according to Christian rites. The
gentleman adds that the opinion he has given need not frighten the
Muslims as they can have their marriages registered! We are not
surprised at this view. It is necessary, however, to understand it fully.
Only those who do not understand this case will remain unconcerned.
Those who understand it will not sit still even for a moment. According to Mr. Tatham, men whose marriages were duly solemnized and
who have had children should now admit that their wives were hitherto
not lawful wives and they are advised to secure legal status for their
wives by getting the marriages registered now. We hope no Indians
will agree to do so. Does it make any sense to say that a man and a
woman who are already married should be married again? Mr. Tatham states, moreover, that a person having two wives will be considered to have committed an offence under the law. This is true, indeed, but it is a position which we cannot tolerate. We give the warning
that this case has implications so grave that, even if the Government
were to drop the matter, our children will not be recognized as legal
heirs by the courts. The Government cannot dictate to the courts. This
is not a matter concerning the administration of law but its inter1
2

60

Vide “The Marriage Imbroglio”, 12-4-1913.
These are not given here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

pretation, which rests with the courts. The Government can permit the
entry of our wives by issuing orders to the officers in charge, so that
we may be pacified. But it is for the courts to accept our children as
legal heirs. If our marriages are treated as legally invalid, the courts
will be able to offer us no relief. The difficulty can be solved only
through amendment of the law.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 12-4-1913

45. FOR HINDUS
There is a belief, we hear, that the decision of Mr. Justice Searle
does not apply to Hindus or Parsees. This belief is unfounded. The
decision means, in plain terms, that marriages not contracted according to the law of this land are no marriages at all. It is not material,
from the point of view of this ruling, whether as a matter of fact a
person has one wife or more. This needs to be carefully borne in
mind. We shall go so far as to offer the advice that until this dispute is
settled, those Hindus or Muslims or Parsees who do not wish their
wives to join satyagraha should not ask them to come here. What
surprises and grieves us is the fact that Indians in South Africa have
not yet flared up as a result of this judgment. It would seem as though
we had lost all spirit. Shall we merely look on when our wives are
treated as concubines by the law of this land?
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 12-4-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

61

46. REPLY TO THE ASSOCIATION
Mr. Cachalia has received a reply to the resolutions on the
subject of marriages passed at a meeting of the British Indian
Association in Johannesburg and communicated to the Government at
Cape Town.1 The Minister for the Interior says in the reply that he
fails to understand why the decision of Mr. Justice Searle should have
agitated the community so much. The community is not unaware [he
says] of the legal position and the Government’s view on the subject
of marriages. The Government has frequently stated that, whatever the
legal position, it does not intend to enforce the law in an oppressive
manner. If a woman’s marriage has been celebrated according to the
rites of Islam or any other religion, if the evidence adduced in support
of the marriage is satisfactory and if it is shown that the husband has
no other wife in South Africa, she is allowed to land. Officers have
been instructed not to depart from the practice that has obtained so
far, the Searle judgment notwithstanding. This reply goes to prove the
correctness of our inference, based on a Reuter telegram, regarding
the effect of the resolutions passed at the meeting of the Association.
There is no doubt that the Government has been taken aback by the
resolution about satyagraha. It appears from [its] telegram that for the
present women will not be subjected to further harassment; but this is
not enough to reassure us. We cannot rest in peace so long as the
sword of the Searle judgment continues to hang over our heads. If, in
fact, the Government did not intend to make any change in the
current practice, why did it seek a categorical ruling from Mr. Justice
Searle? Why was Bai Mariam detained? Even, according to the
Government, Bai Mariam’s co-wife is in India. We do not know
whether her husband has another wife. It is, however, a sufficient reply
to the Government that even if he has another wife, she is in India.
Thus, the assurance given to us in the telegram is an after-thought on
the part of the Government. If, moreover, we consider the position of
Janubie in this context, we shall see that the Government will not be
able to intervene in her case. If her marriage is not treated as legally
1

62

Vide “Letter to Private Secretary to Governor-General”, 10-4-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

valid, she forfeits her right and, until the law is amended, neither the
Government nor anyone else is empowered to grant us relief. The
Parliament alone can do so. It rests with the Government to move the
Parliament for the purpose. Now that the Parliament is in session, and
the Immigration Bill is before it, the Government has a golden
opportunity of redressing our grievance if it really means to do so. If
we are sincere enough, and so is the Association, the Government
cannot but be sincere likewise. If we mean what we say, we shall hold
meetings everywhere to extend support to the Association’s resolutions and, if the Association is sincere, it will not yield an inch
whether it receives any support or not.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 12-4-1913

47. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XV]
7. EXERCISE

Exercise is just as essential to mankind as are air, water and food,
though it is true that man cannot get on for a long time without air,
water and food as he can without exercise. It is a fact of common
experience, however, that one cannot enjoy really good health without
exercise. We have to interpret exercise in the same way that we did
“food”. Exercise does not necessarily mean moidanda 1 , football,
cricket or going out for a walk. Exercise means physical and mental
activity. Just as food is necessary for the mind as much as for bones
and flesh, so also is exercise necessary both for body and mind. If the
body has no exercise, it is sickly and, if the mind has none, it is dull.
Stupidity should also be regarded only as a kind of illness. It betrays
sheer ignorance to describe as healthy a wrestler who, though adept at
wrestling, is mentally a boor. There is a saying in English that he
alone is healthy who has a sound mind in a sound body.
What is this exercise? Nature has so arranged things for us that
we can be continuously taking exercise in one way or another. If we
1

An Indian game

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

63

but think calmly enough, we shall see that a majority of people in the
world live on agriculture. All members in a farmer’s family have
some form of exercise. It is only if they work eight, ten or even more
hours every day in the fields or elsewhere that they can get their daily
bread. They need no separate exercise for the mind. A farmer cannot
work without applying his mind. He must be able to test the nature of
his soil, must watch changes of weather, must know how to manipulate
his plough skilfully and be generally familiar with the movements of
the stars, the sun and the moon. However clever a city-dweller may be,
every time he goes to a farmer’s house, he feels altogether out of his
element. The farmer can say how seed should be sown; he is familiar
with all the by-ways in the vicinity and knows all the men in the
neighbourhood. By looking at the stars he can judge the direction
even at night. He can make certain deductions from the voice and
speed of birds ; for instance, when certain birds cluster or sing
together, he sees in it a sign of the approach of the monsoon or some
other similar phenomenon. Thus, the farmer knows enough of
astronomy, geography and geology to serve his needs. He has to feed
his children and has, therefore, some idea of the duties of man, and,
residing as he does in the vast open spaces of this earth, he naturally
becomes aware of the greatness of God. Physically, it goes without
saying, he is always sturdy. He is his own physician, when ill. Thus, we
can see, he does have an educated mind.
But all men are not going to be farmers. Moreover, these
chapters are not being written for the benefit of farmers. The question
is, what should those who have gone into business or some similar
profession do in this regard? The farmer’s life has been described at
some length in order that we may find a rational answer to this
problem, that we who are not farmers can arrange our way of life
somewhat on the pattern of his and that we may realize that, in so far
as our manner of living differs from the farmer’s, we would enjoy
poorer health. We can conclude from a farmer’s way of living that a
man should do physical work for eight hours a day and that of a kind
that would stimulate our mental powers in the very process of doing it.
Now, merchants and others certainly obtain mental exercise in the
course of their work, but this is one-sided. A business man does not
know astronomy or geography or history, as the farmer does. He may
64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be able to judge about movements of prices and may be proficient in
the art of salesmanship, but this is not enough to exercise fully his
mental faculties. In this type of work, the body does perform some
movements now and then, but they are too slight to be of any account.
In the West, they have invented games like cricket for such
people. Another way is to observe some days in the year as holidays,
when more games are played, and to do some light reading by way of
mental exercise. This is one method which we may consider. To be
sure, spending time in sports does give some exercise to the body, but
exercise of this kind does nothing to improve the mind. We can see
the truth of this from numerous instances. What proportion of men of
high intellectual calibre shall we find among those who regularly play
cricket or from among the large number who play football? In India,
what do we observe as regards the mental development of the princes
who give their time to sports? Again, how many of those with
well-developed intellectual powers are sportsmen? Experience shows
that highly intellectual men are seldom sportsmen as well. The British
nowadays are very much given to sports. Their own poet, Kipling, has
described these sportsmen as enemies of the mind, and adds that they
will also prove themselves enemies to their country. In India, our
intellectuals seem to have found a different way. They provide exercise for their minds but relatively very little or none for their bodies.
These people are lost to us. Their bodies are enfeebled by excessive
intellectual work. They are continually pursued by some ailment or
other and just when they have gained enough experience to be of real
use to the country, they pass away. From this we may conclude that
neither exercising the brain alone nor the body alone is enough and
also that exercise which serves no useful purpose, namely, that derived
from sports, has little meaning. Real exercise is that which trains, continuously, both mind and body alike. He alone who takes such exercise can preserve good health. The farmer is the only such person.
Then, what are those to do who are not farmers? The exercise
obtained from sports such as cricket leaves much to be desired. We
must, therefore, think of a form of exercise something like what the
farmer gets. Businessmen and others similarly placed can make a
garden round their house and regularly spend two to four hours a day
digging there. Hawkers get exercise from their own work itself. If we
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

65

are living in a rented room, we should not raise any difficulty about
working in another’s land, for that would indicate a small mind. We
would derive nothing but benefit from working on land, whosoever’s
it might be. The appearance of our house would be improved and we
would have the satisfaction of having looked after another’s land. It is
necessary to say a few words for those who cannot find an opportunity to work on land or who do not favour such work in any circumstances. Apart from working on land, the best form of exercise is
walking. It has been truly described as the king of physical exercises.
Our fakirs and sadhus are very healthy. One reason for this is that
they do not use horses, carriages or other vehicles. Their journeys are
always performed on foot. There has been a famous American writer
named Thoreau 1 , who has written a highly thought-provoking book
on the subject of walking. According to him, the writings of one who
refuses to leave his house on the excuse of lack of time and who
undertakes no physical activity, are bound to be anaemic like himself.
Speaking of his own experience, he says that when he wrote his best
books he was doing his longest walking. He thought nothing of
walking four or five hours at a stretch. Just as we cannot work when
we are hungry, so it should be with exercise. We do not know how to
measure mental work, therefore, we arc not able to realize that mental
work done unaccompanied by physical exercise will inevitably be dull
and ineffectual. Walking results in rapid circulation of blood in all the
parts of the body, promotes movements in every organ and strengthens it. One should remember that the arms move during walking.
We obtain fresh air by going for a walk and behold the beauties of
Nature. One should not take walks always in the same place or in
narrow lanes but go out into fields and groves. We will then be able to
appreciate in some measure the beauty of Nature. A walk of a mile or
two can scarcely be called walking. A walk, to be worth the name,
should cover ten or twelve miles. Those who cannot do this regularly
can take long walks on Sundays. A certain patient, who used to suffer
from indigestion, went one day to an experienced vaidya2 for some
1

Henry David Thoreau (1817-62); American philosopher, naturalist and
writer; author, among others, of Walden, or Life in the Woods and Excursions. Vide
also “On the Duty of Civil Disobedience”, 7-9-1907.
2
Physician practising Ayurveda, an indigenous system of medicine

66

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

pills. The vaidya advised him to take short but regular walks. The
patient protested that he was too weak. The vaidya realized that he
was, in fact, a timid man. He thereupon took the patient with him in
his carriage. On the way he purposely dropped his whip. The patient,
out of politeness, had to get out to pick it up. The vaidya immediately
drove off. The poor patient had to follow, panting hard for breath.
The vaidya having made sure that the former had covered a
fairly long distance, turned the carriage back, picked him up and told
him that, since walking was the only medicine for him, he —the
vaidya—had forced him to walk even at the risk of appearing cruel.
By this time, however, the patient was ravenously hungry and had
forgotten all about the whip episode. He thanked the doctor, went
home and ate his fill. Those who are not in the habit of walking and
suffer from indigestion and its accompanying ills should try the
experiment.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 12-4-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

67

48. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR1
April 14, 1913
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 5th instant, in reply to my telegram2 of the 2nd instant, regarding
the recent judgment given by Mr. Justice Searle.
I am to submit that it had never, before the judgment of Mr.
Justice Searle, become clear to the community that non-Christian
marriages not registered in South Africa would not be recognized by
the South African Courts. Mr. Justice Wessels’ judgment 3 , delivered
sometime ago, went perilously near such a pronouncement, but his
judgment turned rather upon the legality or otherwise of bigamous
marriages than upon the validity of marriages celebrated according to
the rites of the various great Indian faiths. As the Hon’ble the Minister
will have noticed, Mr. Justice Searle’s decision was not based upon
any precedent, but was an original pronouncement upon the Marriage
Law, the case before him having been considered a test-case.
Moreover, up to now, Hindu, Mahomedan and Parsee marriages
have not been questioned, and the Masters of the several Divisions
have recognized them. But, since the judgment referred to, the Master
of the Natal Provincial Division, my Association understands, has
questioned the validity of a Mahomedan marriage in connection with
the succession of the widow of a deceased Mahomedan to his estate.4
My Association is grateful to the Government for giving the
assurance that it is not their intention to apply the law in a harsh or
arbitrary manner, but, in view of the judgment in question, I hope that
the Government will understand the attitude of the community represented by the meeting in considering the assurance as not sufficiently
meeting the requirements of the situation. In the eye of the law now,
Indian wives of non-Christian persuasion are not wives but concubines. I feel sure that the Government will appreciate the position of
1
2
3
4

68

This was signed by A. M. Cachalia.
This is not available.
Vide “Mrs. Jussat’s Case”, 9-3-1912 & “What is a Wife?”, 11-5-1912.
Vide “Janubie Case”, 12-4-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the community if it resents, as it does resent, such a humiliating reduction of the status of Indian wives and, as has been already pointed out,
the legal consequences of the judgment, which, it is apprehended, it is
not within the power of the Government by administrative action to
remedy, are serious enough to warrant an alteration of the law.
My Association, therefore, ventures to hope that the Government
will be graciously pleased to give due consideration to the feelings of
the Indian community in the matter, and take the opportunity that the
introduction of the new Immigration Bill offersto remedy the evil
created by the unexpected judgment of Justice Searle.1
Indian Opinion, 19-4-1913

1
The Secretary wrote on May 9: “I am directed . . . to inform you in reply that
it would be entirely opposed to the principles of European civilization to pass
legislation which would have the effect of disturbing in any way the position in
regard to the solemnization of valid marriages, as it now exists in South Africa under
the Roman-Dutch Law, by recognizing as valid any marriages solemnized under a
form which permits of the union of one man with more than one woman.
“As you seem to question the statement, made by me in my previous
communication that the position, as indicated in Mr. Justice Searle’s judgment, has
been well understood in South Africa for many years past, I am to invite your
attention to the fact that a case bearing on this question was settled in the Cape
Courts so long ago as 1860, and, as a result, an Act was passed in that year which
provides additional facilities for contracting valid marriages by empowering the
Governor to appoint special Marriage Officers for the purpose of solemnizing
marriages of persons professing the Jewish faith and of persons professing the
Mohammedan faith.”

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

69

49. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[PHOENIX,]

April 15, 1913
THE INTERIOR
AM

GRATEFUL

HOWEVER

REPLY

BOARDS
REME

HITHERTO
COURT

GNIZED.

RIGHT
BE

MOST

RIGHT

STOP

PRESENT

ACCEPTS

THREE

YEA

RETENTION

SUCH

NOT

ABSENTING

HE

LIBERALLY

DEFINED

COULD

BE

COULD

ALSO

BE

EVERY

INDIAN

SUBMIT
SUCH

A

INDIANS

SHOULD

PREVIOUS
EDUCATED

70

IN

MY

BILL

OVER

AND

BE

INDIAN

WILL

OPINION
PROTECTED

IF

ENTERING

EUROPEAN
OF

STATE

WILL

WHICH

I

INTER-MIGRATION

IS

BE

LEFT

OF

MERE

SATISFY
CAN

BE

THOSE
WHOLLY

LEGISLATION

CHILDREN

CLEAR

VAST
ALMOST

YEARS

EASILY

RECOGNIZE

RIGHTS

BUT

PROMISES

BY

AS

FACT

POSITION

HARDLY

FREE

LEGALLY

DOMICILE

THREE

JUDGMENT

BY

MINISTER

CAN

PROVISO

MINOR

INDIAN

INDIAN

SO

ONLY

AND

CONFER

NATAL

IF

A

CAN

DOMICILE.

EXISTING

STOP

THAT

SEARLE

WIVES

STOP

BILL

HIMSELF

BILL

GENERALLY

SETTLE-

MATTER

RESIDENCE

EFFECT

SUBMITTED

NEW

LAW

PROVISIONAL

THAT

BY

LIBERALITY

STOP

IN
YEARS

AFFECTED

RIGHT

ACT
CANNOT

STOP

STOP

SECTION

EXISTING

PREVIOUS

UNACCEPTABLE

PRESENT

COUNTERACTED

1

RIGHTS

TOTALLY

ADMINISTRATIVE

IS

NOT

ABSENTING

TANGIBLE

CONCERNED

STOP

ACT

BY

DIMINISHED

RECO-

BE

THREE

NATAL

MANY

NATAL

BILLS

TO

EQUIVALENT

ESTABLISH

DIMINISHED

LOSE

IS

UNDISTURBED

IT

BY

EUROPEANS

ASSUREDLY

FOR

SUP-

PREVIOUS

DEPARTURE

IMMIGRATION

CONTEMPLATED

RIGHTS

MAJORITY

WAS

SUB-SECTION

HOW

CAN

NEVER

BOTH

EXISTING

MATTER

IF

STOP

RESIDENCE

REGRET
EXPERIENCE

APPROACHING

STATE

CLEAR

NATAL
RS

HITHERTO
NO

FREE

CLAUSE

RE-ENTER
MENT

PRIVILEGE

CONSTITUTES

PRACTICE

RIGHT

UNHAPPY.

CONVENIENT

IT

STOP

COMMUNITY’S

ENTRY

HOWEVER

MAY

REPLY1

FULL

UNSATISFACTORY.

CHERISHED

THEORETICAL
FOUR

GOVERNMENT

DEFINITION
LEGAL

STOP

EDUCATED
AS

IN

POSSIBILITY

DECLARATION

BY

Vide Appendix “Telegram from Minister of Interior”, 29-5-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

HIM

UPON

UPON

ENTERING

WOULD

NOT

CLEARLY

UNNECESSARY

UNDOUBTEDLY

REQUIRED

FROM

BE

AND

IF

IMMIGRANTS

OTHER

INSISTED

DECLARATION

IMMIGRANTS

STOP

WHILE

ADMISSION IN FACT TO FREE STATE UNNECESSARY EXISTENCE RIGHT ENTER
UNDER

GENERAL

BILL

EQUALITY

IN

DOES

NOT

COVER

BORN

INDIANS

RESISTANCE
MINISTER

NOTHING
OR

REVIVAL

PASSIVE

KNOW

IS

AND

AND

OF

TYPE

SECURING

PRACTISED

MYSELFCAN
UNDERGO

DEAR

TO

US

IT

AS

THAN

MENTIONING
ONLY

USE

BY

WHAT

THIS

TIME

RECOGNIZED

UNREPRESENTED

COMMUNITY

COUNTRYMEN
OFFENCE
TAKE

HOWEVER

WAS

INTENSITY

ONLY
OWN

TO

POSSIBILITY

HAD

SOUTH

OUR

PASSIVE
OFFENDED

MENTIONED

THAT

AFRICA

PEOPLE

ORDEAL

REFERENCE

DESIRE

BY

GIVE

AFRICA

IN

HAVE

MY

SOUTH

MY

SOUTH
BY

REPLY

RIGHTS

AND

THOUGHT

THEORY

YOUR

THREAT

DEMONSTRATING
IF

TO

AND

I

HAD

RESPECTING
STOP

REGRET
AS

BUT

RESISTANCE

METHOD

OR

AND

I

PEOPLE

REDRESS

MENT

STOP
FROM

RESISTANCE

PASSIVE

LEGITIMATE

CAPE

OFFENCE

TRUE

EXISTING

INTERPRETED

FURTHER

GIVE

GOVERNMENT
THAT

QUESTION

BEEN

FOR

IMMIGRATION

ENTER

HAS

THREAT
I

REQUIRED

POINT

EITHER

TO

AFRICA

CLEAN

THE

AND

GOVERN-

CO-WORKERS
CONSEQUENCE

TERRIBLE

FOR

AND

DEARER

LIVES

A

FEELING

A

CAUSE

STILL

IF

POSSIBLE.1

GANDHI
From photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5766

1

The Ministry of the Interior in reply said that the matters raised in the
telegram were engaging the Minister’s attention.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

71

50. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[PHOENIX,]

April 15, 1913
SIR,

I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 10th instant, in reply to mine of the 1st instant,1 on the question of
Indian marriages.
With due deference to the Hon’ble the Minister of the Interior, it
is respectfully submitted that the Searle judgment, if my reading of it
is correct, lays down a definitely new principle. Hitherto non-Christian
Indian marriages have been recognized both by the Immigration
Department and the Master of the Supreme Court. Issue of persons
married according to the rites of their respective faiths, but not before
Marriage Officers, have been hitherto accepted in intestate estates as
lawful heirs. But such issue could not, according to the Searle judgment, be now so recognized. The Master of the Supreme Court, Natal
Provincial Division, has already, as will appear from the report
enclosed herewith, raised the question.
I am aware that the marriages registered before Marriage
Officers have not necessarily to be Christian marriages. But the vast
majority of non-Christian Indian marriages have never taken place
before Marriage Officers. All these and the marriages celebrated and
considered by the Indian law to be legal in India, of Indians lawfully
resident in the Union, seem to be adversely affected by the Searle
judgment.
I trust that the Government do not expect that these marriages
should be solemnized or registered before Marriage Officers in the
Union, in order that they might be accepted as valid in the eye of the
law here. I gratefully acknowledge the consideration that the Government propose to show by directing Immigration Officers not to disturb the existing practice. But the relief that would be thus afforded
would not sufficiently meet the case if only because no administrative
1

72

Vide “Letter to Minister of Interior”, 1-4-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

action can deal with the legal consequences that are sure to arise from
the Searle judgment.
In my letter, I did not raise the question of plurality of wives.
That question does not affect vast issues as the one raised by the
Searle judgment does. But as your letter seems to imply that South
African law does not recognize plurality of wives, I may be permitted
to draw the Minister’s attention to Act 2 of 1907 (Natal) which
countenances the practice among indentured Indians. I refer to
Sections 6 and 7 of the Act which I copy and enclose herewith for the
information of the Minister.
In my humble opinion, the issue raised by the Searle judgment
can be effectively dealt with only by amending the marriage laws of
the Union so as to legalize marriages celebrated according to the rites1
of non-Christian religions and performed before non-Christian
priests. 2
I have etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5768

1

The original has “rights”, evidently a typing error.
The Minister of the Interior replied to this letter on May 9: “The Minister is
quite aware of the provision contained in Natal Act No. 2 of 1907, but that is special
legislation intended to apply to a particular class of the community who, it was not
contemplated, would become a permanent section of the inhabitants of South Africa.”
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

73

51. LETTER TO DRUMMOND CHAPLIN
[PHOENIX,]

April 16, 1913
MY DEAR MR. CHAPLIN,

I took the liberty of supplying 1 the long wire 2 I had to send to
the Minister of Interior regarding the Immigration Bill which, I see
from your letter to Polak, was duly delivered to you and was engaging
your attention. I now take the liberty of sending you copy of the
further communications that have passed between the Minister and
myself. Among the copies you will see the correspondence regarding
the recent judgment delivered by Justice Searle whose effect is to
invalidate all Indian marriages. Among the points raised is, therefore,
one asking for an amendment of the law of the existing legislation so
as to restore the legal status as it was understood to exist before the
judgment.3 The other points need not be commented upon by me;
they were, as you may recall, discussed4 at the Conference held at Mr.
Hosken’s house during Mr. Gokhale’s stay in Johannesburg.
I do hope that the Bill, if it is passed at all, will be passed with
such alterations as may be necessary to meet the vital objections raised
on behalf of the community.
I am,
Yours truly,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5770

1
2
3
4

74

The original has “replying”, obviously a typing error.
Vide “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 9-4-1913.
Vide the preceding item.
The original has “disgust”, evidently a typing error.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

52. CONVERSATION WITH KASTURBA GANDHI1
[Before April 19, 1913] 2
When Mrs. Gandhi understood the marriage difficulty, she was incensed
and said to Mr. Gandhi: “Then I am not your wife according to the laws of this
country.” Mr. Gandhi replied that that was so and added that their children were
not their heirs. “Then,” she said, “let us go to India.” Mr. Gandhi replied that
that would be cowardly and that it would not solve the difficulty. “Could I not,
then, join the struggle and be imprisoned myself?” Mr. Gandhi told her she
could but that it was not a small matter. Her health was not good, she had not
known that type of hardship and it would be disgraceful if, after her joining the
struggle, she weakened. But Mrs. Gandhi was not to be moved. The other
ladies, so closely related and living on the Settlement, would not be gainsaid.
They insisted that, apart from their own convictions, just as strong as Mrs.
Gandhi’s, they could not possibly remain out and allow Mrs. Gandhi to go to
gaol. The proposal caused the gravest anxiety. The step was momentous.

Indian Opinion, 1-10-1913

1

This is an extract from the column “News of the Struggle”, a weekly feature
in Indian Opinion.
2
Gandhiji intimated to Gokhale on April 19 Kasturba’s decision to join the
struggle, but requested him not to make it public; vide “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”,
19-4-1913.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

75

53. THE IMMIGRATION BILL
This Bill will be read a second time on the 24th instant when we
shall learn more about it than we do from merely reading it. In order,
however, to understand and appreciate its deadly effect on the Asiatic
communities of South Africa, it is necessary to go back to what is
somewhat ancient history. Those who have felt interested in the Indian
struggle in this land will recall how strenuously the Government tried,
by giving a forced interpretation to Act 2 of 1907 and Act 36 of
1908, to prevent from entering or re-entering the Transvaal a certain
considerable class of minor children of lawfully resident Indians. If
they had succeeded in their attempt, a large portion of the resident
Indian population of the Transvaal would have been obliged to leave
the Transvaal and face ruin. Happily, this attempt was frustrated by the
public-spirited action of the late Mr. Chhotabhai who, at great cost,
took his son’s case to the Appellate Court and won it. 1 Indians have,
ever since, watched every new move of the Government with the
greatest suspicion. The most recent events have but confirmed the
suspicion. Their circulars about wives and children mark the second
big attempt to reduce the number of resident population. The Bill now
before Parliament seeks legislative sanction for this policy. And every
one of its restrictive clauses has to be studied in the light of this bitter
experience. For it should be remembered that the Bill is not wanted
for meeting any difficulty of European immigration. It has been
brought forward principally, if not solely, to satisfy the passive
resisters and to carry out the compact entered into between the
Imperial Government and the local Government about the Indian
settlement. And yet, instead of carrying out the spirit and the letter of
it, and instead of liberalizing the existing laws where they tell harshly
against the resident Asiatic population, the Bill represents a deliberate
policy of ridding South Africa of its resident Asiatic population. That
is how General Botha’s statement that there was every desire, on the
1

The court of trial had ruled that entry of his son’s name in his registration
certificate did not entitle the former to register. Vide “Letter to Members of Asiatic
Conference”, before 18-11-1910; “Chhotabhai Case”, 26-11-1910; “Chhotabhai
Case”, 28-1-1911 & “Chhotabhai Case”, 4-2-1911.

76

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

part of his Government, to treat the resident Asiatics with justice and
liberality, is to be interpreted.
Indian Opinion, 19-4-1913

54. LORD AMPTHILL’S COMMITTEE
The representation, made by Lord Ampthill’s1 Committee, to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies is a weighty and exhaustive
document. It enables one to study, in a connected and compact form,
the march of events in South Africa regarding Indian matters. The
Committee has shown clearly how the cases cited by it evidence a
policy, on the part of the Union Government, of exterminating the
resident Indian population. The administration of the immigration
laws of South Africa makes Indian residence in it more and more
difficult. And the licensing law of Natal, at any rate, steps in where the
immigration laws fail to compass our ruin. The Committee’s letter will
be a difficult document for the local Government to answer.There is
one point made by the Committee which will come as a surprise both
to the Imperial and the local Governments. The latter have so often
stated that South African law does not recognize polygamy. But the
Committee has been able to show that it has been recognized even as
late as 1907 and that, too, by a statute. Sections 6 and 7 of Act 2,
1907, of Natal provide:
Sec. 6. The provisions of Section 68 of the Indian Immigration
Law, 1891, shall, as regards Indian immigrants arriving in the Colony
after the commencement of this Act, apply to all marriages shown in
the certified copies of their marriage register, notwithstanding that any
such marriage may be a polygamous marriage.
Sec. 7. The Protector of Indian Immigrants may, on the application of any Indian immigrants, men and women, who shall have
1

Arthur Oliver Villiers Russell, Second Baron of Ampthill (1869-1936);
Governor of Madras, 1899-1906; acted as Viceroy and Governor-General of India in
1904. He took active interest in the Indian struggle in South Africa and was Chairman
of South Africa British Indian Committee; wrote the introduction to Doke’s
biography of Gandhiji, vide Appendix “Lord Ampthill’s Introduction to M. K.
Gandhi: An Indian Patriot in South Africa” 26-8-1909.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

77

arrived in the Colony prior to the commencement of this Act, and who
shall produce certified copies of their marriage registers, and shall
show that they are the persons therein referred to, register such marriage, notwithstanding that any such marriage may have been a polygamous marriage or that the man may have been married in this Colony under the provisions of the said law to any other Indian woman.
It is true that it was inconvenient for the then Government not to
recognize polygamy, because indentured Indians were wanted by an
influential class. It is now inconvenient to recognize it for free Indian
settlers because they are intruders. It will be interesting to know how
the local Government deal with the dilemma.
Indian Opinion, 19-4-1913

55. NATAL INDIANS, BEWARE!
The Government Notice, published elsewhere, regarding the
issue of certificates for the protection of those who may wish
temporarily to absent themselves from the Province, is a veritable
death-trap into which we hope not a single Indian will be caught. The
Notice seeks to do what the Natal Immigration Act provides no
warrant for. It is a bare-faced attempt to bring the Natal Law into
harmony with the Cape Law, even in advance of the new Immigration
Bill. It will be seen from the Notice that an Indian who takes out the
certificate provided for therein will have only one year in which to
return if he wishes to escape the ordeal of a re-examination. This
certificate carries with it a fee of £1 and, as the document has to be
surrendered immediately after use, every absence from Natal means
not only a fresh inquiry but a fresh imposition of £1. so that, if a
businessman has to leave Natal, say, for the Cape four times a year and
wishes to arm himself with these tickets-of-leave, he must pay £4 for
them. This is a monstrous impost. And the method that has been
devised to fine poor people is wicked. It is the duty of Indians to send
a strong protest against this latest attempt of the Government to harass
us into leaving the country.
Indian Opinion, 19-4-1913
78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

56. SNARE
Like a hunter, the Union Government lays a number of snares
for us. Whichever of them catches us, the Government will have its
prey. On one side, there are rigorous restrictions on children, on the
other, humiliation of women; thirdly, harassment about licences;
fourthly, the new Bill; and now, for those in Natal, a net has been cast
among the Indian people, with a bait that smells sweet but contains
poison inside. The number of fish that take in the bait will be so much
of a gain to the Government. According to a notice in theGazette of
April 11, those who wish to leave Natal for temporary periods may, if
they so desire, apply for such permits for absence. It will be for the
officer to decide whether or not to grant a permit. Any Indian going
out may have one on payment of £1 if he supplies the information
required by the officer. One of the conditions of the permit will be
that the person concerned must return within one year. If he does so,
he will he allowed to disembark without going through an education
test. On the expiry of one year, the permit will lapse. A permit that has
been used once cannot be used again, but must be surrendered to the
officer. Here, a bait is held out that there will be no education test on
return. Before issuing a permit, however, they will have done enough
to make the applicant gasp; what more can they put him to, within a
year’s time? Let us consider the consequences of applying for such a
permit. First, the applicant will have to pay, as it were, a fine of £1. He
will have to pay this fine every time he leaves. Secondly, the officer
will put him to a test on every such occasion. Thirdly, if a great many
Indians take out these permits, the Government can argue that the
provision for three years’ absence in the new Bill is a big concession.
What objection, besides, can be raised against the limit of one year? As
against these dangers, the advantages of not taking out such a permit
are many. Anyone who leaves may remain outside without the least
anxiety and, on returning, re-enter by furnishing the [required]
evidence. If he keeps the evidence ready before leaving, there will
hardly be any difficulty. Another important advantage is that a person
not applying for a permit would have done no harm to the
community. We hope that not a single Indian will look at this permit.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

79

We also hope that those who read this note will explain it carefully to
others and advise them not to walk into the snare. It is the duty of
Durban leaders to protest against this notice without losing any time
and to tell the Government in strong, clear terms that the community,
instead of regarding this notice as having been issued for its benefit,
thinks it injurious and insulting to them.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 19-4-1913

57. NEW BILL
We entreat every responsible Indian to give the most serious
thought to the new Bill. With great dexterity and malice, the Government have tightened the screw on every section of Indians. If the Bill
is passed in its present form, it will be impossible for us to continue
our residence in this country. Indians long settled here live now with a
certain sense of security; this Bill will shake them out of it. The rich
and the poor, the educated and the uneducated, those born here and
those born outside—the Government have laid hands on all. We know
that the Government will even seek to delude us with sweet assurances
that the law will not be enforced. Should any Indian get into the
Government’s clutches, he will have reason to be sorry afterwards.
This Bill and the Searle judgment will have the effect of depriving us
of heirs though we have heirs living. Our wives will come to be looked
upon as concubines. If we leave South Africa and remain absent for a
period of three years or, leaving one province, live in another for the
same period, we shall altogether lose the right of returning. No matter
what documents we may take with us regarding the business we have
left behind, none of it will avail. How long can we hold our own under
such conditions? Through this Bill, the ground is being prepared for
our total undoing. And yet, we are sorry to say, all South Africa, with
the exception of Johannesburg, is slumbering. We are persuaded that,
even if a single Indian who understands things comes forward to work
in each area, the whole of South Africa will be roused. Our lethargy is
bound to be our ruin. It is the duty of every Indian who realizes this
80

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to rouse himself and others from such lethargy. If any of them,
thinking that it is none of his concern, holds back, he too will go down
along with the others.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 19-4-1913

58. MRS. PANKHURST’S SACRIFICE
All Indians are familiar with the celebrated Mrs. Pankhurst1 who
has been fighting for franchise for British women. This lady has
broken all bounds in fighting. She advises women to plunder, to
destroy. We are against all these things, but about her courage, there is
no doubt whatsoever. She has money, and much ability; she has used
these in the service of her chosen cause. She is no longer young. She
had never before known suffering and has not been trained to bear it;
still, she is ever in the front volunteering to suffer. A short while ago,
the house of Mr. Lloyd George, Finance Minister, was burnt down at
Mrs. Pankhurst’s instigation. She willingly took on herself the entire
responsibility for this. She was prosecuted and was sentenced to three
years’ imprisonment. Even in gaol, these ladies are bent on harassing
the authorities and so getting themselves released. Accordingly, though Mrs. Pankhurst was offered a variety of delicious dishes in gaol,
she refused to touch them and fasted for eight days. She was about to
collapse, and was, therefore, released. And now this brave lady is in
hospital in a critical condition. This kind of fighting is not satyagraha.
A satyagrahi’s object is to get into a prison and stay there. He will not
even dream of harming others. If, however, we leave aside her mode
of fighting and only think of the suffering she has borne, we shall
find much to learn from her. Despite numerous difficulties in their
way, she and her companions do not yet feel dispirited, nor are they
likely to do so. They will struggle on till death. Though a woman,
Mrs. Pankhurst is as manly as any man. Indians should emulate all
this courage, for the British women being without the franchise is
1

Emmeline Pankhurst (1858-1928); leader of the suffragette movement in

England
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

81

nothing compared to the disabilities we suffer.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 19-4-1913

59. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XVI]
8. ATTIRE

If health depends on diet, it is also affected to some extent by
dress. White women, for the sake of what they fancy to be beauty,
dress so that their waist and feet should look narrow and fall victims to
various ailments in consequence. In China, women’s feet are kept so
small that even our children’s feet are larger in comparison. The
practice does great harm to the health of Chinese women. The reader
will easily see from these two illustrations that what we wear does, in
some measure, affect our health. The choice of our costumes is not,
however, in our own hands. We dress the way our elders did and this
seems the right thing to do in our present circumstances. The real
function of clothes has gone out of people’s minds and these have
come to serve as symbols of our religion, country, community, etc.
Again, the costumes worn by the labourer and the office-worker differ
greatly from each other. It is indeed difficult in these conditions to
consider clothes from the point of view of health; it will be useful,
though, to give this matter some thought.
The term attire should here be understood to include also shoes,
ornaments, etc.
Let us first examine the basic purpose of clothes. In the natural
state man wears no clothes. Men and women cover only their private
parts, the rest of the body remaining bare. This makes their skin tough
and strong. Such men and women find it easy to withstand the rigours
of the open air. They do not suddenly catch cold. In the chapter on
air, we saw that we breathe not only through the nose but also through
the countless pores of the skin. By covering ourselves with clothes, we
obstruct this most important function of the skin. In cold countries,
man had to cover himself with more and more clothes as he grew
82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

more and more lazy. He could no longer bear the cold. In course of
time, this became a regular custom. By and by, people came to look
upon clothes as a mode of personal adornment, and, ultimately,
costumes came to be a means of identifying one’s community, etc.
In fact, Nature has provided man with the best dress in his skin.
It is altogether wrong to think that the nude body is ugly. The finest
pictures we see are of the naked body. By covering up the normal
organs of the body, do we not, as it were, suggest that Nature has made
a mistake? The richer we are, the more stylish grows our dress. People
dress themselves in a variety of ways and, looking into the mirror,
smile with pleasure and congratulate themselves on their appearance.
If custom had not perverted our outlook, we would easily realize that
man appeared at his best and enjoyed the finest health in his naked
state. The moment he puts on a mere shirt, he detracts by so much
from his appearance. As if this were not enough, both men and
women wear jewellery. There are quite a few men who fetter their legs
[with anklets] and put rings on ears and fingers. All these things are
dust-traps. Heaven alone knows what charm there is in them. As for
women, they have broken all bounds. Anklets so heavy that they can
scarcely lift their feet, numerous rings in the ears, large rings again in
the nose, and no end of bangles on the wrists. By wearing these, we
collect a great deal of dirt on the body. The filth in the ears and nose
is beyond description. We regard this filthy condition as an ornament
and feel constrained to spend money on it. The women do not mind
risking their lives at the hands of robbers. It has been truly said that
for the folly of pride we pay an unlimited price by way of suffering.
Women have refused to have their earrings removed, though they have
boils in their ears. A bangle cannot be removed, even if there is a boil
on the hand and even if the latter has become septic. Be it a he or a
she, it would be impairing one’s appearance to take off one’s diamond ring even when the finger has grown septic! Most people must
have personally come across such instances.
It will be difficult to bring about a radical improvement in dress,
but we can discard ornaments. We can dispense with garments which
do not seem necessary, retain a few in deference to custom and discard the rest. Anyone whose mind has outgrown the fallacious notion
that “apparel maketh a man” will be able to effect considerable impVOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

83

rovement [in his dress] and safeguard his health.
Nowadays, moreover, a notion is in the air that it is best for us to
put on European dress, that it is more impressive and wins us greater
respect from people. This is not the place for a discussion of the topic.
All that needs to be said here is that, though the Euro-pean costume is
suitable for the cold countries of Europe, the Ind-ian costume suits
both Hindus and Muslims in India. Our clothes are loose and,
therefore, allow free circulation of air. Being white, they disperse the
rays of the sun. In dark clothes one feels hotter in the sun because the
rays falling on them are not so dispersed,
We always cover our heads, particularly when going out. The
turban has become our especial mark declaring us to be Indians.
There will be nothing but benefit, however, from leaving the head
uncovered wherever possible. Wearing long hair and parting it with
ever so much care seems to be rather uncouth. Dust, dirt, and lice
collect in long hair. One will also find it difficult to treat any boils that
may develop on one’s scalp. For a turban-wearer to grow long hair
like a Saheb is sheer absurdity.
We fall into the clutches of many diseases through our feet. The
feet of those who wear shoes, etc., become tender. With shoes on, the
feet perspire and emit an offensive odour. Anyone sensitive to smell
can scarcely bear to stand near such a person when he is removing his
shoes and socks, so offensive is the odour of the feet. We call shoes
“shields against thorns” or “protectors of the feet”, which means
that we need wear shoes only when we have to walk among thorns or
stir out in extreme heat or cold, and even then, we need cover, not the
entire feet, but only the soles; when necessary, therefore, one may put
on only sandals. Anyone who suffers from headaches, physical
weakness, aching feet, and anyone used to wearing of shoes should try
walking barefoot. He will soon discover the advantages of keeping
one’s feet uncovered, in contact with the earth and free from perspiration. Sandals are an excellent form of footwear and also comparatively cheap. In Africa, they are made by Trappists1 near Pinetown for
anyone who wants them and one can also get them made in Phoenix.
The average individual will not have the courage to use sandals only.
1

84

Monks of Cistercian order noted for silence and other austerities.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Even such a person should always keep his feet uncovered whenever
possible and use sandals when he must cover the soles and can do
without shoes.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 19-4-1913

60. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
P HOENIX,

April 19, 1913
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

By this time you are already on your way to London. I do hope
that there you will get some rest. I was grieved to see from the papers
that you had a nervous breakdown. It is on such occasions that I long
to be with you.
Polak will write to you fully on the situation. I wish to state only
this that this time the struggle, if it comes, will involve more sufferings
than before. So far as I know, we shall not appeal to the public in
India for pecuniary support. If those who know me personally wish to
send anything, I shall gratefully accept the help. The plan would be to
beg in S[outh] A[frica] from door to door. I think that thereby we
shall manage to get sufficient to feed and clothe us while we are out of
gaol. May I ask you also not to make any public appeal for funds. I
have still about £300. These I am jealously guarding for emergencies.
Most of the settlers here including the womenfolk will join the
struggle. The latter feel that they can no longer refrain from facing
the gaol no matter what it may mean in a place like this. Mrs. Gandhi
made the offer on her own initiative and I do not want to debar her.1
The matter of Mrs. Gandhi’s intention has not yet been made public.
Will you also not mention it anywhere for the time being?
I hope that you will do what you can for the London Committee. 2 I am going on with the collections as I promised I would. As
1
2

Vide “Conversation with Kasturba Gandhi,” before 19-4-1913.
South Africa British Indian Committee (SABIC)

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

85

soon as I have [a] decent sum by me, it will be passed on to you. We
have stopped sending anything to Maud Polak1 since this month.
It is likely that Maud will discuss with you her conduct regarding her visit to S. A. I wrote 2 to her saying that she had misled me
and that you too had been misled. In spite of the breach of the very
personal relation between us, she has continued to do her work on the
Committee satisfactorily. She thinks that she is simply the victim of a
misunderstanding. I am disinclined to believe it and I have said so to
her. I wish I could have saved you the bother of having to revive
painful recollections. But I was bound to let you know what had
passed between Maud and myself.
I should much appreciate a line about your health and the
treatment you may be undergoing. Could you at all find time to visit
Just’s Jungborn and Kuhne’s Institute?
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From the original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 926 Courtesy: Servants of India
Society

1
2

86

H. S. L. Polak’s sister, was Assistant Honorary Secretary, SABIC
This letter is not available.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

61. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Friday [April 25, 1913] 1
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Manilal has taken out your things. He will pack them and send
by goods. He does odd things only in the morning, hence the slow
progress of the work.
You will be pleased to know that Devdas and Fakiri ran to the
station and back in 35 minutes and Sivpujan in 29.
Gokhale had a nervous breakdown. Beyond the letter you saw
he has not written to me, either, as he promised to on the work itself.
But why should you even for his sake mislead people? If you feel that
he should have written and he has not, you could certainly say you
expected a letter but had not received one. You cannot hide behind
the shelter of the statement that you belong to the majority and I to
the minority.
Do you remember the story of Dr. Primrose in The Vicar of
Wakefield? He used to give a horse to the guest whom he did not want
back. He lost both the horse and the guest and was satisfied. This is a
fine illustration of returning good for evil. Geevers asked me just
when he was to go to the station and I to my work for the money. I
asked, I think, exactly two questions. They did not satisfy me. But not
to give would have caused delay, waste and irritation. I thought the
best thing was to give even from the fund I have and be done with. It
was the penalty I paid for having countenanced him at first and then
having inflicted him on you. Am I clear? You may pursue the subject
still more when we meet.
I may leave here on Monday, though I am not sure. I may stay a
day or two and go to the Cape Town.
From Phoenix the resisters will be Mrs. Gandhi, Chhaganlal,
Mrs. Chhaganlal, Mrs. Maganlal, Jeki, Hanif, Coopoo, Manilal,
1
From the reference to Gokhale’s nervous breakdown, to which reference is
made by Gandhiji in his letter to Gokhale dated April 19, 1913; vide “Letter to G. K.
Gokhale”, 19-4-1913. The Friday following this date fell on April 25, 1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

87

Govind, Ramdas, Sivpujan, Sam and Solomon. I may have omitted a
boy’s name. The women’s names are for your use only. Miss
Schlesin knows I think that Mrs. Gandhi and Jeki will join. But I do
not think I wrote about the others. I have sketched out an elaborate
programme which I have not the time to set forth here.
Hoosen Doud’s son has arrived a wreck vomiting blood. Perhaps you would like to write a word of sympathy to him or Doud.
I hope Albret will pardon me for not writing in reply to his
advice.
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. COurtesy: National
Archives of India

62. TELEGRAM TO KALREY
[PHOENIX,

April 26, 1913]
KALREY
SECOND

READING

COMMITTEE
WIRE

COPY

BILL

COMMENCED

TELEGRAM
CHAPLIN,

GONE.
ALEXANDER,

PARLIAMENT. 1
COMMITTEE
SMARTT,

HOPE
SHOULD

MERRIMAN.

HOPE INDIAN WOMEN’S PROTEST SENT.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S.N. 5787

1

88

This was on April 26.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

63. £3 TAX DISAPPOINTMENT
We learn from an authoritative source that, owing to the exigencies of the political situation, the Government do not intend to introduce this session a Bill to repeal the £3 tax required, under Act 17 of
1895, of ex-indentured Indians who remain free in Natal at the expiry
of their contracts. The news will come as a shock and a bitter disappointment not only to those immediately affected, but to the entire
Indian community, who rightly regard the impost as a tax upon its
honour and social integrity. BecauseGeneral Botha1 and General Hertzog 2 are engaged in a party quarrel, the business of the whole country
must come to a standstill. General Botha has adopted the attitude that
he is fighting his opponent in the interests of the Empire. He does not
seem to realize the inconsistency of that attitude with his inability to
keep his unwritten pledge to the Hon. Mr. Gokhale to repeal this tax
at an early date. It is an open secret that the only reason why no
public announcement of the intentions of the Government was made
during Mr. Gokhale’s visit was because Ministers desired, before
definitely committing themselves, to ascertain the feeling of the Natal
members. The views of most of these, as is now well known from
General Smuts’ statement in the House on the Financial Relations Bill,
are against the retention of the tax as inequitable and there is,
therefore, no valid excuse for the dilatory tactics of the Government
beyond a cowardly fear to arouse further antagonism from the Free
State reactionaries, who are in no way interested in the question
beyond their notorious obsession by [sic] anti-colour mania. We have
no doubt that Mr. Gokhale, who is now on his way to England, will
have certain home truths to speak to His Majesty’s Ministers at the
gross manner of the betrayal of his own and the Indian community’s
hopes. The least the Government can do, to save their face, is to give
instructions that the tax and its arrears are not to be demanded, pending the passing of the necessary repealing legislation next session.
Indian Opinion, 26-4-1913
1

Louis Botha (1862-1919); Boer General and statesman; Prime Minister of
the Transvaal, 1907, and of South Africa Union, 1910-19
2
James Barry Munnik Hertzog (1866-1942); South African nationalist leader
and politician; Prime Minister of South Africa Union, 1924-39
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

89

64. THAT BILL
The Immigrants’ Restriction Bill is apparently meeting with
all-round opposition. The scathing criticism of the Natal Witness on
the withdrawal of the right of access to the Supreme Court, except in
certain rare cases, is highly appropriate. It is not the autocracy of little
“tin tsars” that the officials now demand. The people of South Africa
are now called upon to hand over their liberties into the keeping of an
infallible bureaucracy that is afraid to face the criticism and the
scepticism of His Majesty’s judges. We do not need to emphasize the
glaring audacity of the Government’s attempt to impose upon the
public—or, rather, the Indian public—Immigration Boards whose
decisions are to be unappealable, when there is almost daily record of
the havoc wrought to Indian interests by the existing Licensing Boards
of Natal and the Cape. We are rapidly reaching, in South Africa, that
Government by bureaucracy against which Sir James Rose-Innes
recently inveighed so strongly, and it is difficult to believe that people
with such splendid traditions of liberty and freedom as the South
African Colonists can boast will be content to deliver to a close
corporation of unchecked permanent officials the control of their
movements into and within the Union.
Indian Opinion, 26-4-1913

90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

65. NEW BILL
Perhaps, as we write this note, further news of the Bill is already
available. At the moment, it seems quite possible that the Bill may fail
for reasons not connected with our struggle. There is a split in General
Botha’s camp. The supporters of General Hertzog have shown their
teeth. They came together at a meeting in Bloemfontein and passed a
resolution supporting General Hertzog, so that there is little possibility
now of the Orange members supporting General Botha. Even in the
Cape, General Hertzog has some members to help him. Likewise, there
may be a few here and there in the Transvaal too. It does not,
therefore, appear that General Botha will be able to continue in power
with the support only of his own party. If he seeks the support of the
Unionist Party, not only will it be a humiliation to him, but General
Hertzog will grow stronger still, and General Botha will be left with
very few supporters among the Boers. Many believe that, in this
difficult situation, he may not be able to retain the reins of power in
his hands. If this view is correct, there are two possible consequences;
one, that General Botha may dissolve the Parliament and order fresh
elections, so that a new Parliament will come into being; alternatively,
he may accept all the demands of General Hertzog’s supporters. In
either case, there is little chance of this Parliament being able to do
much. The papers also report that General Hertzog’s supporters have
raised two issues, first, that Mr. Sauer1 , who has always been known as
a friend of the Zulus and who champions their cause, has been
appointed by General Botha as Minister for Zulu Affairs, and
secondly, that he has decided to grant relief to the Indians out of
deference to the Imperial Government. Thus, we have also become a
cause of friction among them. This is, however, nothing for us to be
happy about, for these two reasons just happen to have come in
handy. The unthinking Boers are likely to be taken in by them, for
there is an element of truth in both of them, which, however, will do
good neither to the Zulus nor to us. Mr. Sauer, as Minister, is not
1

J. W. Sauer, Member of the Union Cabinet, a philanthropist and radical who
refused knighthood.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

91

going to present the Zulus with cart-loads of wealth nor General Botha
to gift away a kingdom to us in order to oblige the Imperial
Government. We have seen what it is that he is prepared to give. But
the fine words to which General Botha treated the Imperial Government in our case are being deliberately used against him by General
Hertzog’s supporters. We can, therefore, hope for no advantage to us
from all this. Even if General Hertzog comes to power, we shall secure
neither more nor less than what we can by our own strength. Satyagraha is equally effective in all circumstances and at all times; such is
its invincible and supreme power.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 26-4-1913

66. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XVII]
9. AN INTIMATE CHAPTER

Those who have carefully followed the chapters on health so far
should read this, I submit, with especial care and ponder well over it.
Other chapters are still to follow and will, I feel, prove useful, but there
will be none in the series as important as the present one. As I
indicated earlier I have in these chapters said nothing on which I have
had no personal experience or of which I was not firmly convinced.
There are many things which promote good health, all of them
necessary, but the most important is brahmacharya1 . We can have
good health by means of good air, water and food; but, if we spend all
that we earn, we shall be left with nothing on hand. Similarly, if we
fritter away the health which we gain, what remains ofour capital
behind? For both men and women, therefore, brahmacharya is an
absolute necessity if they are to preserve the wealth of physical wellbeing; no one need doubt this. He who has conserved his generative
fluid is known as viryavan, a man of strength.
1
Literally living in the Brahman, the Absolute. In ordinary usage the term
has come to signify celibacy, which is considered essential for attainment of that
state.

92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

What is brahmacharya?—it may be asked. It consists in men
and women refraining from carnal enjoyment. “Refraining from
carnal enjoyment” does not mean merely refraining from contact
with each other with such enjoyment in view, but also keeping the
mind free from the very thought of it—one must not even dream
about it. Man should not be disturbed by the presence of woman and
woman by the presence of man. We should hold back and store within
our bodies the mysterious power that Nature has bestowed upon us
and use it to promote our health, the health not only of the body but
also of the mind, the intellect and the memory.
Let us now take a look-at the strange things that go on around
us. Most men and women, whether young or old, are submerged in
this infatuation. On such occasions we go utterly mad. Our reason
ceases to function, a veil seems to come over our eyes and we are
blinded with passion. I have observed men, women and young people
of both sexes looking distraught when possessed by passion. My
personal experience is no different. Whenever I have been overcome
by this state, I have lost all sense. Such is the nature of passion. Thus,
for the sake of a grain of pleasure1 , we lose a maund of vitality. When
our excitement dies down, we find ourselves in a pitiable state. The
following morning our body is heavy, we are ill at ease, and a lethargy
sets in. Our mind is out of sorts. In order to set these things right
again, or keep them right, we must needs drink milk boiled with spices, swallow iron, take yakutis 2 , approach vaidyas for strength-giving
drugs and look around for foods that will serve as aphrodisiacs. Thus,
as the days and years go by, we decline in body and mind and find
our intellect gone in old age.
This, surely, should not be—in old age, the intellect should grow
sharper rather than duller. We should be in such condition that the
experience gained during a life-time can be of use to us and to others,
a condition possible to those who observe brahmacharya. Such a
person is unafraid of death and does not forget God evenat the
moment of death. He does not indulge in vain attempts and does not
1
The original has a pun on the Sanskrit word rati which means pleasure and,
also, a measure of weight.
2
Tonic preparations of the Unani system of medicine

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

93

behave like a dandy. He who gives up this frame with a smiling face
and goes to render his account to the Master is truly a man and she
who dies thus is truly a woman. Such persons alone may claim to have
maintained true health.
We do not, as a rule, stop to consider that the basic cause of
pleasure-hunting, envy, ostentation, hypocrisy, anger, impatience,
violent hatred and such other evils is our violation of brahmacharya.
If one’s mind is not under one’s control and one behaves more
foolishly even than a child, indulging oneself once every day or
oftener, what other crimes would not one commit, knowingly or
unknowingly? What unforgivable sins would one stop short of?
But does one ever find anyone observing such brahmacharya?
If everyone did so, the world would come to an end. [So runs the
argument.] This is likely to involve a discussion of religious issues. I
shall, therefore, pass over that aspect of the matter and consider it
from a worldly point of view. In my opinion, both these questions
have their origin in our fear and weakness. We do not want to observe
brahmacharya and, therefore, seek excuses to escape from it. There
do exist people, and in large numbers, who observe it; if, however,
they were easy to discover, what would be their worth? Thousands of
labourers are imprisoned in the bowels of the earth in order that
diamonds might be obtained and, even then, only a handful of these
are found in a mountain of broken earth and rock. What efforts, then,
would be necessary to discover the jewels among men who observe
brahmacharya? Let us do a simple sum in the rule of three to
calculate. If the world comes to an end because we observe
brahmacharya, how is that any concern of ours? We are not God. He
who has created the world will look after His affairs. Whether others
observe it or not is not a question for us to ask. When we select
business or law or anything else as a career, we do not ask what would
happen if everyone became a lawyer or business man. Finally, those
men and women who observe brahmacharya will, in the course of
time, receive answers to both the questions, that is, they will find others
like themselves. And it will also be as plain as daylight to them what
will happen to the world if all did the same.
How can these ideas be put into practice by men caught up in
94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

worldly responsibilities? What should the married ones do? And those
who have children? What should they do who cannot control their
desire? We have seen what the ideal is. If we always hold it before us,
we shall either be able to follow it faithfully or approximate to it in
some measure. If we place before a child the finest models when
teaching it to write the letters of the alphabet, it will copy them to the
best of its ability. Similarly, we can place before us the ideal of unbroken brahmacharya, and then make every effort to approximate to
it. What if we happen to be married? The natural law is that men and
women should depart from brahmacharya only when they desire
progeny. If a couple do so after full deliberation, once in a few years,
they will not wholly forget themselves and will remain well stored with
vitality. Rarely do we come across couples who indulge in sexual
intercourse only for the purpose of procreation. The rest in their
thousands seek the pleasures of lust, yearn for them and indulge in
them. The consequence is that, against their wish, children are born to
them. In enjoying these pleasures, we become so utterly blind that we
have no consideration for our partner. In this matter men are more
guilty than women. In his stupidity man gives no thought to the
woman’s weakness; he does not stop to consider whether she is strong
enough for the burden of bearing children and bringing them up.
People of the West have broken all bounds in this matter. They adopt
various techniques so that they may have their pleasure without being
burdened with children. Books have been written on these techniques
and there are professionals who explain how to indulge in the
pleasures of lust and yet have no children! So far at least we have been
free from this sin; but we do not think for a moment before imposing
burdens on our women and we do not care if our children are weak,
lacking in vitality, timid and dull of intellect. Whenever a child is born,
we offer thanks to God. This is only a way of covering up our pitiable
condition. Why should we not regard it a sign of divine anger that we
have weak, crippled, lustful and worthless children born to us? What
reason for satisfaction can there be over a child of twelve having
issue? Why should this be an occasion for merry-making? Why should
we not regard it as a manifestation of divine wrath that a girl of twelve
should become a mother? We know that, if a tree bears fruit too soon
after it has been planted, the latter is immature and we take good care
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

95

to see that fruit does not appear too early on a tree. When, on the
contrary, we have a celebration on the birth of a child to a child-wife
by a child-hus-band, surely we behave with incredible blindness. Of
what good is it to India or the world to be swarmed over with worthless
creatures, as with ants? Animals are better off than we are inasmuch as
the male and the female are brought together only when we intend
them to have progeny. Subsequent to the union, the period of
pregnancy and the period between the birth and the weaning of the
child, when it can fend for itself, should be looked upon as sacred and
during this time at least the husband and wife should scrupulously
observe brahma-charya. But we give no thought whatever to the
matter and continue to take our pleasures recklessly. Such is the
sickness of our minds—a good example of incurable sickness. It is a
disease which brings us to death, and until that time we wander about
like insane men. It is the especial duty of married couples that they
should not mistake the purpose of marriage, but should understand it
aright and come together only while they have no child and desire an
heir.
In our present pitiful condition, this is extremely difficult. Our
diet, our way of life; our talk, the sights which surround us, are all
such as to excite our lust. Sexual pleasure, moreover, has become a
craving with us, much like opium. Is it likely that in such a state we
would take thought and turn back? But to any sceptic who wants to
know how the ideal can be practised, there is no answer in this chapter.
It is intended for those who are ready to think and make an effort to
do what ought to be done. Those who are satisfied with themselves will
find it boring even to read these things; the chapter is intended, rather,
to help those who have realized their abject state and are tired of it to
some extent.
We can see from the foregoing that those who have not married
should not do so in these difficult times and that, if one cannot do
altogether without marriage, one should marry late. Young men
should take a vow not to marry before they are twenty-five or thirty
years of age. This is not the place to consider the other benefits which,
apart from good health, may follow from this course; everyone,
however, will know how to gain such benefits for himself.
96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

To parents who may read this chapter, we must say that they are
guilty of cruelty in selling away their sons and daughters by marriage
or betrothal while they are still children; in doing so, they regard their
own interests instead of those of the children. They want to feel
important and have a name in the community, want to have a big show
by celebrating their children’s marriage. If they desired the welfare of
their children, they would look after their education, care for them
and train their bodies. What can be more harmful to the interests of
boys and girls today than that they should be married off while they
are still children?
Lastly, when a married man or woman is separated from his or
her partner by death, it will benefit the survivor’s health to lead the
life appropriate to a widower or widow. Some doctors have expressed
the opinion that young men and women must have opportunities for
sexual relief. There are also some others who argue that this is not
necessary in any circumstances. When doctors thus quarrel among
themselves, we should take care not to be misled by any of them and
sink in self-indulgence in the belief that we have their support. From
my own experience and that of others which I have come to know of,
I can affirm without the least hesitation that it is unnecessary to
indulge in sexual relations for the sake of health; on the contrary;
such indulgence and the resultant loss do much physical harm. The
vitality of both mind and body developed through many years is so
much impaired even by one such occasion that it takes a long time to
regain it and, even so, the original state is never restored wholly. One
may make use of a broken glass by re-joining the fragments, but it
will always remain a broken thing.
In order to conserve virility, fresh air and water, wholesome food
as described earlier, and pure thought are indispensable. In this way
morals are closely linked with health. A perfectly moral person alone
can achieve perfect health. Anyone who, prepared to make a fresh
start from the moment that he sees the light, meditates carefully over
what has been said so far and puts these suggestions into practice will
have direct proof in experience. Even one who has observed
brahmacharya for some period will notice the increase of mental and
physical powers and, having once secured this philosopher’s stone,
will guard it with care like very life. The slightest lapse and he will
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

97

realize what an error he has made. I have committed mistakes even
after I had thought over—experienced—the countless benefits of
brahmacharya and I have known the bitter consequences. I have vivid
memories of the exalted state of the mind before a lapse and the
pitiable condition after it. But from these mistakes, I have learnt the
value of that precious jewel. I do not know if I shall be able to
preserve it unbroken. I hope to, with God’s help. I can see the good it
has done to my mind and body. I, who was married in childhood, was
blinded [by lust] in childhood and had children while a mere child,
awoke after many years and seem to have realized on awakening that I
had been pursuing a disastrous course. If anyone learns from my
mistakes and my experience and saves himself, I shall be happy to
have written this chapter. The following calculation is also worth
making. Many people have said, and I believe it, that I have plenty of
energy. My mind is not considered weak—as a matter of fact—some
think me obstinate. I have ailments of body and mind ; and yet I am
reckoned as fairly healthy in comparison with those with whom I have
come into contact. If I have been able to maintain this condition
because, after some twenty years of self-indulgence, I woke up, who
can say what I would have been if I could have saved those twenty
years as well. I am sure, myself, that there would have been no limit to
my energy and I would have had so much of it to spend on service to
the public or myself that others would have found it an ordeal to
equal it. This is the conclusion to be drawn from my all-too-imperfect
example. The physical, mental and moral strength of one who has
been able to observe unbroken brahmacharya must be seen to be
believed; it cannot be described.
Anyone reading this chapter will see that, when married persons
have been advised to observe brahmacharya and widowers to continue
in that state, there can be no question of any men or women, married
or unmarried, being permitted to gratify their desire anywhere. It is
not possible, when dealing with questions of health, to consider the
dire effects of casting evil glances at other people’s wives or prostitutes. This is a matter for religion and ethics. Here we need only state
that those who indulge in such extra-marital relations and have contacts with prostitutes suffer, we find, from such unmentionable diseases
as syphilis and rot away because of them. Nature is so merciful to
98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

them that it promptly incapacitates them; they keep slumbering,
however, and run from doctor to doctor in search of a cure for their
diseases! Where there is no adultery, fifty per cent. of the doctors and
vaidyas will lose their occupation. These diseases have such a hold on
the human race that thoughtful doctors have been driven to observe
that, despite all their discoveries, the nations of the world will soon be
wiped out if the evil of adultery continues unchecked. The remedies
for the diseases in question are so toxic in effect that, even when the
diseases themselves seem to be cured, others take root in their stead
and pass from generation to generation.
We shall now indicate how married couples may observe brahmacharya and so conclude this rather long chapter. A married person
cannot observe celibacy merely by following rules regarding diet, air
and water. He must also refrain from being alone with his wife. We
shall realize on reflection that, except for the purpose of conjugal relations, it is not necessary to be alone with one’s wife. At night the husband and the wife must sleep in separate rooms. During the day they
should remain fully occupied with useful activity and pure thoughts.
They should read such books and meditate over such lives as would
strengthen them in their good resolve and should frequently remind
themselves that all pleasures lead to suffering. Whenever they feel
passion rising in them, they should take a cold bath. This will transform the cosmic fire in their bodies into a benign influence for both
men and women and increase their happiness. All this is certainly hard
of achievement, but conquering difficulties is what we are born for
and. anyone who wishes to acquire good health must conquer this
one.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 26-4-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

99

67. NOTE TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[P.O. B OX 2493]
JOHANNESBURG ,

April 26, 1913
1.

2.
3.
4.

The architect business should be wound up with the least
possible delay at the most in 3 months; the decision should be
announced at once.
The Mountain View property should be sold without reserve
within 3 months.
Tolstoy Farm should be kept practically at any cost.
The African Building should be the primary occupation.
ON P ROP. 1

You are not a competent architect. Study seems to be almost
impossible but even if it were practicable, it is not desirable or
profitable. The beer-hall business is the best warning that you must
subordinate your conscientious scruples to your business. Its
continuation means a loss of moral fibre and a reluctant fawning upon
people whom you would rather keep at a distance. And after all the
fawning and all the abandoning of principles, it is a question whether
the business has any money in it. And the business ties you down as
nothing else can if you are really to nurse it and give satisfaction to
your clients.
ON P ROP. 2

Mountain View is a veritable Devil’s temptation. It simply
absorbs money and energy without any certain prospect of preventing
a loss. It is better to lose even £1000 or more than to sink more
money and risk losing even that. A wise and cautious man will never
fear to abandon a proposition which was wrong in the beginning.
Your action just now is like that of a man [who] fearing to let his
rotten shares go, buys in attractive-looking ones to recoup himself for
the loss on the rotten ones forgetting all the while that the others may
prove just as bad. The Mountain View proposition is decidedly a
100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

speculation and an honourable man should never speculate, much less
to avoid a loss. The dividing line (if any) between speculation and
gambling is very thin indeed. It is a niggardly spirit that fears to lose.
ON P ROP. 3

Tolstoy Farm cannot be given up because of the memories
connected with it and because in the event of your leaving South
Africa for any new enterprise, spiritual or other, you are in a position
to look back with satisfaction upon something accomplished in a
concrete manner.
ON P ROP. 4

The African Building is the cleanest and most reliable asset you
possess. It is also the most heavily burdened asset. And if you want to
avoid insolvency in case of unforeseen misfortunes, you will be wise
to increase the monthly income from it so that you can pay out the
bond debt as quickly as possible. It provides steady and healthy
occupation according to the ordinary European standard. It will not
unduly fetter your movements. There is nothing of a speculative
nature about it. The social atmosphere of Pretoria is much purer and
calmer than that of Johannesburg. Being on the spot, you have a far
greater opportunity of getting a buyer for your lease so as to relieve
you from the bond debt and leave you £2000 clear after paying all
your other debts. The monthly withdrawal of £25 enables you to live
comfortably and meet your ordinary wants.
GENERAL R EMARKS

It is necessary to map out the future course in detail and take a
solemn vow never to depart from it. Your position does not warrant
any help to anybody, whether friends or relatives. It is quite wrong, I
feel sure, to send £30 to Mrs. Daniel and equally so to send £12 to
Mrs. Mayo annually. Just consider your position by taking a few
figures. Add up your monthly expenses thus:
Salaries
Rent
Sundries Household
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

101

Rates on Mountain View
Premiums on policies
Rates and premiums and rent on African Building
Personal expenses average
Contributions such as Mrs. Daniel, etc.
Interest on loans
Against that put down your monthly income and you will find
that you are running your various businesses at a loss, thus showing
that you are an insolvent. You ought to make out this statement not
roughly but accurately. Again, make out another list putting down all
your assets and all your liabilities and then find out what the assets will
fetch today under a forced sale. And if you come to the conclusion
that they will not pay your creditors, you are an insolvent. Remember
that the forced sale at a current bank rate, a fixed bank deposit, etc.,
fetches the same amount as an ordinary sale. You have practically not
a single asset worth mentioning of this character. The reason is
obvious. You have never laid by any money as a prudent worldly man
would. Your transactions therefore were of a speculative character.
From that original taint not even the African Building or Tolstoy
Farm is free. But you cannot abandon these unless you are ready to
embrace poverty as you would a brother or sister. My recommendations are therefore intended for you as you are at your ordinary
best, not your very best.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

68. TELEGRAM TO GOOL AND GOOLMAHOMED
[JOHANNESBURG ,

After April 26, 1913]
GOOL
7, B UITENCINGEL
ADAM GOOLMAHOMED
8, K LOOF S TREET
[CAPE TOWN ]
HOPE

YOU

GRATION

BILL.

WILL
READ

LODGE
DEBATE

PROTEST
BILL

AGAINST

WHICH

SAYS

IMMIINDIANS

GENERALLY WILL ACCEPT IT.

From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5772

69. SPEECH AT VREDEDORP1
[JOHANNESBURG ,

April 27, 1913]
Mr. Gandhi, who had come specially from Phoenix, after explaining the
nature of the Bill, said that he hoped that the Government would grant their
humble request. But, if they did not, they were bound, after exhausting all their
resources by way of petition, etc., to take up the well-tried weapon of passive
resistance. This would be the third campaign and he had no doubt that itwould
be the most brilliant of all, though it would involve much greater suffering and
would be a protracted ordeal. But, as self-respecting men, they could not shirk
it. They must be prepared to risk all for the honour of their womanhood, for
the sake of their religions and for the good name of the country of their birth.
They wished to deceive neither themselves nor the Government. It was plain
to the speaker that, in the impending struggle, they could not count upon
hundreds going to gaol, but he knew that what they might lack in numbers
1

A meeting of the British Indian Association was held at Vrededorp, a suburb
of Johannesburg, to consider the Immigration Bill. A. M. Cachalia presided. For the
text of his speech, which was later forwarded to the Governor-General, vide Appendix
“Speech by A. M. Chachalia”, 27-4-1913.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

103

would be made up for by the earnestness and; the unconquerable will of the few.
Those who could not suffer the hardships of a gaol life might still take their
share in the campaign. They could hold meetings, they could collect
subscriptions, they could sacrifice their time and look after the families of
those who might be imprisoned. Such work, too, was necessary. No country in
the world could afford to place all its children at the same time on the field.
Theirs was an army of peace. Although they used military terms, they agreed
with the soldier only in so far as the latter was a sufferer in his own person. A
true passive resister could never be party to injuring others. His motive power
was not vengeance. It was hardly possible to expect the whole community to
become soldiers in such an army. But, whether they had five hundred or fifty,
or five, or even one true passive resister on the field, victory was theirs.

THE R ESOLUTION1

This mass meeting of British Indians hereby endorses the action
of the Committee of the British Indian Association in forwarding to
the Government its objections against the Immigration Bill and,
inasmuch as it affects the honour, the religious sentiment and the very
existence of the Indian community in South Africa, solemnly resolves
that, in the event of the Government not conceding the request, passive
resistance, which has remained under suspense since 1911, be revived
and continued, until the sufferings of the passive resisters shall have
proved to the Government and the Europeans of South Africa the
earnestness of the community and, therefore, the necessity of granting
relief.2
Indian Opinion, 3-5-1913

1

This was unanimously passed.
The meeting was then addressed by L. W. Ritch and H. Kallenbach on
invitation.
2

104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

70. TELEGRAM TO DRUMMOND CHAPLIN AND OTHERS
[JOHANNESBURG ,

After April 27, 1913] 1
DRUMMOND C HAPLIN
R T. H ON ’BLE MERRIMAN
S IR THOMAS S MARTT
MORRIS ALEXANDER
THEO . S CHREINER
C APE TOWN
PROTESTS

AGAINST

FROM

ALMOST

IF

BILL

INDIAN
IF

ACT

PASSED

DEMANDS

GENERAL

MENTS
LAW

IMMIGRATION

EVERY
PASSIVE

OF

BY

EASILY

1907,

BE

INDIANS,
BE

REMOVING

BRINGING

MARRIAGE

BILL

JUDGMENT

VALIDATING

INDIAN

REVIVE.

WITH

AMEND-

TRANSVAAL

RACIAL
RECOGNIZING

GRANTING

CERTAIN

CARRIED

AMENDED

GONE

ASSOCIATION.

AMENDMENT

RESISTANCE

CANNOT

SUGGESTED

HAVE

INDIAN

WITHOUT

BILL

COULD

BILL

IMPORTANT

IMMIGRATION

REPEALING
BAR
AS

THEREIN
BEFORE

ASIATIC
AND
SEARLE

MARRIAGES.

From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5773

1
It appears that this telegram and the cable to Lord Ampthill, vide the
succeeding item, were sent some time after the mass meeting held at Vrededorp on
April 27.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

105

71. CABLE TO LORD AMPTHILL1
[JOHANNESBURG ,

After April 27, 1913]
MR.
GOKHALE
SUGGESTS
MY
CABLING
YOU
OBJECTIONS
BILL.
THEY
ARE,
BILL
CONTRAVENES
SETTLEMENT,
DISTURBING
EXISTING
RIGHTS
AND
IMPOSING
DISABILITIES
NOT
CONTEMPLATED.
REPLACES
SUPREME
COURT
JURISDICTION
BY
CREATION
BOARDS
OF
ANNUALLY
REMOVABLE
MEMBERS
HAVING
FINAL
JURISDICTION
EXCEPT
CASES
DOMICILE,
TAKES
AWAY
RIGHTS
EDUCATED
INDIANS
ENTER
CAPE
OR
NATAL
FROM
TRANSVAAL
ON
PRESENT
EDUCATION
TEST.
CONTEMPLATES
PROHIBITION
ENTRY
FREE
STATE
NEW
EDUCATED
IMMIGRANTS
ALTHOUGH
SETTLEMENT
PROVIDES
THAT
UNDER
GENERAL
BILL
SUCH
INDIANS
SHALL
HAVE
EQUAL
RIGHTS
WITH
OTHERS
REGARDING
IMMIGRATION.
RESTRICTS
PRESENT
RIGHT
ENTRY
THROUGH
ANY
PORT
TO
ANY
PORT
SPECIALLY
APPOINTED.
DEPRIVES
NATAL
INDIAN
LONG
RESIDENCE
OF
RIGHTS
OF
DOMICILE
HITHERTO
POSSESSED
BY
IMPORTING
STRICTER
CAPE
SECTION
ON
DOMICILE.
CONTRARY
PRESENT
STATUTORY
POSITION
MAKES
NATAL
TRANSVAAL
INDIANS
WHO
MAY
ABSENT
FROM
THEIR
RESPECTIVE
PROVINCES
LONGER
THAN
THREE
YEARS
PROHIBITED
IMMIGRANTS.
DEPRIVES
S[OUTH]
A[FRICA]
BORN
INDIAN
RIGHT
ENTER
CAPE.
RECENT
JUDGMENT
CONTRARY
ESTABLISHED
PRACTICE
INVALIDATES
INDIAN
MARRIAGES
NOT
SOLEMNIZED
ACCORDING
CHRISTIAN
RITES
OR
BEFORE
MARRIAGE
OFFICERS
WHETHER
SUCH
MARRIAGES
PERFORMED
INDIA
OR
HERE.
THUS
REDUCING
MAJORITY
WIVES
STATUS
CONCUBINES.
BILL
SEEMS
DEPRIVE
EDUCATED
INDIANS
WHO
ENTERED
UPON
EXISTING
TEST
OF
RIGHT
RE-ENTRY
UNLESS
OTHERWISE
DOMICILED.
IF
BILL
NOT
AMENDED
ALL
THESE
PARTICULARS,
REVIVAL
PASSIVE
RESISTANCE
CERTAIN
THOUGH
CHIEFLY
RESIGNED
MEET
PASSIVE
RESISTERS.

From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5774
1

The draft does not bear Lord Ampthill’s name, but presumably the communication was addressed to him,

106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

72. INTERVIEW TO “THE STAR”1
JOHANNESBURG .

On or before April 28, 1913]
Interviewed by a representative of The Star, he said the Bill would be
totally unacceptable to the Indian community unless it carried out the
fundamental principle of the compromise in respect of existing rights and the
removal of the racial bar.

It is perfectly true that there are no local wants of the Indian
community in the Free State, and it is also true that no Indian is likely
to enter the Free State, but we want the theoretical right of entry
preserved in a general way. The reason why the first Bill did not pass
was because the Government wanted to introduce legislation to meet
those points; last year’s Bill provided for it, and we quite recognized
that Indians who entered the Free State would be subject to local
disabilities, such as the prohibition to hold landed property, to farm
and to trade. If we accepted the present Bill, the position of Indians
would be infinitely worse than it was even before passive resistance
began.
The Government appears to be desirous of consolidating the
worst features of the Provincial legislation; for instance, in the Cape
the term “domicile” has a stricter meaning, and that is the meaning
they want to apply to Natal, a contingency which would not have been
possible five or six years ago. They want to level down the conditions
in Natal to those of the Cape instead of levelling up the Cape practice
to that of Natal.
Mr. Gandhi evidently considers it is almost hopeless to expect a general
Immigration Bill that would meet the views of Indian communities in the
different Provinces, and in reply to a question as to the most ready way to
settle the problem, he expressed himself in favour of amending Provincial
legislation, and suggested, as far as the Transvaal was concerned, that the
Immigration Law should have the racial bar removed, which would not arouse
any hostility, and that the offending Asiatic Act of 1907 should be repealed.
1
Gandhiji was on a visit to Johannesburg to consult the European Committee
and the executive committee of the British Indian Association. The report was
reproduced in Indian Opinion, 3-5-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

107

It is clear that the Indians are resolved to resist the provisions of Mr.
Fischer’s Bill in the event of it becoming law, and already they have
communicated with Mr. Gokhale, who happens to be in London, with the
object of placing before the Imperial Government.
The strained relations between the Indians and the Government began
soon after the grant of Responsible Government, and the passive resistance
movement continued from 1906 to 1910, when the compromise with General
Smuts was reached.

The Star, 28-4-1913

73. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
GOVERNOR-GENERAL
JOHANNESBURG ,

April 30, 1913
THE P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR -GENERAL
C APE TOWN
SIR

I have the honour to enclose herewith, in triplicate, copy of the
Resolution1 unanimously passed at an open-air meeting of British
Indians held at Vrededorp on the 27th instant under the auspices of
my Association, and to request that His Excellency will be good
enough to forward same, as also copy of the Chairman’s speech 2 on
the occasion, likewise enclosed, to the Hon’ble the Secretary of State
for the Colonies and the Hon’ble the Secretary of State for India.
I have, etc.,

A. M. C ACHALIA
C HAIRMAN ,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Colonial Office Records: 551/39

1
2

108

Vide “Speech at Vrededorp”, 27-4-1913.
Vide Appendix “Speech by A. M. Chachalia”, 27-4-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

74. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Wednesday [April 30, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Probably you would be expecting an early letter from me.
Hence this at 5.45 a.m. before I go down to the field.
Did you write to Hoosen? The sooner you do so the better, if
you have not done so already.
I have not been keeping a regular diary, so here is my
resolution. I am not to accept any pecuniary assistance from you until
I consider that you are not in an insolvent condition. Consider well the
propositions1 I have jotted down and having done so come to a
decision quickly. Do not be more than a week over your decision. I
feel sure nothing but vows would save you from yourself.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

109

75. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

May 1, 1913
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Incidents have taken place in the Farm which have agitated me
much. Devdas made me weep today as I have not wept for years. 1 I
shall tell you all about these things when we meet. They drive me
more and more into the jungles of India. This may be counted as a
weakness of mine and that it may be proof of coming imbecility.
Only something within me tells me that I am more and more being
driven to Truth. You know that in my search for it nothing will daunt
me.
Your simile is right. But if in the attempt to straighten out the
back it breaks, you have to suffer the breaking. Do you nurse a tree
whose trunk is rotten though stiff? Or do you cut it off and sometimes
even see to it that your trim digs deep enough to tear away the roots.
So it is with us. You and I can but break in the pursuit. Better to do
that than to sit still, remain drones and parasites. I know that parasites
as well as drones have their place in nature but we are parasites and
drones out of place. Just examine the last working of your mind. You
suggest flying to Norwich, as if a loan would settle everything! The
true position is that the loan would follow if you only woke up to a
sense of your own duty and began to work at it. No loan is required to
wind up your business or to stop the fever at Mountain View.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. courtesy: National
Archives of India

110

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

76. THE BILL
The Johannesburg mass meeting 3 was held none too soon. Its
resolution is most timely. The composition of the meeting, the
number of delegates who attended from most parts of the Transvaal,
and the messages sent to Mr. Fischer must have shown the Minister
that he could not hope to satisfy British Indians unless he was
prepared to accede to their request for amendment of the Bill in the
direction pointed out in Mr. Cachalia’s telegram. It is difficult,
therefore, to understand Mr. Fischer when he says, at the second
reading of his precious measure, that the Bill would pacify the Indian
community. Mr. Chaplin, who contributed to the debate in an
excellent speech, uttered seasonable warning when he said that the Bill
was useless and unacceptable to the Unionist Party unless Mr. Fischer
could give a definite assurance that the Indians were satisfied. In spite
of the Bill being pushed forward a stage further, we imagine that it will
never reach the third reading stage. But it is well for passive resisters to
keep themselves in readiness. It is to be hoped that, if the struggle is
revived, the impending third campaign will be the purest, the last and
the most brilliant of all. We share the belief, with Thoreau, that “one
true passive resister is enough to win a victory for right”. Right is on
our side. It could not be on the side of a Government that has no
regard for its sacred pledges. And we have many true passive resisters.
We would all fail to satisfy the definition of an ideal passive resister,
but we feel sure that the community contains many who would
approach the ideal as nearly as is possible for mortals to do. On such
rests a great duty.
Indian Opinion, 3-5-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

111

77. THE CAMPAIGN
R ESOLUTION ON S ATYAGRAHA

The mass meeting held at Johannesburg has passed a resolution
that satyagraha be started against the new Bill. If the Government does
not accept our demands, there is not the slightest doubt that
satyagraha will be revived. This was a meeting of no ordinary
importance. Many Indians were present. Leaders of every town were
there. One can see that, if satyagraha is resumed, the campaign will
follow a different pattern. In the past, we could not be sure who would
go to gaol or be in a position to do so.1 We had no means of judging
how strong or weak the community was. By now, however, we have
had some training. We can now make a fair guess how many and who
will be able to court imprisonment. The Government also knows our
strength. On the previous occasion, we expected everyone to go to
gaol. We besieged persons in order to drag them out. It was the time
for such training. Those who besieged people and those who were
besieged were alike new to the situation. We know better now from
experience.
P LAN OF C AMPAIGN

Mr. Cachalia has, therefore, made it clear that we will have neither
ourselves nor the Government labour under a false impression. The
very resolution passed at the meeting implies that those who support it
are not bound to go to gaol unless they themselves declare that they
will do so. Everyone who approves of satyagraha can make himself a
party to this resolution and declare himself in agreement with it. The
person accepting this resolution tells the community and the
Government that he believes in the justice and the necessity of this
satyagraha campaign, that he will oppose the Government, that, even if
he does not go to gaol, he will give monetary or other help to those
who do, will look after their dependents, will make himself useful in
the campaign in other ways, offer body-labour if he has no money,
1

The reference is to the passive resistance movement of 1909, which was
followed by mass arrests of Indians, including Gandhiji.

112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will regularly spend some of his time working for it, will not avail
himself of any of the provisions of the law and will not support the
Government in its oppressive measures.
C APE AND NATAL

This struggle is not for the Transvaal [alone], but for all South
Africa. Therefore, it befits the Cape and Natal also to wake up. It is
only natural that Johannesburg should lead the way. It would be
shameful, however, if the Cape and Natal sit back. From there, too,
people should come forward to go to gaol, and meetings should be
held in both these provinces similar to the one in Johannesburg. The
Government may treat us as if we are separate, but we can demonstrate
our “union” by our actions.
C OMPARISON WITH P REVIOUS C AMPAIGN

It was our experience during the previous campaign that those
who did not go to gaol sought to thwart the community’s effort and
join hands with the authorities. Some others, who did not turn against
the community, hid themselves in shame and helped in no other way
at all, as they should have done. Difficulties of both these kinds
should disappear, thanks to the resolution adopted this time. If
anyone, for whatever reason, schemes against the community, he will
only be acting as its enemy and, to that extent, as his own. As for those
who hid themselves, their absence meant so much loss to the
movement. Our cause thus received a set-back. It was, however, not
possible for us at that time to fight in any other way. We were all
being tried in the furnace. We could not distinguish one from another.
It was insulting a man to say that he would not be able to go to gaol
and the statement was taken as bringing discredit on him. That was but
right. All the stronger for the testing, we have now emerged from the
furnace. A man will not be in disgrace for not going to gaol and need
not feel ashamed. He has realized, and so has the community, that he
lacks the necessary strength. Those who come forward to court
imprisonment must not feel proud. They should not think that they
are doing something great. We are all limbs of one body. Just because
the eye performs the function of seeing, it is not justified in looking
down on the leg. The leg should not feel humbled for not being able
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

113

to see as the eye does. The leg and the eye, each works according to
its nature. The body needs them both. But either of them will call
down disgrace on itself if it fails in its natural function. Then the body
and the organ will both suffer. This is equally true of those who
volunteer to go to gaol and those who do not.
TO THOSE GOING TO GAOL

Now, a few words to those who come forward to court imprisonment. This time, the campaign, if it starts, is likely to be a big one. If
the community stands united behind those who go to gaol, the campaign will in all probability be over quite soon. But whether the community is or is not unanimous, whether it helps or does not help, it is
not permissible for the satyagrahis to give up their pledge. Hence,
they must be prepared to submit to heavy suffering in this campaign.
Moreover, a satyagrahi may not take cover behind what others do. He
is not concerned with whether others do or do not go to gaol. Some
people, it is observed, say that they will go to gaol if the leading
businessmen do. If not, [they say,] they are not prepared to sacrifice
themselves, poor people that they are. Again, the Tamils say that they
will come forward only if the Gujaratis do, and the Hindus only if the
Muslims do. The businessman says that he can look after himself
quite well, but that, for the sake of the community, he will be prepared
to come out if the hawkers do. None of those who argue thus is a
satyagrahi. One interested in business will mind his business. He will
not look to what others do. He alone can be a satyagrahi whose soul is
possessed by satyagraha. He must understand that he has not come
forward in order to confer a favour on anyone, but because he has
understood and come to like satyagraha and has the requisite strength.
The first to benefit from it will be himself. The community’s benefit
follows from his. In patriotic work, there is no clash between one’s
own interests and those of thecountry. If anyone thinks that there is,
he is not patriotic enough. A mother does not seek domination over
her child because she has drudged for it. A child is not proud because
it has served its mother. He who has dedicated his all to his country or
religion feels that he is serving his own interests in doing what he
thinks to be his duty. What, then, is so wonderful about doing one’s
duty? Why look to what others do? Why think ill of others? A satya114

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

grahi can make no conditions. He stands ready to sacrifice himself,
body, mind and possessions and, hence, is not afraid of losing wealth
or life. He has entered into a pact with death itself. There is no middle
of the road line for him. One who feels thus will help to keep up the
fight. He will live on even after death. We trust that those who lack this
spirit will not come forward for going to gaol. It is our firm belief that
fifty Indians so inclined, or five or even one, will be enough for winning our demands.
TO THOSE WHO MAY NOT GO TO GAOL

Finally, let us say a few words to those who may not come
forward to go to gaol. There will be no one now to shame any person
[into doing anything]. That is no reason for any Indian to conclude
that he need not go to gaol and so can stay away. No Indian may sit
back in the belief that even one Indian will suffice, and that others
need not, therefore, go [to gaol]. A man going to gaol may remain
unconcerned even if he is the only one to do so. But the one who does
not come forward for gaol should feel ashamed within. The shame in
one’s heart is more painful than what others cause. If a man has the
requisite strength, he should prefer gaol; and if he cannot go, he
should feel sorry. It is not proper that one who does not go should
seek to brazen it out. That’s not the meaning of the resolution. What it
means is that, if a person wants to go but cannot do so out of sheer
weakness, he may be allowed to excuse himself. Indians who thus
plead weakness will take much trouble and work untiringly to help the
campaign in other ways. The duty of such Indians begins this very
day. They should know that they will be supporting the campaign, if
they help maintain the London Committee. Perhaps, through the
efforts of the Committee, it may even become unnecessary to start the
struggle. Therefore, such Indians should dip their hands into their
pockets this very day to help maintain the Committee and strengthen
its position. This is the right time for doing so. Mr. Gokhale will not
be in England for ever. If the Committee is not put on a sound basis
now, we shall have no such opportunity again. This is, therefore, the
immediate duty of those who will not be going to gaol and we hope
that help will be forthcoming from all the three places, Natal, the Cape
and the Transvaal. Making up their minds, if satyagraha starts, to
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

115

provide for the families and look after the affairs of those who go to
gaol, they must begin the necessary preparation right now. With that
end in view, we must find out who are likely to go to gaol and fix up
simultaneously the arrangements for helping them. If this is done, we
shall have an exciting fight this time, one which will surpass the
previous one and which will be recognized as on a higher plane.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 3-5-1913

78. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XVIII]
SOME REMEDIES: 1. AIR

We have considered how to keep good health, on what it
depends and how to conserve it. If all men always followed the rules
of health and observed unbroken celibacy, the chapters that follow
would not be necessary because such men cannot possibly suffer any
physical or mental illness. But such persons are rare indeed. There is
hardly one so fortunate as never to have fallen ill. The average person
is perpetually ill with some sickness or other. Such a person will enjoy
good health in the measure in which he follows the rules set out in the
first part. If, moreover, he knows some simple remedies, he will not get
into a panic and rush to a doctor or hakim1 when he does fall ill. It is
with this in mind that the chapters which follow are written.
We have seen that fresh air is the first essential for good health:
it is also an invaluable cure for certain ailments. For instance, if a man
whose joints have become stiff is treated with steam, there will be
immediate perspiration and the joints will be relieved. This method of
applying steam is known as Turkish bath.
If a person whose body is burning with high temperature is
made to sleep naked in the open air, the temperature will immediately
come down. He will feel easy and, if he is covered with a blanket when
his body has become cool, he will begin to sweat and the fever will
disappear. There is a notion among us that, when anyone has high
1

116

Physician practising the Unani system of medicine
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fever, all the windows and doors should be closed, even if that should
make the place unbearably hot for the patient, that the latter’s head
and ears should be wrapped up, and that he should be covered with
heavy blankets. This is an entirely wrong notion. The practice causes
the patient acute discomfort and makes him weak. It often happens
that the patient, having been wrapped up in this way, perspires
profusely and the thermometer shows a lower temperature, but the
patient is greatly weakened. In fever brought on by heat, no one
should be afraid to take the air treatment described above. The patient
will immediately feel the benefit and no harm whatever will come of
it. One should only make sure that the patient does not shiver when
lying exposed. If he feels cold, it means that his discomfort [from
heat] had not been too severe to bear after all. In case the patient is
not in a condition to lie naked out of doors, there can be no harm
whatever if he is made to sleep covered up in the open air.
A change of air is a highly effective remedy for prolonged fever
or any other sickness. The practice of going for a change of climate
is, as a matter of fact, part of the “air treatment”. There is also a
custom, among some, of changing houses. Many believe that a house
which is never free from illness must be a haunted one. This seems to
be mere superstition. The so-called haunting is in fact just polluted
air. Consequently, the change of house means change of air, and that
is in itself a great advantage. The air we breathe has so close a bearing
on the condition of our bodies that the slightest change in it is bound
to affect us for better or worse. The rich can go abroad in search of
good climate. A poor man can also benefit by going to a neighbouring town or even by a change of residence. Sometimes a patient
improves merely by being moved from one room to another. It is
superfluous to caution here that on all such occasions the air in the
room, house or town to which one goes should be better than that left
behind. Sickness caused by a humid atmosphere will not disappear by
a change to a more humid place. Sometimes no benefit is derived
from a change of air, the reason being that the change is made without
a knowledge of the principle involved. Sometimes health does not
improve because, though the change has been to a better climate,
other necessary precautions have not been taken, with the result that
the benefit derived from a good climate is lost.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

117

I would request the reader to compare this chapter with the
one in Part I devoted to the subject of “air”. 1 The earlier chapter
explai-ned the relation between air and good health and it contained a
gen-eral discussion on air. In this chapter, the therapeutic value of air
is considered. Read in conjunction with this chapter, the earlier one
will be better understood.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 3-5-1913

79 LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

May 5, 1913
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

My analysis of your position reacted upon me and made me
feel that if my remarks were sincere (and they were that absolutely) I
could not possibly let you spend on my behalf without being guilty of
having participated in a fraud upon yourself, your creditors and in a
fraud upon yourself, your creditors and myself. My resolve was a
most natural consequence of my discovery long ago made but
realized only during our last communion. No matter what others may
say, I should defend the position before all that you are today in an
insolvent position. To fully grasp the truth is to avert the crisis and
make yourself solvent. Your condition is not hopeless or helpless. But
every insolvent is not necessarily helpless. If he can enter into a
composition with his creditors he can pay 20/- in the pound. But at the
moment he has not the money to pay his creditors and is therefore
insolvent. Such is undoubtedly your position.
All the same, you are bound to send the £200 to your brotherin-law. Only I wish it would be the final lesson of your life. Your
position does not warrant the gift. It is no use calling it a loan nor can
1

Vide “General Knowledge about Health (-I)”, 1-2-1913; “General Knowledge
about Health (-V)”, 1-2-1913 & “General Knowledge about Health (-VII), 15-2-1913.

118

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

it do any good to your brother-in-law. But a promise is a promise and
you should send the money. Will you then seriously set to work so
that your position becomes sound, i.e., you can confidently say, ‘I
have no debts I cannot pay on demand without a loss’. To arrive at
that stage, I feel that a firm adoption of the propositions suggested by
me is necessary. That alone will save [you]. And the very effort will
provide you with an occupation which is bound to raise you.
Now for your modifications. I must say I do not like them but
you must be the final judge. If that is the utmost you can do, then let
that stand. I return the paper. Anyway, please resolve quickly and act
promptly.
Please let me know if you have examined your tools. If you
find any missing and you want them, please let me know.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

80. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR1
[JOHANNESBURG ,

After May 7, 1913]
I beg to thank you for your letter of the 7th instant, in reply to
my telegram2 of the 4th idem.
My Committee fears that the Government reading of the Searle
judgment is different from that of the Indian community —you say
that, in my telegram, I “refer to the judgment recently delivered by
Mr. Justice Searle, in relation to the question of marriages which have
been solemnized by rites or customs which recognize polygamy.”
I would respectfully point out that my Association has never
understood that the Searle judgment dealt with the question of poly1
This was signed by Sonja Schlesin, Secretary, Transvaal Indian Women’s
Association, and, presumably, drafted by Gandhiji.
2
Vide the following item.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

119

gamous marriages. Justice Searle’s pronouncement, in the humble
opinion of my Committee, is unequivocal “the whole question in the
case was whether a wife, married by Mahomedan custom, was a wife
within the meaning of the Immigration Act.” And what applies to
marriages by Mahomedan custom would apply also to marriages by
Hindu custom or to marriages by Zoroastrian custom or to marriages
consecrated according to the customs of any religion save the
Christian, which were not registered before a Marriage Officer. The
question of polygamy has, therefore, I respectfully submit, been quite
gratuitously introduced.
My Committee trusts that the Government will recognize the
great urgency of the question raised by it and that the laws of the
Union regarding marriages will be amended during the present
session so as to restore the former practice of recognizing in law
Indian marriages.
Indian Opinion, 24-5-1913

81. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Thursday [May 8, 1913] 1
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I do not want to keep you in suspense. Had I had the time I
would have given you the Devdas incident earlier. Even now I shall be
brief. We have all only just returned from Verulam after the Templeopening ceremony. Devdas ate stolen lemons at Inanda Falls although
he had promised not to do such a thing again. When he was faced with
the fact, he was inclined to be naughty and sharp. This grieved me
much. And his last defence broke me entirely. He said he did not
immediately confess his guilt as he was afraid of being hit by me, as if
I am in the habit of hitting boys. And so I felt that by way of lesson to
1

Gandhiji opened the Hindu temple at Verulam, on May 8, 1913, a
Thursday.

120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

him I would deposit a few slaps on my cheeks which I did and then
felt the grief so much that I wept bitterly. More later.
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

82. INDIAN WOMEN AS PASSIVE RESISTERS
The following telegram has been addressed by the Transvaal
Indian Women’s Association to the Hon’ble, the Minister of the
Interior:
Committee Transvaal Indian Women’s Association has
carefully considered position, in the light of the Searle judgment, of Indian women resident in South Africa or entitled to
enter therein with their husbands possessing rights of resi-dence
in the Union, and has come to the conclusion that the honour of
Indian womanhood is affected by that judgment. Committee
therefore respectfully trusts that the Government will be pleased
to amend the law so as to recognize the validity of Indian
marriages which have been duly consecrated accor-ding to the
religious customs of the parties and are recognized as legal in
India. I am also to inform the Government that the earnestness
of the members of the Association is such that, if the
Government cannot see its way to comply with the request, they
would offer passive resistance and in common with the male
members of the community suffer imprisonment rather than
suffer the indignity to which in their opinion the Searle
Judgment subjects them.1
S ONJA S CHLESIN
HONORARY S ECRETARY

We understand that the above telegram was sent after over forty
Indian ladies of Johannesburg, professing the Hindu, the Mahomedan
1

This telegram was dated May 4, 1913. What follows appeared as a “Note” by
the Editor, Indian Opinion.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

121

and the Christian faiths, had decided upon sending it. Most of them
have emphatically declared their intention of braving imprisonment,
should the Government decline to grant their prayer. The readers of
Indian Opinion are aware of the fact that the Honorary Secretary
(Miss Sonja Schlesin) is not an Indian but a European. She has made
common cause with us now for a long time, by way of protest against
the prevailing anti-Asiatic prejudice on the part of the majority of the
Europeans of South Africa. She has been the Honorary Secretary of
the Indian Women’s Association ever since its establishment. Miss
Schlesin, whilst she is in love with her work, is not in love with the
official position she occupies. She considers that the office should
rightly belong to an Indian woman. But she recognizes that her Indian
sisters have not that knowledge of the English language and of South
African politics which is required in a Secretary of an Association like
the one which she has been guiding and serving so long. Miss
Schlesin has fitted herself for the task before her by being in Mr.
Gandhi’s office and, therefore, in close contact with the passive
resistance movement since its inception in l 906. Miss Schlesin, like
the male European workers in South Africa for the Indian cause,
demonstrates the unity of human nature, whether residing in a
brown-skinned or a white-skinned body, and also that South Africa is
not devoid of disinterested souls.
Indian Opinion, 10-5-1913

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

83. THE WOMEN’S RESOLUTION
The remarkable resolution of the Indian women of Johannesburg on the marriage question, that has been agitating our countrymen for the past few weeks, marks an interesting development of the
passive resistance campaign. The resolution has been duly wired1 to
Mr. Fischer, and, if the Minister still persists in ignoring the grievance
created by the Searle judgment, he will do so with his eyes open. He
may rest assured that Indian women are not dying to go to gaol, nor
do the male members of the community contemplate with equanimity
the prospect of their women-folk being imprisoned. If, therefore,
Indian women become passive resisters, they must have what is, to
them at any rate, a very serious grievance. We congratulate our plucky
sisters who have dared to fight the Government rather than submit to
the insult offered by the Searle judgment. They will cover themselves
and the land of their birth, as, indeed, of their adoption, with glory, if
they remain true to their resolve to the end.2 We know that they fully
recognize what their wire means.
We hope, too, that the male members of the population will
realize their own duty in the matter. It is largely in their hands to end
the struggle at an earlier stage. “The larger the number of passive
resisters, the quicker the termination of the struggle” is a mathematical formula.
Indian Opinion, 10-5-1913

1

Vide the preceding item.
How the pioneer women passive resisters acquitted themselves in the
struggle is narrated in Satyagraha in South Africa, Ch. XL.
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

123

84. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XIX]
2. WATER TREATMENTS

Air does its work invisibly, so that we cannot fully realize the
efficacy of air treatments. But the properties of water and the effects it
produces are immediately apparent and we can, therefore, readily see
how admirably it works.
Water treatments by steam are more or less familiar to all. We
give a steam-bath to a patient suffering from fever. A bad headache
can often be relieved by the use of steam. If joints are affected by
rheumatism and it is desired to give the patient quick relief, treatment
with steam, followed immediately by a cold bath, proves highly
beneficial. When there are boils on the skin, too many of them, we
cannot apply ointment or poultice to all of them, but they soften in no
time if treated with steam.
When exhausted, if one takes a hot bath followed by a cold
shower, one feels light in body and the fatigue disappears. If anyone
suffering from insomnia takes a steam-bath, followed by a cold
shower, he will, more often than not, soon fall asleep.
In most of these cases hot water can be substituted for steam. It
is not necessary, therefore, to make any distinction between the two. If
one suffers from stomach-ache, it can be quickly relieved by hot water
fomentation. This can be done by placing a bottle or other vessel,
filled with boiling water, on a cloth over the abdomen. Sometimes it
becomes necessary to cause vomiting. This can be done by drinking
plenty of hot water. One suffering from constipation can get relief by
drinking hot water when retiring or in the morning immediately after
brushing the teeth. Sir Gordon Spring, a former Prime Minister of the
Cape, enjoyed excellent health. When asked what it was chiefly due to,
he replied that he drank a glass of hot water the last thing at night and
the first thing in the morning. That was, he said, the secret of his good
health. Some people pass a motion only after drinking tea and in their
ignorance give the credit to tea. Actually the tea is harmful: it is the
hot water in it that produces the effect.
124

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

There is a special kind of tub for a steam-bath, but this is not
really necessary. A spirit or kerosene stove or small wood or coal fire
should be placed under a cane chair or wooden stool. A pot of water
should be covered and placed on the fire. A counterpane or blanket
should then be spread over the chair and so arranged over the front
that the patient seated on it should not feel too severely the heat from
the fire or steam. The patient should be wrapped in a cotton rug or
blanket and seated in the chair. The lid should then be slipped off the
water pot so that the steam reaches the patient. It is our custom also to
cover the latter’s head but this is not necessary. Heat generated in the
body rises to the head and drops of perspiration form on the face. If
the patient is not in a condition to get out of the sick-bed; he may be
laid on a cane couch or iron bedstead and given steam-treatment. In
that case, also, the blankets should be so arranged that heat and steam
do not escape. Care must be taken to see that the patient does not
sustain burns and the blankets or other things do not catch fire.
Should the patient happen to be extremely weak, one should hesitate
to give him steam-treatment, for if steam has its benefits, it can have
harmful effects too. After taking a steam-bath, the patient always feels
weak. The weakness does not last long but the treatment, if taken
habitually, is bound to have an exhausting effect on the patient. Steam
should, therefore, be used with great caution. It may also be applied
locally. For instance, in a case of headache it is not necessary to steam
the whole body. Water should be boiled in a narrow-necked vessel or
kettle and the forehead held over the opening. The head should be
partially covered with a cloth so that the steam may reach the head
through the nostrils. If the nose is blocked, such inhalation will give
immediate relief. If an inflammation is confined to a particular spot, it
may be treated by applying steam to the affected part only.
The good effects of hot water and steam are fairly widely
known, but few seem to know the value of cold water. To tell the truth,
the beneficial properties of cold water even surpass those of hot water.
It may be said that on most people cold water has a stimulating effect.
Even the weakest patient can be given cold water treatment. For fever,
smallpox, rash and other skin affections, wrapping up with cotton
sheets soaked in cold water is highly efficacious. The effect seems
almost miraculous and anyone can test it without the slightest risk. In
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

125

cases of giddiness or delirium, a piece of cloth soaked in ice-water and
placed over the head gives great relief. If one has had no motion, it
may be possible to get relief by applying cloth soaked in ice-cold
water to the abdomen. Those who have wet dreams often get relief if
they sleep every day with a cold wet bandage tied over the lower
abdomen. The application of an ice pack stops bleeding in any part of
the body. When the nose is bleeding, immediate stoppage is brought
about by dashing a lot of very cold water on the head. One suffering
from any disease of the nose, or from cold or headache derives great
benefit from drawing up water through the nostrils twice a day. One
nostril should be closed, water drawn in through the other and then
ejected through the first. Water may also be drawn in through both the
nostrils and ejected through the mouth. If the nose is otherwise clean
and some of the water passes from the nostrils into the stomach, it
does no harm. It is an excellent habit to clean the nose by drawing in
water through the nostrils. Those who cannot manage this may do so
by using a douche, but anyone can master the technique of drawing
water up through the nostrils after a few attempts. Everyone should try
to learn it since a headache can often be cured instantly by this easy
method. If the nose gives out an offensive smell, for that, too, this is an
effective remedy. Some persons suffer from a running nose; they will
find the method of drawing water in through the nostrils an unfailing
remedy for their condition.
Many people are reluctant to take an enema, and some even
argue that it causes weakness. This is a wrong notion. There is no
better method of immediate relief from constipation. In various
conditions, where other remedies are ineffective, an enema provides
relief. It empties the bowels completely and prevents accumulation of
new poisons in the body. Anyone who suffers from gas, flatulence or
any complaint brought about by poor digestion may take two pounds
of water by enema, and so have an immediate rest. There is a book on
this subject. Its author had tried many remedies, but failed to cure his
dyspepsia. He had grown extremely weak and anaemic. With the use
of the enema, his appetite improved and, in a short time he was in
excellent health. Complaints like jaundice can be immediately cured
by means of enemas. If this treatment has to be prolonged, it is
advisable to use cold water, as hot water may cause weakness; this,
126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

however, is not to be blamed on the enema as such.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 10-5-1913

85. LETTER TO BHAVANI DAYAL
INDIAN OPINION

EDITOR
H. S. L. P OLAK
P HOENIX,
NATAL ,

May 12, 1913
DEAR SHRI BHAVANI DAYAL1 ,

I have your letter. The whole of it is not worth printing, for it
contains no new fact or argument. Therefore only the portion commending satyagraha will be published in Indian Opinion.2 I do not
think it worthwhile to translate it into English. Your article is not for
English readers. I shall send you a copy of Indian Opinion.
If the Swami3 is invited to the Hindu Conference or if it seeks his
support in any way, no sensible Hindu can participate in it.
Bande Mataram from

MOHANDAS
From the handwritten original in Hindi signed by Gandhiji: C. W. 5743
Courtesy: Vishnudutta Dayal

1

Edited the Hindi section of Indian Opinion for some time from January 28,
1914; President of Indian Young Men’s Association; was later known as Bhavani
Dayal Sannyasi.
2
This was published in the issue of 17-5-1913.
3
The reference appears to be to Swami Shankeranand, who visited South
Africa during 1908-10, and was again there at this time.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

127

86. LETTER TO DRUMMOND CHAPLIN
[PHOENIX,

May 14, 1913]
DEAR MR. CHAPLIN,

Mr. Fischer’s statement is certainly extraordinary.1 The Imperial
Government could never have seen the full text of the Bill. As before,
in my opinion, the Union Government have merely cabled home a
summary giving their interpretation of the debatable clauses. If so,
they have obtained the Imperial Government’s consent under false
pretences. Be that as it may, I venture to state that if any of the
existing rights as set forth in my letter2 are disturbed and if the legal
status as to marriage is not restored as it existed before the Searle
judgment, passive resistance will undoubtedly revive and this time it is
bound to be of a general character, i.e., it cannot be confined to the
Transvaal. You may also have noticed that Indian women will actively
participate in the struggle if the marriage question is not settled. I trust
you do not mind my writing frankly in this matter.
May I thank you and the Unionist leaders for their
sympathetic speeches at the second reading and may I hope that the
same vigilance will be exercised by you and them during the
1

Moving the Immigrants’ Restriction Bill for the second reading on
April 30, Fischer had strongly defended the proposed legislation and the
various other measures adopted by the South African Government to control Asiatic
influx. Indian Opinion reported Fischer to have stated: “ . . . complications had
arisen through the coloured population in their midst, and thus they had, perhaps,
to be more careful in regard to those who would come in, who were not of that
civilization which they had in the country, and not best fitted to promote the best
interests of South Africa. . . . With Europeans they in this country could assimilate.
With Indians they could not. The large introduction of Indians into this country would
give rise to grave economic, moral, social and political evils. . . . It was the
intention of South Africa to exclude Asiatics. . . .” On the marriage question, he was
reported to have said: “ . . . what was recognized was that the marriage was according
to the Roman-Dutch law, and according to the civilization to which South Africans
belonged. That they should upset the code of marriage laws of this country was not to
be acceded to. . . .”
2
Vide “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 15-4-1913.

128

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

remaining stages of the Bill? I cannot help feeling that, if the
Government will not grant all our demands, the best solution will be to
amend the Transvaal law.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5781

87. THE SECOND READING
In spite of the unanimous opposition of the Unionist Party, the
Immigration Bill has been read a second time without a division. The
result would be considered astounding if we did not know the ways of
the Botha Ministry. The Right Hon’ble Mr. Fischer has bought his
second reading by promising to consider favourably the suggestions
made by the Opposition for improving the Bill and by telling the
House that he had secured the general approval of the Imperial
Government for his measure. We may expect lively debates and
drastic amendments during the committee stage. But this may not
serve our purpose in the least degree. Nothing but a total acceptance
of our demands can satisfy us, and this not because we do not
compromise but because there can be no question of compromise on
points of existence or honour. Passive Resisters are under a vow not to
accept anything in satisfaction of their demands if it disturbs existing
rights. By their very constitution they are precluded from bargaining
away the rights of others in order to save themselves the sufferings of
imprisonment.
From Mr. Fischer’s language, it is clear that he wants to egg on
the Europeans of South Africa to rise against us, and us to offer
passive resistance. Though the majority of the speakers during the
debate spoke against his Bill and advised him to placate passive
resisters, he gratuitously mentioned that the threat of passive resistance
might make the Government to come to “plain terms”. We wish they
would. We certainly do not want ambiguity. And in pleading for general terms in an Immigration Bill, we do not countenance a subterfuge,
as it has been called, but we ask for a continuance of the excellent part
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

129

of the British Constitution which requires that, however persistent a
bad practice may be, it shall not be incorporated into the law. In Lord
Ampthill’s words, theory should be sound, though one may fail to
carry it out in practice. In theory, there is no such thing as a straight
line that can be drawn, but because we draw a line that is only fairly
but not quite straight, we are not supposed to have resorted to a
subterfuge by having still the true, though theoretical, definition in
view. To keep our theory right is to obey the law of our higher nature;
to depart from it in practice is to concede the weakness of human
nature. If, therefore, the Government wish to depart from the theory
of the British Constitution to which they owe their very existence, they
are welcome to do so; only, then, they will not have used “plain terms” but they will have avowed their enmity to the origin of their existence. And passive resisters who still cling to the beautiful vision of
that Constitution are prepared to fight for making it a reality or die in
the attempt.
Indian Opinion, 17-5-1913

88. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XX]
2. WATER TREATMENTS (CONTINUED)

After numerous experiments, a German named Kuhne has
discovered that certain water treatments are most effective in a number
of ailments. His book on this subject has been translated into many
languages. Translations are available in India also. His thesis is that the
stomach is the source of all disease. If there is excessive heat in the
stomach, it erupts by way of boils on the skin or rheumatism or some
such trouble, or as fever, causing the whole body to become hot.
There were many before Kuhne to write on water treatments. There is
a very old book called Water treatments. But no one before Kuhne
had laid the same emphasis as he did on the basic identity of diseases.
No one had pointed out that all ailments had their origin in the
stomach. It is not necessary for us to accept Kuhne’s thesis as gospel
truth, nor need we go into the details of the matter. But it seems quite
certain that, in a large number of cases, Kuhne’s diagnosis and
130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

treatment are correct. Thousands have found this by experience. The
late magistrate of Durban, Mr. Titan, was struck down by paralysis
after an attack of tetanus. Having tried various treatments without
success, he was advised by someone to see Kuhne. He went to him, was
completely cured and lived in Durban for many years after his return.
He always advised people to try Kuhne’s treatments. There is a clinic
in Natal which gives his treatments. It is near Sweetwaters station. This
is only one instance of its popularity; one can find many others.
Kuhne says that the excessive heat in the stomach can be
removed by cooling, and for this purpose he advises a bath which will
cool the stomach and the adjacent areas of the body. He has invented
a special tin bath to make the process easy, but we can do without it.
Oval tin tubs of 36 inches, more or less as may suit the patient, are
readily available; one of these will do for a Kuhne bath. Three
quarters of the tub should be filled with cold water and the patient
should be placed in it so that his feet rest outside on a board and the
upper part of the trunk also remains above the water-line. Only the
portion from the navel to the thigh should be submerged. The patient
must be naked in water. If he feels cold, the upper part of his trunk
and his feet may be covered with blankets or he or she may wear a
shirt or `a blouse, keeping it out of the water. This bath should be
taken in a room which can let in light, air and sunshine and, in fact,
does let them in while the bath is proceeding. After seating himself in
the tub, the patient should rub his abdomen, under the water, with a
rough towel or get it rubbed by an attendant. This kind of bath can be
taken for 5 to 30 minutes or longer. Sometimes the relief is immediate. If the patient is suffering from gas, wind begins to pass or he
begins to belch. If he has fever, his temperature is bound to fall by
one or two degrees 5 minutes after the bath has commenced. He will
have a free motion. An exhausted person will feel refreshed. One
suffering from insomnia will feel relaxed and be able to sleep. One
who is excessively drowsy becomes alert and lively. The reason why
such seemingly opposite effects are produced has already been stated.
Lethargy and insomnia are different results produced by the same
cause; they are only apparently opposites. Both diarrhoea and constipation arc similarly the results of indigestion. Some get diarrhoea
while others get constipation. The bath has a highly beneficial effect
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

131

on both conditions. Very old cases of piles are cured by this bath
treatment in conjunction with correct dieting. If a person feels nausea,
he will probably be cured immediately he starts the bath. The weak
grow strong with it. Many have been cured of their rheumatism by
this means. The bath is also excellent for haemorrhage and useful in
cases of blood-poisoning. Anyone having a severe headache will get
immediate relief with this bath. Kuhne himself thought that his baths
were invaluable even in such terrible diseases as cancer. Pregnant
women will have easier deliveries if they take these baths. It is a treatment that can be taken by children, by the young and the aged, by
men and women.
There is another way of taking this bath which is unfailingly
effective in certain ailments. It is called the wet sheet pack, which in
Gujarati means “a bandage of wet cloth”. The manner of treatment is
as follows: Place a table or low seat, long enough for the patient to lie
on full-length, if possible in the open air. Arrange on this four or
more blankets according to the weather, so that they hang down on all
sides. Spread over them two clean bed-sheets, long and thick, which
have been soaked in cold water and wrung out. Place a pillow under
the blankets for the head. The patient should then be stripped of all
clothing, except a small handkerchief or cloth round his waist which
may be retained if desired. He should be laid flat on his back
between the sheets arranged as above, the arms hanging own and the
[lower] sheet and blankets wrapped round him from both sides, one
over the other. The covering at the bottom should be carefully
wrapped round his feet. If there is sunshine, a wet cloth should be
placed on his head and face, leaving the nose uncovered in all cases.
The patient will feel a momentary chill which will be immediately
followed by a feeling of relief and comfortable warmth. He may
remain in this condition for 5 minutes to an hour or more. By and by,
the patient becomes so hot that he perspires. Frequently, he falls
asleep at this stage. When he comes out of the wet sheets, he must immediately have a cold bath. This treatment is highly effective in many
skin diseases. Eczema, ringworm, pimples, chickenpox, smallpox, simple boils, fever, etc., yield quickly to the “wet sheet pack”. However
severe the attack, smallpox can, in most cases, be cured by this
treatment. An attack of rash is cured by taking one or two baths. The
132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

technique of taking or arranging this bath is easily learnt and
everyone will discover its effectiveness in experience. During the bath,
the dirt from the skin is deposited on the wet sheet. The latter should,
there-fore, never be used again by the same or another patient until it
has been thoroughly washed in boiling water.
Finally, there is one point to be kept in mind about these watertreatments, that, if the bath is taken without proper attention to diet
and exercise, it can never have full effect or may have no effect at all.
If a man suffering from arthritis takes the Kuhne bath or “wet sheet
pack” but eats unsuitable food, does not breathe fresh air, lives in
dirty surroundings and takes no exercise, he cannot hope to benefit
from the treatment alone. It can be of help only if other rules of
health are duly observed. There is no doubt whatever that, if they are,
water treatment will help the patient to a most speedy recovery.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 17-5-1913

89. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR1
[PHOENIX,]

May 19, 1913 2
SIR,

I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 9th instant in reply to my letter of the 30th ultimo.
I observe that the Hon’ble the Minister resents any reference to
passive resistance. 3 I am sorry but the reference as a statement of facts
was inevitable. There was no desire to use any threats. Revival of
1
The letter was sent over the signature of A. M. Cachalia. The
correspondence was published in Indian Opinion, 24-5-1913.
2
This is the date assigned by Indian Opinion; the draft is undated.
3
The Secretary of the Interior, in his letter dated May 9, had written: “It is a
matter of great regret to Mr. Fischer that, in referring to the draft Immigration Bill,
your Association and other representative bodies in the Indian community have seen
fit to threaten to revive the passive resistance movement.”

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

133

passive resistance is no threat but a certainty, should the Government
unfortunately find it impossible or be reluctant to carry out the sacred
promise made by the predecessor, in office, of the Hon’ble the
Minister. The promise was made in the name of the Government and
in its name it was repeated last year. Everyone of the points raised by
the Association arises out of the terms of the provisional settlement.
Moreover, I am constrained to point out that the policy hitherto
pursued by the Government in administering the existing legislation
affecting the community represented by my Association is wholly at
variance with the “desire” expressed in your letter not to treat that
community in any but an entirely fair manner! My countrymen
consider not only not fair but harsh and unjust the treatment meted to
wives who wish to join their husbands in South Africa or minor
children who wish to join their parents, or to those, as in Natal, who
want to re-enter on the strength of previous residence or to those, as in
the Cape, who try to re-enter after the expiry of the period mentioned
in their permits of absence or to those who want temporary permits to
enter the Transvaal. It may be added that, if the community in the
Transvaal has not been altogether extinguished under the combined
effect of the Gold Laws and the Townships Act, it has to thank the
Supreme Court and not the Government who so ungenerously
attempted to read a meaning into the Acts which they did not bear.
Even the marriage trouble is due entirely to the deliberately hostile
policy of the Government. They could have avoided the ruling of the
Court by simply allowing the only wife of the applicant in South
Africa to join her husband. It will thus be seen that any pressure that
could be put upon the Government by the European community
cannot, in my humble opinion, result in greater cruelty being
practised upon my community, short of its utter annihilation. And if
passive resistance, i.e., self-inflicted suffering of my community,
should prompt measures to destroy its existence in South Africa, I
doubt not that it will prefer such destruction to a destruction of its
honour, its religious sentiments and its self-respect.
I have, [etc.,]
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5755

134

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

90. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR1
[PHOENIX,]

May 19, 1913
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 9th instant, in reply to mine of the 14th ultimo2 regarding the
validity of Indian marriages.
My Committee had, it was thought, made it clear that, in its
request, it had not raised the question of polygamy, which could be
treated on its merits. What the Searle judgment does is to disregard
marriages contracted in India or in South Africa in accordance with
the rites prescribed by Indian faiths. I beg to inform the Hon’ble the
Minister that the religious ceremonies in India do not mention
polygamy, nor do all Indian faiths necessarily recognize polygamy.
All my Association asks for is that monogamous marriages celebrated
in India or in South Africa according to the ceremonies prescribed by
the great Indian faiths may be lawfully recognized, as they were
before the Searle judgment. Where my countrymen bring or have
more than one wife the indulgence promised in the Government communication may be exercised till the time is ripe for legal recognition
of such marriages.
I do respectfully hope that the position taken up by my
Association has now been made clear.
Indian Opinion, 24-5-1913

1
2

This letter was signed by A. M. Cachalia.
Vide “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 14-4-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

135

91. THE BILL
The Immigration Bill promises to become the law of the land, if
one may judge from the considerable progress made by it in Committee since Monday last. Mr. Fischer, in spite of his unsatisfactory letter
to Mr. Cachalia which we reproduce this week, has seen the error of
his ways and actually himself moved amendments which, in his telegraphic and other communications, he evinced no desire to do. The
amendments include the restoration of the existing rights of inter-provincial migration under the Cape and the Natal laws, also of the rights
of domiciled Indians whose right to return after three years’ absence
was threatened. The exact effect of the amendments it is impossible to
ascertain unless we have the full text thereof before us.
Mr. Alexander, who has been working so disinterestedly and
zealously for all causes which are neglected or unpopular owing to the
colour prejudice, moved a reasonable amendment which would
probably have met our demand on the marriage law, and was met with
a fishy and misleading reply from the Minister, although Mr. Chaplin
supported Mr. Alexander in a well-informed speech. The Minister
threw dust in the eyes of the Members by stating that we had declined
to accept a Marriage Officer as we wanted polygamy recognized in
South Africa. It has been made perfectly clear that the Searle
judgment invalidates every non-Christian Indian marriage if it is not
registered. No appointment of a Marriage Officer can meet this
difficulty unless Indians are to be expected to register existing
marriages and thus impliedly admit their illegality prior to
registration—a position which no Indian would humiliate himself by
accepting. Nor would such appointment meet the difficulty of wives
who may come from India. The Transvaal Marriage Law provides for
legal recognition of European marriages, no matter how celebrated in
Europe in the following terms:
All marriages entered into outside this state by persons of whom one or
both were not at the time of entering into such marriage resident within this
state shall be recognized and considered to be equally valid in this state as in
the country where such marriages shall have been solemnized, and should the

136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

legality of such marriages be questioned by any heirsor other interested
parties, the same may be proved in any court of law by producing the marriage
registers or certificates, if it should be customary to keep such registers in
such country, or to grant certificates thereof, or by producing duly authenticated copies thereof, or by witnesses, or any other means of proof admissible
by law in all other ordinary cases.

Presumably, such marriages may, therefore, well be even
polygamous; they may be performed according to any rites. Why
should not the same recognition be vouchsafed to Indian marriages?
Moreover, Mr. Fischer has evidently not studied Mr. Justice
Gardiner’s recent judgment. According to that judgment, an Indian
wife, unless her marriage is registered, is not exempt from liability to
give evidence against her husband. Here, at least, there was not even a
suspicion of the question of polygamy arising. But the fact is that Mr.
Fischer does not scruple as to how he misleads the House when he has
to deal with an awkward situation.
So it may be that the Immigration Bill now in Committee may
come out of it satisfying all our demands but the one about marriage.
Mr. Fischer proposes to deal with the marriage difficulty
administratively. In the words of The Natal Mercury parliamentary
correspondent, “the objection to the administrative solution is, of
course, that it reduces the title of the domiciled Indian to import a wife
from a right to a favour—one, moreover, which is dependent on the
discretion or caprice of an official”. We warn Mr. Fischer that, even if
this question is the only one left unsolved, revival of passive resistance
is a certainty.
Indian Opinion, 24-5-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

137

92. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XXI]
3. EARTH CURES

We have learnt something about water treatments. In some cases,
earth cures, have shown even more spectacular results. Our bodies are
made up largely of earth; it is, therefore, not surprising that earth
should have an effect on us. All people regard earth as something
sacred. The ground is coated with mud to destroy odours, earth is
sprinkled over refuse, dirty hands are cleansed with earth, the private
parts can also be wiped clean with earth. Yogis coat their bodies with
mud. The original inhabitants of this country [Africa] apply mud to
boils. We filter water through sand or earth in order to purify it.
Finally, dead bodies buried in earth will not pollute the air. Such, we
observe, is the undoubted excellence of earth. From this we may make
a fair guess that earth, probably, has some highly beneficial qualities
peculiar to itself.
Just as Kuhne gave much thought to water and said many useful
things about it, another German named Juste has written about earth.
He goes to the extent of saying that even incurable diseases may yield
to earth treatment. He reports how once, in a neighbouring village, a
man bitten by a snake and even given up as dead by many was
brought to him on someone’s advice. Juste placed him under earth
and the man soon regained consciousness. This is not an impossible
thing to have happened. Juste had no reason to tell a lie. It is obvious
that great heat will be generated in anyone buried under earth. We
have no means of discovering how the invisible bacteria in the earth
act upon the body; it does seem, however, that earth has the power to
absorb poisons. By citing Juste’s illustration, it is not of course
intended to suggest that every case of snake-bite can be cured by
earth treatment, but it should certainly be tried on such occasions. The
suggestion that earth should be used for bee and scorpion stings is
easier to accept. I have myself tried it on such stings and found that
immediate relief followed. For this purpose, a stiff paste made of earth
soaked in cold water is applied on the affected part, which is then
bandaged.
138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The illustrations that follow are from my personal experience. A
patient suffering from dysentery was cured in two or three days by the
application of a mud pack to his abdomen. Immediate relief has been
obtained by this method in cases of headache. Inflammation of the
eyes is cured by placing a mud pack just over the affected eyes.
Swelling brought about by blows is relieved. For a number of years I
could keep well only if I took fruit salt, etc. I learnt of the efficacy of
earth treatment in 1904, since when I have never had to take fruit salt.
For anyone suffering from constipation, the application of mud packs
to the abdomen is found to be highly beneficial. Stomach-ache also is
relieved in this way. Diarrhoea can also be cured by a mud pack. High
fever is reduced in an hour or two by tying mud packs to the stomach
and the forehead. Boils, the itch, eczema, etc., often yield to treatment
by mud pack. However, once pus is formed in the boils, mud packs
are found to be of little use. In the case of burns, the immediate
application of mud pack reduces pain and prevents swelling. Piles
yield to the mud pack. As a result of frost, the hand and feet often
become red and swollen. Mud packs are a sure remedy for this
condition. Mud has been found to be good for eczema. For pain in
the joints, the application of mud brings immediate relief.
From these numerous experiments with mud packs, I have come
to the conclusion that as a house-hold remedy mud is invaluable.
Every kind of earth is not equally efficacious. Red earth has
been found to be particularly effective. The earth to be used should
always be dug out from a clean spot. Earth containing a mixture of
dung, etc., should not be used. It should not be excessively sticky.
Earth which is partly sandy and partly sticky is excellent. It should be
altogether free from grass or roots. It is sometimes advisable to strain
the earth through a fine sieve. It must always be mixed with cold water
and the paste should be of the consistency of dough. It should
normally be placed in a clean unstarched piece of cloth and applied
like a poultice to the affected part. The pack should be removed
before the mud is about to dry up. A pack usually lasts for two or
three hours. Mud from a used pack should not be used again. The
cloth, however, may be used after washing, provided there was no pus
on it. When mud is applied to the abdomen, a warm cloth should be
placed over the pack and then the whole thing tied with a bandage.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

139

One should have a tin of earth handy so that it can be used whenever
necessary and one does not have to go hunting for it in emergency. In
case of scorpion stings, etc., the earlier the mud is applied the better.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 24-5-1913

93. TELEGRAM TO DRUMMOND CHAPLIN AND OTHERS
[PHOENIX,

May 24, 1913] 1
DRUMMOND C HAPLIN
P ATRICK DUNCAN
S IR DAVID HUNTER
THEO S CHREINER
R IGHT HON ’BLE MERRIMAN
MORRIS ALEXANDER
P ARLIAMENT HOUSE
C APE TOWN
MINISTER’S

STATEMENT

COGNITION

POLYGAMY

ONLY

LEGAL

RIAGES

RECOGNITION

CELEBRATED

POINTMENT

INDIANS

MARRIAGES

AND

SOUTH

AFRICA

1871

SPECIALLY

STOP

SIMILAR

CASE

STOP

MENTS
TECTION
AFRICA

PROVISION

RIGHTS
UNDER

DRAW

LEGAL

INDIANS

SOUTH
CAN

THEN

ATTENTION

COMMITTEE
ENTER

CAPE

SECTION

4

STOP

DO
OF

ALSO
NOT

MARRIAGES

WHAT

FORM

WOULD

FACT

MEET
AMEND-

INCLUDE

INDIANS

SUB-SECTION

CELE-

MARRIAGE

EUROPEAN

MARRIAGES

BORN
‘F’

APCASES

MARRIAGES

MATTER
INDIAN

MAR-

MEET

TRANSVAAL
ALL

NO
FOR

AFRICA

ONLY

REDEMAND

INDIAN

ONLY

STOP

RECOGNIZES

EUROPE

CARRIED

OR

OFFICERS

BRATED
CELEBRATED

STOP
NON-CHRISTIAN

INDIA

MARRIAGE

FUTURE
LAW

DEMAND

WRONG

PARA

PROSOUTH
‘A’

1
The draft is undated. It, however, appears from the telegram dated May 24
addressed to Marshall Campbell, vide the following item, that this was also sent the
same day.

140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

CAPE

ACT

SOLVE

30

OF

FREE

STOP

SUBMIT

FREE

STATE

PASSIVE

1906

STATE
THAT

IF

AND

STOP

NOR

DIFFICULTY
EXISTING

MARRIAGE

DO

THEY

THEORETICAL
RIGHTS

RIGHT

DISTURBED

DIFFICULTY

LEFT

OR

UNSOLVED

CERTAINTY.1

RESISTANCE

From a photostat of the handwritten draft: S. N. 5784

94. TELEGRAM TO MARSHALL CAMPBELL
[PHOENIX,]

May 24, 1913
S ENATOR MARSHALL C AMPBELL
C APE TOWN
THANKS
SION

YOUR
IT

DISGRACE.

FOR

JUSTICE.

HAVE

AMENDMENT
INDIAN

INDIANS

YOU

NOW

AND

MEANS

AMEND

MARRIAGES
RIGHTS

FEW

ACCEPT

AS

IMPRISONMENT

OR

ACCEPT

YOU

WILL

IF
AND

YOU

SUCCEED
HONOUR

HE

THEY

ARE.

UNAWARE
ASSURANCE

WILL

NO

IF

EXISTING

OF

CANNOT

THEMSELVES
ARE

PEOPLE’S

GOVERNMENT
OWN

AFRICA-BORN
ALL

SAVING
THEY

EVEN
INDIAN

RESISTERS

OTHER

GRATITUDE
MAKING

DOUBT

VALIDITY
SOUTH

SAKE
OF

REGISTRA-

MINISTER’S

PASSIVE

WORSE

ANY

AMENDMENT

UNLESS

PRESERVE

FOR

THEIR

INDIA.

RIGHT
AND

MARRIAGE

HARDLY

RECOGNIZE

CAPE

TARDY

ALEXANDER
IF

TO

SURRENDER
EARN

SAYING

IN

OUT.

CUSTOM.

SESAND

MEASURE

RELIEF

RESTORE

COMPROMISE

UPON

NO

ANYTHING

ENTER

BE

THIS

DISCREDIT

CASE

REGISTERED

BILL
TO

INDIAN[S]

WOULD
MEET

TAKEN

LAW

REMOVED

ALEXANDER

NOT
GRANT

CLAUSE

INDIAN

IT

IS

WILL

TAX

GOVERNMENT

WIRED

MARRIAGE

TION

IF
SAVE

DOES

THEREFORE

TO

WIRE

WOULD

CALLED
RIGHTS.

HELPLESS

PEOPLE

RENDER

JUSTICE

PROMISES.

PLEASE

1
In reply to this, Patrick Duncan sent the following telegram on May 26:
“Your telegram. Difficult to see how to avoid recognition polygamous marriages if
legal recognition granted Indian non-Christian marriages.”

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

141

WIRE

COMMUNICATIONS

PHOENIX.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the handwritten draft: S. N. 5786

95. TELEGRAM TO PATRICK DUNCAN
[PHOENIX,]

May 27, 1913
P ATRICK DUNCAN
C APE TOWN
WIRE 1

THANKS
ONE

WIFE

SAT

CASE.

MINISTER

TRATION

LAW

AS

AMENDMENT
NOT

REGISTRATION
RELIGIOUS

AMENDMENT

IN

SUFFICIENT
IN

RITES
MARRIAGES

ADDITION
STOP

THERE

MAY
JUSTICE

RECOGNIZE
WESSELS

ACCEPTED
AS

YESTERDAY
IT
NO

JUSBY

CONTEMPLATES

CELEBRATION
IS

ONLY

DID

ACCORDING

SYSTEM

REGIS-

INDIA.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5792

1

142

Vide footnote 2 to “Telegram to Drummond Chaplin and Others”, 24-5-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

96. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[PHOENIX,]

May 27, 1913
INTERIOR
C APE TOWN
INVITE

MINISTERS

LAW

1871

CELEBRATED
UNDER

INDIAN

NOT

OF

4

1906

DO

RETICAL

RIGHT

OFFENDING
QUESTIONS

ACCORDANCE

‘F’

THAT

NO

STATE

REMOVED
PASSIVE

PROVISIONAL

‘A’

STATE

PROTECT

RIGHT

CAPE

UNDER

CAPE

ACT

LEFT

30
THEO-

SUBMIT

RESISTANCE

SETTLEMENT

DO
AMEND-

DIFFICULTY
STOP

CAN

INDIANS

POLYGAMY.

ENTER
PARA

MATTER

PROVISION

APPEAR

FREE

APPEAR

INCLUDED

BEG

NOT

DOES

MINISTER

MARRIAGES

SIMILAR

INDIANS

SUB-SECTION
NOR

MARRIAGE

EUROPEAN

RECOGNITION

AFRICA-BORN

SECTION

IF

STOP

TRANSVAAL
AFRICA

STOP

LEGAL

CARRIED

SOUTH

SOUTH

FORM
CASE

DEMAND

MENTS

RECOGNIZES

OUTSIDE

WHAT

MEET

ATTENTION

WHICH

RISK

CERTAINTY
UNSOLVED

THEREWITH.1

GANDHI
From a photostat of the handwritten draft: S. N. 5793

1

The Minister replied the same day that the amendment recognizing Indian
marriages was accepted on the assurance from Sir David Hunter and others that it
would “entirely meet the case” of Indians, the point regarding entry into the Cape was
a new one, and the question of intermigration referred to in correspondence of
February 1912 was fully met. Asking for elucidation of the point regarding the Free
State, the Minister hoped there would be no further reference to passive resistance.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

143

97. TELEGRAM TO SIR DAVID HUNTER
[PHOENIX,

May 27, 1913]
S IR DAVID HUNTER
C APE TOWN
WIRE 1

THANKS
AMENDMENT
PLATES

SYMPATHY

REGISTRATION

REGISTRATION

INDIA

UNNECESSARY
REFERRED
OTHER

AND

ACCEPTED

POINTS

ENOUGH

STOP

THERE

STOP

AND
TO

DOES
MY

ALSO

NOT

[STOP]

NOT

REGISTRATION
NOT

TELEGRAM 2
YET

OCCUR
OF

UNFORTUNATELY

AS

IT

IS

NO

CONTEMSYSTEM

CLAUSE

TOTALLY

TRANSVAAL

LAW

YESTERDAY

STOP

MET.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5796

1

This was dated May 26. It read: “Government this day accepted amendment
which puts marriage question right. The Bill has now passed second and third readings
and I think we may heartily congratulate ourselves upon the concessions obtained by
the friends of the Indians.”
2
This is not available; vide, however, “Telegram to Drummond Chaplin and
Others”, 24-5-1913.

144

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

98. TELEGRAM TO SCHREINER AND CAMPBELL
[PHOENIX,

May 27, 1913]
S ENATOR S CHREINER
S ENATOR MARSHALL C AMPBELL
C APE TOWN
IMMIGRATION
CARRY

BILLS

OUT

RIVED

BY

STOP

BORN

‘F’

STOP

BILL

TION

AS

INDIA

MATTER

WHAT

PROVISOMAY

AWARE

WHETHER

RIGHTS

RETURN

DENCE

PRESENT

REQUIRING
FROM
ED

BILL

STOP
BE
BILL

OTHERS
FREE

INDIANS

SO

ABILITY

HOLD

HOPE
INTERVENE

SEEMS

ENTERING

YOU

LAND
WILL

TO

IF

THIS

HAVE

WILL
OR
SEE

NOT

NATAL

INDIANS’

YEARS’

RESI-

THIS

STILL
TRADE
YOUR

SETTLEMENT

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

BE

BILL

CONDITION
NOT

BY

REQUIRED

REQUIREMENT
MAY

THAT

IMMIGRATION

DECLARATION

DIFFICULTY

WILL

CONTEMPLATES
BAR

RESTOP

AM

THREE

BREAK

MAKE

STOP

STATE

RACIAL

CASE

POLYGAMY

SETTLEMENT

NO

INDIANS

OF

REAFRICA

PROVISION

STOP

PROTECTS

PROOF

LAW

MEET

LAW

NOW

ON

NATAL
SHALL

STOP

EFFECT

REGIS-

SOUTH

SIMILAR

ADDED
BY

REGISTRA-

MARRIAGE

WILL

1906
SOLVE

SYSTEM

OUTSIDE

[STOP]

RECOGNIZED

OF
NOT

REQUIRES

MARRIAGES

BE

BE

THERE

FORM

INDIAN

SUB-SEC-

30

NO

TRANSVAAL
EUROPEANS

AFRICA-

‘A’

DOES

IS

ARCOM-

SOUTH

ACT

IT

THERE

STOP

MARRIAGES

GARDING

CAPE

AS

STOP

1911

PARA

YESTERDAY

FAILS

INDIAN

RIGHT

UNDER

OF

DIFFICULTY

COGNIZES

NOT

4

OF

WITH

AWAY

CAPE

AMENDED

MARRIAGES

TRATION

SMUTS

TAKES

ENTER

—SECTION

MARRIAGE

NO

IT

SENATE

SETTLEMENT

GENERAL

INDIANS

TION

BEFORE

PROVISIONAL

AT

MUNITY

NOW

IS

SOLVED

WAIVTHOUGH

BE

LIABLE

DIS-

OR

FARM

STOP

WAY
CARRIED

EFFECTIVELY
OUT

THUS

145

PREVENTING

REVIVAL

PASSIVE

RESISTANCE.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5805

99. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[PHOENIX,]

May 27, 1913 1
INTERIOR
[CAPE TOWN ]
BEG

THANK

MESSAGE

MINISTER

STOP

HAVE

REFERENCE

PASSIVE

AMENDMENT

WILL

AS

IT

SECTION

MEET

CASE

INDIA

STOP

ONE

WIFE

IS

MENTION
INDIANS
CULAR

BECAUSE
SECTION

UPON

MY

LETTER

MAINTAINING
REPLY

CONTEMPLATE

DATE

SPOKE
SOUTH

NEVER

HAS

INDIANS

ENTER

SHOULD

BE

22ND

APRIL
AND

EXISTING

CAPE
DEPRIVED

ANY
BUT

NO

LARGE

1911

BASED
SPECIALLY

COULD
STOP

CAPE

NEW
STOP

NEVER
SPOKE
MOVE
THERE

NATAL-BORN

INCONCEIVABLE

POSSESSED

SMUTS’
MEMBERS

FEAR

DESIRE

IS

PARTI-

IS

GENERAL

WAS

INDIANS
IT

TRUE
OF

I

THERE

RIGHT

AS

AFRICA-BORN

RIGHTS

DEBATE

AFRICA-BORN

BEEN

IS

COMMUNITY

BELIEVING

LAWFUL
FAR

SETTLEMENT

RIGHTS

DURING

AS
SO

OVERSIGHT
BUT

STOP

SURRENDER

IGNORANCE

INTRODUCE

2

TRANSWOULD

SOUTH

MY
ACT

EXISTING

SAME

WHO

OF
CAPE

AFTER

IT

ABOUT

SYSTEM

YESTERDAY

HERE

STOP

MADE

RELI-

NO

RECOGNIZED

CONCERNED

WAS

IS

RECOGNIZED

DIFFICULTY

ADDITION

WIRE

MARRIAGES

BE

IN

AMENDMENT
MY

BY

YESTERDAY’S

MARRIAGE

THERE

STOP

TONE

FEELINGS

STOP

SOLVE

QUOTED

SHOULD

HURT

STOP

INDIA

VAAL

CONCILIATORY

REGISTRATION

CELEBRATION

REGISTRATION

FOR
DESIRE

RESISTANCE
NOT

CONTEMPLATES

GIOUS

IN

NO

BY

THEY
THEM

1
Indian Opinion, 7-6-1913, published this telegram as dated May 28. It is
likely that it was drafted on May 27 and dispatched the following day.
2
Vide “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 22-4-1911.

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

FOR

YEARS

HON’BLE
BAR

STOP

GOKHALE
ESSENCE

SHOULD
CLAIM

BE

DISCRIMINATION
MAKE

[STOP]

SAY

WHETHER

STOP

IF

CONSIDERED

SIRE

MY

SION

BY

PRESENCE

AND

ARRIVE

SENATE
IN
AT
WAIT

ASSURE

MINISTER

MY

EARNEST

WITH

HONOUR

MY

IMMIGRATION

EIGHT

FORM

SATISFACTORITIME

IF

SETTLEMENT
HIM
IS

SOLUTION

BEFORE

MINISTER

FACILITATE

DESIRE

THIS
YEAR’S

AMENDED

POINTS

UPON

LASTING

CHAPTER

LAST

TAKE

AND

NOTBE

STOP

BILL

ORDER

AND
TO

TO

OUT

WILL

STATE
RACIAL

THEREFORE

LAW

OTHER

COME
COME

AS

SEEING

BILL

FREE
LEGAL

SECTION

PLEASED
ERNMENT

NO

SHOULD

WITHOUT

LY
BEING

RIGHTS

BROUGHT

IMPOSSIBLE
MET

EXISTING

STATE

CLEARLY

CORRESPONDENCE

RACIAL

THAT

REGARDING

DECLARATION

WAS

REMOVAL

INDIANS

FREE

MENTIONED

FROM

BE

IMMIGRANTS

THIRTY-THREE
POINT

STOP

SHOULD

AGAINST

EDUCATED

LIABLE

IS

MAINTAINED
THERE

SPECIALLY

APART

COMPROMISE

THAT

STOP

MATTER

STOP

WILL

DEDISCUSBE

STOP

PRAY

ASSIST

GOV-

CONSISTENTLY

COUNTRYMEN.1

GANDHI
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5795

1

In a reply on May 29, vide Appendix “Telegram from Minister of Interior”,
15-4-1913, the Minister held out no hope that Parliament would alter the provisions
of the Bill on the points raised by Gandhiji. That the Government, however, was keen
on averting a revival of passive resistance is borne out by the Governor-General’s
confidential despatch to the Colonial Office; vide Appendix “Governer-General’s
Cable to Colonial Office”, 29-5-1913.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

147

100. TELEGRAM TO MORRIS ALEXANDER
[PHOENIX,]

May 29, 1913
ADVOCATE ALEXANDER
P ARLIAMENT
C APE TOWN
THANKS

WIRE 1

AM

INDIA

SUPERFLUOUS

WITH

GREAT

DURING
SINGLE
ENTERED

WIRING2
AS

SOLEMNITY

PROLONGED
INSTANCE
SOUTH

SENATOR
INDIAN
AND

EXPERIENCE
UNDESIRABLE

SCHREINER

REGISTRATION

MAR-RIAGES
PROLONGED
HAVE
INDIAN

PERFORMED
CEREMONIAL.

NOT
WOMEN

KNOWN
HAVING

AFRICA.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the handwritten draft: S. N. 5802

1

Dated May 28, it read: “Your wire. Have consulted with Senator Schreiner.
Telegraph him what you suggest in absence of registration to prevent immigration of
undesirable women. Why cannot Indian Government be petitioned to provide for
registration.”
2
Vide the following item.

148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

101. TELEGRAM TO SENATOR SCHREINER
[PHOENIX,]

May 29, 1913
S ENATOR S CHREINER
P ARLIAMENT
C APE TOWN
ALEXANDER
WILL

SUGGESTS

MEET

RIAGES

TO

REGISTRATION
RIAGES

CASE
PREVENT
INDIA

CELEBRATED

LONGED
LONG

INDIAN

SUCH

ENTRY

SUPERFLUOUS

DANGER
VERY

NOT

KNOWN

ALTHOUGH

BEFORE

SEARLE

WOMEN

ENTERED

FREELY

UPON

LY

STATEMENT.

USELESS

FOR

AMENDMENT
PROTECTION

INDIAN

AS

INDIAN

AND
ENTRY

REMOTE.
SINGLE

HAVING

AFRICA
VERBAL

WOMEN.

SOLEMNITY

MOREOVER

WOMEN

I

REGISTRATION

BECAUSE

GREAT

HAVE

INDIAN

WHAT

OF

UNDESIRABLE

WOMEN

EXPERIENCE

OF

WIRING

ABSENCE

WITH

CEREMONIAL.

DESIRABLE

MY
IN

ENTERED
JUDGMENT

THINK
MARTHINK
MARPROUNDURING
CASE
SOUTH
INDIAN

HUSBANDS

MERE

STANDS

ENTIRE-

IT
WIVES.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the handwritten draft: S. N. 5803

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

149

102. TELEGRAM TO SENATOR SCHREINER
P HOENIX,

May 30, [1913]
S ENATOR S CHREINER
C APE TOWN
THANKS
I

WIRE

DID

HESITATED

WORRY

LIGED.

LETTERS

MYSELF

22ND

SETTLEMENT
NION”.

NO.

PAGE

OR

CAPE

WEAKENED

COLONY

TABLE

TO

HAS

AND
HIS

OF

TO

DEPRIVED

CAPE

MEN

LIKE
OF

DUCED.

TION.

GRANT
IN

CLARED
REASONS.

150

AND

CASE

AMENDMENT
AS

IS

CELEBRATION

ARE

NOT

BOMBAY
SUCH

MARRIAGE

AND
SUCH

FROM

AUTHORIZED
AS

YOU

REQUIRE

CLAUSE

PROOR
MEN-

MAGISTRATE
FOR

AS
BY
HEAD-

BE

RECOGNIZED
IS

ARE
PRESENT

TEST.

CERTIFICATE

SHOULD

OBTAINABLE

INDIANS
UNDER

ALWAYS

SUCH

FISCHER
IMPOSSIBLE

REGISTRATION

COULD

INDIA

ACCEP-

MR.

CERTIFICATES

CASTES

GRANT

INDIANS

BE

WITHOUT

AMPLE

CERTIFICATES

RECENT

INABILITY

CAPE
IS

KAJEES

MAGISTRATES

OBLIGED

OF

ENTERING

DIFFERENT

OF

UP

EXISTING

HARPREJU-

AFRICA-BORN

RIGHT

THERE

MR.

NOT

TAKING

BLUE
PARTI-

WHICH

GOVERNMENT.

SOUTH

FULL

1911

POSITION

ME

OF

OF

MARRIAGES

PRIESTS

SUCH

SAYING

ACT

TO

TO

PROBABLY
HAS

WHICH

WOULD

MAJESTY’S

POSITION
BE

PRESENT

OPI-

GOVERNMENT

SOLUTION

NATAL

TELEGRAPHED

COPY

MARCH

IN

ANY

PROVISIONAL

INTERIOR

—

SEVENTEENTH

SMUTS

“INDIAN

YOU

IMPERIAL

DATE

TELEGRAPHED

DICED

HAND

ALSO
5579.

1911

OFFICE

OB-

GEN.

BASES

APRIL

AS

ABSOLUTELY

FORMED

PARTY

SEE

EARLIER

BETWEEN

29TH

TIMES”.

C.D.

CULARLY

UNLESS

1911

WIRING
“CAPE

CORRESPONDENCE

COURT

YOU

APRIL

AM

COMMUNICATE

EXCHANGED

PUBLISHED

OBTAINABLE

BOOK

NOT

DEABOVE

EVIDENCE
IN

PLACE
MARRIAGE

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

LAW

TRANSVAAL

1871

REFERRED

BY

ME

PREVIOUS

1

TELEGRAM .

GANDHI
From a photostat of the handwritten draft: S. N. 5806

103. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[PHOENIX,]

May 30, 1913
INTERIOR
C APE TOWN
WHILST

I

BEG

HAUSTIVE
POINT

REPLY ,
OUT

NOT

SEE

THEIR

THE

WAY

AMENDMENT.
ORIGINAL
WAS

UNION

CERTAINLY

BY

MERE

MIGRATION

LAW.

CAPE,

NATAL,

BOUND
BUT

TO
IF

PASSIVE

RESISTERS

BRETHREN
OR

WORSE,

1
2

DO

FOR

NO

INDIAN

THEN
NOW
TO

WHEN
SELL

GAINING
THEY

MUST

REGISTRATION

IS

CLAUSE

TO

AT

EXISTING

COULD
WHICH

FOR
COULD

NOT
THEY
UNION

GOVERNMENT
RIGHTS
FROM

RESPECTFULLY

NO
CAPE.

TRANSVAAL

CONSIDERING
OR

INDIANS

RIGHTS

DEMAND
THE

IT

WITHDRAW

THE

DIFFICULTY

OF

FREEDOM

CANNOT

AFRICA-BORN

POINTS

PUBLIC

IT

EXISTING

INDIANS

STATE

AS

HONEST

PUBLIC

TO
DO

CONVINCED

GOVERNMENT

ARISEN

BILL.

EUROPEAN

OF

SOUTH

AMENDMENT
FREE

AM
REQUIRING

RESPECTED

HAVE

IMMIGRATION

MET

FOR
HAD

EX-

CARRIED

REGISTRATION

MORE

AS

DRAFT
WOULD

THERE

REMOVE

BE

FAR

QUESTIONS.

THEREFORE

TO

FOR

RESPECTFULLY

SO

CONDITION

IF

CERTAINLY

QUESTION

BOUND

AMENDMENT

IMPOSSIBLE
USELESS.

WOULD
IF

MARRIAGE

THE

MINISTER

AMENDMENTS

OUTSTANDING

THE

TOTALLY

THANK

FEEL

THAT

SETTLE

THAT
DOES

TO

2

OF

A
BE
IMRAISE
ARE
BILL.

DESIRE
THEIR

IMPRISONMENT
DECLINE

TO

Vide “Telegram to Schreiner and Campbell”, 27-5-1913.
Vide Appendix “Telegram from Minister of Interior”, 15-4-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

151

ACCEPT

A

PRESENT

BILL

LIAMENT
IF

BARGAIN
MAY

THEY

TO
ONLY

WITH

OPINION,

IN

I

ITS
WILL

HAVE

TERMS
NOT
THE

OUT
IN
ARE
TO

ACCEPT
THE

IN
I

FRANKNESS

LIBERTY

OF

TO

THE

MEASURE

CON-

MY

WITHDRAW
IT.

PAR-

GOVERNMENT

TERMS
A

THEM.

WHERE

FREEDOM.

AND

BOUND

EXCUSE

TAKEN

BRING

TO

BILL

WITH
CARRY

HONOUR,

WILL

DISHONOURABLE
ORDINARY

LEGISLATE

CAN

SISTENT

MINISTER

AN

WISH

SETTLEMENT

PARLIAMENT

SO

NOT

HUMBLE
IT,

TRUST
WITH
EXPRESS

IF
THAT

WHICH
MY

SENTIMENTS.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the handwritten draft with corrections in Gand hiji’s hand:
S. N. 5807

104. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Vaishakh Vad 10 [May 30, 1913] 1
CHI. JAMNADAS 2

Once again, I have not been able to write to you as I had hoped
to, so busy I keep. Since I have had two letters from you, I write this. I
shall not be able to write much, though.
I find no harsh words in your letter.
I don’t see how you can join the struggle, since neither
Maganlal3 nor anyone else from here can go [to India]. Chhaganlal 4
or Maganlal will write to you about all these matters. I should
certainly like you to be with us. But how can we always get what we
want?
I return herewith the relevant part of your letter, with your
questions serially numbered, so that I have less to write and yet you
1

This appears to have been written after Jamnadas Gandhi left South Africa
for India in December 1912.
2
Son of Khushalchand Gandhi, Gandhiji’s cousin
3
Addressee’s elder brothers
4
ibid .

152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

could follow [the answers].
l.
[If there is no God, how can there be moksha? What is the meaning of
moksha?]1

To ask how there can be moksha if there is no God is to fail to
understand moksha. We can grasp only a part of the meaning of
moksha; the rest must be experienced; it cannot be put into words. We
have no organs with which to describe it. In so far as we can
understand, it means deliverance from having to assume an endless
succession of various bodies, and from the resultant suffering. There
is no need, however, to deny the existence of God. We may try to
define God in accordance with the limits of our knowledge.
At any rate, God is no dispenser of rewards and punishments,
nor is He an active agent. But, if one atman2 can be conceived after
the embodied atmans have become free, it is God. He is no material
thing, but pure consciousness. This is also the view ofthe
advaitavadins3 . At no time and in no circumstances do we need a
kinglike God. By thinking that we do, we put a limit to the power of
the atman, which is infinite.
2.
The same distorted meanings, and as many of them, have been
and are being read in the Bible as in any other holy book. Those who
level charges against Tolstoy are ignorant. I do not know the truth
about Marie Corelli4 . But to describe her as a witch is sheer ignorance.
3.
[What should I do if, though I would not injure a cow and have never done so, I
am attacked by one even when I am not in her way? What could be the reason for my
being thus attacked?]

If we are attacked by a cow, it must be because we fear cows and
other creatures and so the fault is ours. All fear is of the nature of a
moral weakness and, so long as we are subject to it, we shall always
have to face such misfortunes. While we fear cows, we should take care
not to stand in the way of any. If accidentally we find ourselves doing
so, we should put up with the injuries. By hitting the cow, we shall do
1

The question have been supplied from Mahatma Gandhijina Patro.
The Self, not identifiable with any aspect of human individuality
3
Those who hold the view that the atman, the Self in man, is not distinct
from the Brahman, the Absolute
4
(1864-1924); celebrated novelist
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

153

no service to ourselves or to her.
4.
[How can one say that a tiger will not kill a man living in his den without
fear?]

A tiger will never eat up a man who, on occasion, lives in his den
without any fear whatever. In what circumstances he might do so,
would need to be considered.
5.
I do not in the least approve of the European custom in regard
to marriages. When a young man is to be married, wisdom lies in the
parents choosing [the bride]. This is true for any young man, even a
man of 25 or older. Of course, the parents will consult him.
6.
[Did or did not Dharmaraja1 commit a sin in declaring that Ashvatthama was
killed? Why did Lord Krishna advise him to say this?]

The only lesson I draw is that even a Dharmaraja may stumble,
so that we too should be on our guard. If we believe that a Shri
Krishna in the body advised a Yudhisthira in the body, there is no
harm in conceding that Shri Krishna was not perfect. If we look upon
Shri Krishna as the Supreme Being, the entire episode will have to be
interpreted symbolically. One will then read in it a meaning which
accords with one’s moral principles. The shastras2 need not be
regarded as infallible. We will never go wrong if, having got hold of
the inviolable principles of morality, we interpret the shastras in the
light of these principles and then are guided by them.
7. [Is it necessary that there should be only one religion for the whole world?]

Personally, I think the world as a whole will never have, and
need not have, a single religion.
8.
There is no such rule that all wholesome foods can be taken
irrespective of one’s condition. Food which is wholesome for a
labourer cannot be so for a tubercular patient.
I have no more time now, but this answers one of your letters.
1
In the battle of Kurukshetra, Yudhishthira, eldest of the Pandava heroes in
the Mahabharata and known for his absolute truthfulness, was prevailed upon to say
within Dronacharya’s hearing: “Ashvatthama is killed.” Ashvatthama was the name
of Dronacharya’s son and also that of an elephant. In fact, only the elephant had been
slain. Dronacharya, who had proved invincible as leader of the Kaurava host, laid
down his arms on hearing that his son was dead.
2
Holy books other than those regarded as revelation

154

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You have committed many grammatical mistakes in the letter to Miss
Schlesin. I asked Chhaganlal to keep a copy. If he has done so, I shall
correct and return it.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5646 Courtesy: Narandas
Gandhi

105. THE OUTLOOK
It is difficult to state definitely the position that now faces our
countrymen under Mr. Fischer’s Bill. It must be admitted that some
amendments (we refuse to call them concessions) in the right direction
have, undoubtedly, been made. But much more must be done if there
is to be no revival of passive resistance, and if there is to be even a
bare fulfilment of the terms of the provisional settlement of 1911. Not
a single existing right can be surrendered. Passive resisters may not—
dare not—buy peace and freedom from imprisonment at the cost of
the rights of others. And yet the right of South Africa-born Indians to
enter the Cape, which they possess today in virtue of the Cape
Immigration Act of 1906, is being taken away by the Bill. South
Africa-born Indians, i.e., in practice, the Natal-born Indians, are not
pining to go to the Cape. They rarely evinced any such desire
throughout all these years. But they will certainly not give up on that
account the right they possess of being able to enter the Cape. Nor
can passive resisters be party to a Bill which deprives them of such a
right.
That Mr. Fischer has accepted the marriage amendment, moved
by Mr. Advocate Alexander, shows, let us assume, a desire on his part
to meet us on the point. But, through no fault of Mr. Alexander’s, the
amendment has a fatal defect in it. It requires re-registration at the
place of celebration. Mr. Alexander does not know that there is no
system of registration of marriages in India. It is, therefore, not possible to produce registration certificates. This impossible requirement
makes the amendment useless for the very purpose for which it is
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

155

intended.
Nor is registration necessary as a safeguard against the introduction of undesirable women. In the first place, the amendment
requires the marriages to be celebrated in accordance with the faiths
of the respective parties. Indian marriages are accompanied with great
solemnity and elaborate ceremonial, lasting for days, and in some
cases even months. Indeed, there is much greater publicity and ceremonial about ordinary Indian marriages than there is in the publication of banns that precede European Christian marriages. This in
itself acts as a perfect safeguard better than any system of registration
that could be devised. In the second place, it is a well-known fact that
there is hardly a case on record during the past thirty years or more of
an undesirable Indian woman having been introduced, although
Indian women have entered until lately, on the mere verbal statement
of their husbands. It should, therefore, cause no difficulty to remove
the registration clause during the progress of the Bill in the Senate.
And if this marriage question is settled, and no other existing
rights are taken away, and if the Free State difficulty is satisfactorily
solved, there will remain the one question of the existing right of the
South Africa-born Indians. We can only hope that the Senate will rise
to the occasion, the Government will see the necessity of fulfilling a
solemn compact, and that this right will be restored. But, if it is not,
passive resisters will fight, we have no doubt, on that single issue.
Indian Opinion, 31-5-1913

156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

106. MUNIEN’S CASE1
The evidence in this case and the cruel sentence passed by the
Verulam Magistrate were reported by us a fortnight ago in these
columns. Thanks to the sympathy of Sir David Hunter, the case
became the subject matter of a question by him in the House of
Assembly. Mr. Sauer gave a chill, unsympathetic and haughty reply to
Sir David’s very pertinent question. Readers can see elsewhere both
the question and the answer, and judge for themselves. It is plain to us
that Mr. Sauer gave the answer he did because the matter was one that
concerned only a poor, neglected ex-indentured man, belonging to a
race that is unrepresented in the House that Mr. Sauer and his
colleagues dominate, and that is labouring under a prejudice which
makes it possible for anybody to heap insults upon it with impunity.
Had the case been that of a European, Mr. Sauer would not have
dared in a most careless manner to shirk inquiry, profess and glory in
his ignorance of the case and consider Magistrates’ decisions above
criticism by the Legislature, which, after all, is the body finally
responsible for the well-being of the meanest subject of the State.
But truly does pride go before destruction and haughtiness
before a fall. Hardly had Mr. Sauer finished his heartless reply when
Justice Hathorn began his review of the Magistrate’s action and
considered it to be so irregular and illegal that he quashed the
conviction against Munien and awarded him costs of appeal. The
Magistrate, who was more jealous of obedience to his orders than of
the welfare of those who had the misfortune to appear before him,
gave it as a reason for his vindictive judgment that Munien was
punished as an example to others, so that his orders might be obeyed
by them. We suppose Mr. Sauer’s cynicism will permit him even now
to defend the Magistrate and his own action in shirking investigation.
Indian Opinion, 31-5-1913
1
Munien, an Indian, was charged for default of payment of £3 tax arrears. He
was sentenced to 14 days’ imprisonment with hard labour for contempt of court even
after the amount due was paid.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

157

107. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XXII]
4. FEVER AND ITS REMEDIES

Having considered the principal remedies, we shall now turn to a
few specific diseases and in the process we shall get some idea of other
forms of treatment which do not call for separate chapters.
We use the term fever for any rise in body temperature but
English doctors have distinguished many varieties of it and written big
volumes on these, ending up in sheer confusion. As shown in these
chapters, and according to the popular view of the matter, one remedy
is enough for most types of fever. I have had experience of a single
remedy applied in all cases of fever ranging from simple fever to the
bubonic plague and I believe the results have been quite satisfactory.
In 1904, there was an epidemic of the plague among our people.1
Twenty-three persons were attacked by it. In twenty-four hours,
twenty-one cases proved fatal and only two could be removed to
hospital. Of these, one survived and he happened to be the only one
who could be treated with the mud pack. We cannot, of course,
conclude from this that the patient was saved by the earth-treatment,
but it can at any rate be maintained that the latter did him no harm.
All the victims had inflammation of the lungs and fever. They had
become unconscious. A mud poultice was applied to the chest of one
of them. He was bringing up blood and phlegm. After taking him to
hospital, I learned from the doctor that he had previously been given
very little food and that too only milk.
Fever has its origin generally in some stomach trouble. The first
step to be taken therefore is fasting. The notion that a weak person or
one suffering from fever will be weakened by fasting is entirely
mistaken. We saw in an earlier chapter that only that food is useful
which can be digested and converted into blood. The rest merely
remains in the stomach like a lump of lead, as we have seen in earlier
chapters. The digestive system of one who has fever becomes extremely slack. The tongue becomes dark or coated and the lips are dry.
1

158

Vide “Plague in Johannesburg”, 9-4-1904.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

What can a person digest in such a condition? Giving him food is
bound to raise his temperature. By stopping all intake of food, we give
the stomach a chance to do its work. The fast, therefore, must be
continued for at least a day or longer. Kuhne baths should be
administered during and after the fast. At least two should be taken
every day. In the intervals between baths, a mud pack should be
applied to the abdomen. If there is headache or the head feels very
hot, a pack should be applied to the head also. The patient should be
adequately covered but kept in the open air. The fast should be
broken with orange juice added to warm or cold water. Juice should
be squeezed out of the orange and strained and then hot or cold water
added as required. As far as possible, sugar should not be added. This
mixture of orange juice and water will have an excellent effect. If a
patient can take lime juice and water without his teeth being set on
edge, he should be given that. For the next meal he can take half or a
whole banana, well mashed. One spoon of olive oil and half a spoon
of lime juice should be added to the mashed banana and given to the
patient after mixing them well. If he feels thirsty, he should be given
water, which has been boiled and cooled, or lime juice and water.
Unboiled water should never be given. Cold water must always be
previously boiled. Methods of purifying water have been described in
an earlier chapter which should be referred to. The patient should
wear only a minimum of clothing and this should be frequently
changed. As he is to be covered with a sheet, very little clothing is
necessary with this treatment. Some persons suffering even from such
a severe illness as typhoid fever have been known to recover and, what
is more, they now enjoy excellent health. Quinine brings about an
apparent cure but the patient suffers from side effects. Quinine is
believed to be particularly effective for patients suffering from
“malaria fever”, but in fact they are rarely found to be entirely free
of it, whereas I have seen even malaria patients completely cured by
nature treatment.
Much reliance is placed by-others on a milk diet during fever,
but my experience has been that milk taken in the early stages of
fever does actual harm. It is, moreover, difficult to digest. If necessary,
it should be given along with wheat coffee or boiled with a little
quantity of rice flour and water. But in cases of obstinate or high
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

159

fever, it cannot be given even in this form. At such times I have found
lime juice mixed in water to be remarkably beneficial. When the
patient’s tongue has become clear, the banana diet should be started,
the banana being prepared in the manner described earlier. If the
patient is constipated, rather than a purgative he should be given an
enema of hot water mixed with borax to clear his bowels. Olive oil in
the diet will thereafter help to keep the intestines clear.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 31-5-1913

108. STATEMENT ON IMMIGRATION BILL1
[DURBAN,

June 2, 1913]
If the Bill is not amended in several material particulars I feel
that a revival of passive resistance is inevitable. The provisional
settlement of 1911 contains two principal conditions to be fulfilled by
the Government, namely, that existing rights should be maintained
intact in any legislation that might be passed in order to satisfy the
Indian claims, and that Transvaal Act No. 2 of 1907, subject to
reservation of the rights of minors, should be repealed, and there
should be no racial bar introduced in any such legislation. Both of
these conditions are violated by the Bill even in its amended form.
Our claim that existing rights should be maintained is fortified by a
declaration of the Imperial Government in their despatch dated
October 7, 1910, in which it is specially laid down that “any solution
(of the Transvaal controversy) which prejudiced or weakened the
present position of Indians in the Cape Colony and Natal would not
be acceptable to His Majesty’s Government,” and Mr. Harcourt
emphasized the point once more in his telegram of February 15,
1911, in discussing the Immigration Bill of that year. That existing
1

Lord Gladstone, Governor-General, sent from Cape Town a copy of this
statement to the Secretary of State for the Colonies on June 4. It was also published
in the Cape Times, 3-6-1913 and in Indian Opinion, 7-6-1913, along with editorial
comments from The Natal Mercury.

160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

rights are jeopardized is clear from a consideration of the following
facts:
South Africa-born Indians have, under the present Cape
Immigration Act, the unconditional right to enter that Province. This
right is now being taken away. If the Bill is not adequately amended,
this deprivation will constitute a very serious grievance, and passive
resisters will lose all title to respect if, for the sake of avoiding the
hardships of gaol or any other penalty to which they might be liable,
they were to accept such a bargain. I do not know what other
fatal defects there may be in the Bill as amended. The question of
domicile, for instance, may have been left in a most unsatisfactory
position, and so also that of the right of appeal to the Supreme Court.
The marriage amendment moved by Mr. Alexander, and accepted by the Minister will, I fear, frustrate the very purpose with which
Mr. Alexander moved it in such a public-spirited manner. It requires
the fulfilment of an impossible condition, namely, registration of
marriage at the place of its celebration, in addition to proof of due
performance of religious rites. There is, however, no system of State
registration of marriage in India. As a matter of fact, a recent arrival
from India endeavoured to obtain a certificate of marriage from a
magistrate at Bombay, who refused to issue it, on the ground that he
was not authorized by law to do so. Nor is this requirement necessary
for any purpose whatsoever. The religious celebration is accompanied
by so much solemnity, ceremonial and publicity, that it is the best
possible safeguard against collusive connexions. Finally, the strictness
with which the marriage question has been dealt with by the Government is quite unwarranted by past experience. During my 20 years’
experience in South Africa, I have never known of the entry under the
Immigration Law of a single Indian woman belonging to the undesirable class.
The second condition of the settlement appears also to have
been broken by the Government in that a declaration is to be required
of such Indian immigrants as may possibly be admitted into the Free
State, it not being required of European immigrants. The declaration
in question will be highly offensive and wantonly irritating, because,
in the case of an educated Indian, who alone could enter that Province,
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

161

it would be wholly unnecessary. It is merely a statement that the
declarant shall not hold landed property, trade, or farm there,
disabilities to which he is subject whether he makes the declaration or
not. It will be remembered that it was the Free State difficulty that
came in the way of a permanent settlement on the two previous
occasions.1 Mr. Fischer cannot now settle the controversy by ignoring
it as if it were not of the most vital importance. One can only hope
that the Senate will perform its duty as a vigilance chamber and the
guardian of unrepresented interests, by insisting upon amendment of
the measure, so as to fulfil both the letter and the spirit of the provisional settlement.
The Natal Mercury, 3-6-1913

109. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[DURBAN,

After June 5, 1913]
TO

THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR AND S EVERAL MEMBERS OF
P ARLIAMENT
I

OBSERVE

MOVED

THAT

ONLY

SUME,

THAT

REMOVE
EST

IT
SHOCK

THE

TAX

MR.

DEFENDED

REMOVAL.

I

TAX

BE

MOST
I

NO
THIS

THE
HOPE

WERE

FROM

TAX
THAT

MEN
AWARE
OR

EVEN

BE

RE-

I

PRE-

INTENTION

CAUSE

INDIANS
MADE

REMOVED
NOT

TO

SHOWING,

PRESENT
WILL

RESPONSIBLE
AM

IS

WOMEN

THOUSANDS
VISIT

WOULD
THE

GOKHALE.

THEM

IS
MEN.

TO

GOKHALE’S

FEMALES.2

INDIAN

THERE
FROM

MR.

£3

THE

FROM

GREAT-

WHO

TO

TO

THE

DURING

BELIEVE

THAT

ALL

MALES

AND

IN

NATAL

MET

THAT

ANY

OF

TO

ITS

OBJECTED
AT

THIS

LATE

1

Vide “Letter to H. S. L. Polak”, 16-3-1911.
This was during his visit to South Africa in November 1912. When the
legis-lation to repeal £3 tax was being discussed, there was no suggestion to restrict
the relief to women.
2

162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

HOUR

GOVERNMENT

WISDOM

OF

JUSTICE

WHICH

AND

REMOVING
IS

PARLIAMENT
THE

ALREADY

WHOLE

WILL
TAX

SEE
AND

THE
RENDER

OVERDUE.

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5809

110. THE BILL
The correspondence between Mr. Fischer and Mr. Gandhi,
published elsewhere,1 shows clearly that Mr. Fischer had fully
intended to deprive us of almost every right that we have been
enjoying under the existing Immigration Laws of the different
Provinces. The only right that was to be left to us was for those, who
are at present physically residing in the respective Provinces, to live
confined in their Provinces with little chance of being able to re-enter
if they left their Province. Thanks, however, to the stubborn
opposition from the Unionist Members and the fear of passive
resistance, some slight modifications have been introduced into the
measure. We wish that the Unionist Members had retained their
firmness to the last. But Mr. Fischer successfully put them off the
scent by telling them that the Imperial Government had already
approved of the will. But the correspondence makes it clear that, in
spite of the amendments, the Bill offers no settlement of the Indian
question, that it leaves many big gaps and that, if they are not filled
up, passive resistance is sure to revive. Mr. Fischer must consider us to
be a perfectly stupid community, if he thinks that, with vested rights
taken away, we are going to accept his measure. The threat to
withdraw the marriage amendment, if we do not accept his measure, is
unworthy of a responsible Minister. Either the amendment is intended
to remedy a fault or it is useless. If it is so intended, the attitude of the
community cannot affect the necessity of the amendment. But it is
perfectly true that the amendment is quite useless and it would be
more honest to tell us that our marriages are not to be recognized than
1

Vide letters and telegrams to the Minister and the Secretary for the Interior,
1-4-1913; 9-4-1913; 15-4-1913; 27-5-1913; 27-5-1913 & 30-5-1913.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

163

to mislead us, by an ineffective amendment, into believing that our
wishes are being respected. This marriage difficulty, however, is only
one of the many defects in the Bill. And, unless the Senate is prepared
to adopt heroic measures, the Bill, which is supposed to have been
designed to satisfy passive resisters, will simply compel them to revive
the struggle, cost what it may.
Indian Opinion, 7-6-1913

111. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XXIII]
5. CONSTIPATION, SPRUE, DYSENTERY, PILES

It will certainly appear strange to most readers that four diseases
are considered together in this chapter. But they are, in fact, closely
related to one another and our cures for them, which require no
medicines, are common to all. When the intestines are heavily loaded,
some people, because of their peculiar constitution, become
constipated. That is, they do not pass stools regularly and in proper
quantity and have to strain. If this goes on for a long time, they begin
to pass blood. This results sometimes in the rectum becoming
flaccid and sometimes in piles. Still others suddenly develop
diarrhoea. If the motions are numerous continuing during all hours at
short intervals and in small quantities, the condition is known as sprue.
Some have dysentery in which mucus is passed and there is griping.
All these patients suffer from lack of appetite, look pale, become
weak, have offensive breath and a coated tongue. Some have
headaches or develop other ailments. Constipation is so common that
hundreds of medicines and powders have been invented for it. Mother
Seagle’s Syrup, fruit salt, etc., are intended chiefly to cureconstipation
and thousands come to harm through them, since they are apparently
effective. Any ordinary hakim or doctor will tell us that the root cause
of constipation is indigestion and will also add that constipation will
disappear if the causes of indigestion are removed. The more honest
among us freely admit that patients want to shake off the disease
without shaking off their own bad habits, and hence they are driven to
164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

prescribing powders and decoctions. Advertisements nowadays actually announce that those who take the medicines in question will not
need to change their diet or other habits; they will be cured by the
medicine alone! Those who have been following these chapters must
have realized that such advertisements are fraudulent. The effect produced by a purgative is always bad. Though it may remove constipation, it will, however mild it be, give rise to other poisons in the body.
Having taken a purge, if one proceeds to change one’s bad habits so
that purgatives will not again be necessary, one may perhaps derive
some benefit from it. Those, however, who continue with their bad
habits arc bound to get some other ailment even if they are cured of
constipation or sprue.
We shall now consider remedies for these four diseases. The first
is for the patient to reduce his diet. Heavy foods, those prepared with
excessive ghee, sugar and milk kept boiling over a long time, should
be eschewed. If he has any addictions like smoking, drinking,
hemp-taking, etc., he must give them up. If he is in the habit of eating
white bread, he should give it up. Tea, coffee and cocoa should be
given up. The diet should consist mainly of fresh fruits, together with
olive oil.
Treatment should begin with a 36-hour fast. During this time
and later, mud packs should be applied to the abdomen on retiring
and one or two Kuhne baths should be taken daily. The patient should
walk at least two hours a day. Anyone following this regimen is bound
to benefit. I have actually seen severe cases of diarrhoea, constipation,
dysentery, and also of severe and chronic piles, cured in this way.
With regard to piles, it is necessary to insist that, as long as mucus or
blood is being passed, no food is to be taken. When the patient is in a
position to take food, he should have orange juice filtered and added
to boiling water. In this way, the worst case of dysentery can be cured
in the shortest time without harming the patient. If dysentery is
accompanied by severe griping, the abdomen should be fomented
with a bottle filled with very hot water or with a heated brick. As in all
illnesses, the patient needs fresh air here too.
The following fruits are regarded as especially beneficial in
constipation: figs, French plums, muscatel raisins, large grapes, black
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

165

grapes, green grapes and oranges. One should not, however, imagine
from this that these fruits should be eaten even when one is not
hungry. When there is griping or a bad taste in the mouth, even these
fruits can be harmful. When food is needed, these fruits will be
specially beneficial in constipation, that is all that the statement above
should be understood to mean.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 7-6-1913

112. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
P HOENIX,
NATAL ,

June 7, 1913
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

I thoroughly understood why there was no letter from you. The
cause of it grieved me much and I wished I was with you as your
nurse. I am glad that you are much better now. India as a whole will
never understand you fully and your energy being unapproachable
excites jealousy. May you bear it well with a light heart.
As your quack physician, I shall certainly want to know all
about your health, diet, etc.
Polak I know has been writing to you regularly. I do not
therefore wish to inflict a long letter on you. If you have the time, you
will doubtless read this week’s I[ndian] O[pinion] which reproduces
the whole of the correspondence I have carried on with Mr. Fischer.
The Unionists put up a spirited fight at first but they weakened in the
end. Fischer’s information that the Imperial Government had
accepted the measure as it stood did the trick. I can hardly believe that
they could ever accept the Bill as drafted. If you have followed the
debate as printed in the pages of I. O., you will have noticed that your
name was very freely used by several speakers and that mostly to the
advantage of our cause. Yes, the visit is bound to produce far-reaching
results in many ways.
166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The Bill has been read a second time in the Senate. There may
be some alterations made but I do not think there is enough fight left
in W. P. Schreiner to carry all the amendments that are necessary to
prevent a revival of the struggle. Have I told you that Mrs. Gandhi,
Mrs. Doctor and the wives of Chhaganlal and Maganlal are joining the
struggle? Pray do not disclose this just yet. Of course there are many
men at the settlement who are joining this time. If the struggle comes,
as seems almost certain, my return to India must stand indefinitely
postponed.
Polak has now opened office. I have no anxiety about Ritch’s
expenses. And Polak will presently find his own. The London
Committee remittance has been stopped since March last. So that the
only burden is I. O. and if the struggle revives, Medh’s 1 family will
have to be supported. Apart from this, there will be only the incidental
current expenditure. Medh’s I would rather not beg in South Africa.
But the other expenses we either find here or do without. I am
collecting steadily the amount to be placed at your disposal for the
London Committee which I hope you will reorganize. If there is any
deficit in the £600 to be collected for 3 years’ existence of the
Committee, I have a promise from our friend Rustomjee2 that he will
find it. I think that if anyone is reliable in S[outh] A[frica], he
certainly is. That reminds me of your cap and umbrella which I hope
were safely delivered to you.
Kallenbach is here for a few days.
Hoping that this will find you in good health,
I remain,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From the handwritten original: C. W. 927 Courtesy: Servants of India Society

1
2

Surendrarai Medh, a satyagrahi
Parsee Rustomjee, a leading Indian merchant of Natal and a satyagrahi.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

167

113. STATEMENT ON £3 TAX1
[DURBAN,

Before June 11, 1913]
I observe that the Government propose to ask Parliament to
remove the tax only on women. This, it is to be presumed, shows that
they have no intention at present of removing it from men. Mr.
Gokhale met most of the public men of Natal at Newcastle, Dundee,
Maritzburg, Durban, Isipingo, and elsewhere. I had the honour of
being present at all these meetings. And I do not remember a single
public man having defended the tax or objected to its removal. Mr.
Smuts stated the other day that he was to consult the Natal members of
Parliament. If, therefore, now the tax is not removed from both males
and females, the presumption will be that the Natal members do not
desire to see men released from the burden. In my humble opinion
the honour of Natal is involved in this matter. I can recall many a
Town Hall meeting held for less important purposes. I am sure that
Natal holds its honour dearer than the navigability of its beautiful
harbour. Will not the public men of Durban, at a Town Hall meeting,
demand from Parliament removal of this iniquitous impost? All, be
they never so hostile to Indian aspirations or to my countrymen’s
presence in this Province, may join hands in overdue justice being
done, and the fame of Natal being preserved.
I well remember the great meetings of Indians which Mr. Gokhale addressed at Lord’s Ground, Isipingo, and, as the Hon. Marshall
Campbell’s guest, at Mount Edgecombe.2 Fully 10,000 indentured
and ex-indentured Indians were present at Mr. Campbell’s estate.
Over 5,000 were present at Lord’s. They were assured that, as Mr.
Gokhale had met with no opposition from the Europeans to the
removal of the tax, it would very probably be removed at an early
date. Subsequently, after his interview with the Ministers, he declared
that he had received assurances that the tax would be removed. This
1
2

168

This was reproduced in Indian Opinion, 14-6-1913.
Vide “Diary, 1912”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

information was passed on to these thousands of helpless men and
women. One man in Verulam had the “effrontery” to believe that the
tax had already been repealed, and for that crime was sentenced to be
imprisoned with hard labour by the Verulam Magistrate. 1 What will
these men think when they hear that, though their women will at last
be free, they themselves will have to continue to pay?
The Natal Mercury, 11-6-1913

114. STATEMENT ON IMMIGRATION BILL
DURBAN,

June 13, 1913
If Mr. Harcourt is correctly reported,2 his answer is astounding.
If he has seen the Bill in its original form, it will be impossible to
avoid the conviction that the Imperial Government have thrown the
Indians overboard and have gone back upon their own despatches in
order to please the Union Government. I shall, however, hope that
they have not seen the Bill, and that they have no first-hand knowledge of the full effect of the amendments made. It is perfectly clear,
on the other hand, that the Union Government have not only committed a breach of trust towards the Indians, violated the settlement of
1911 and belied their assurances to Mr. Gokhale, but instead of
honestly telling the Imperial Government that they do not intend to
carry out the terms of the settlement, or to respect the wishes of the
Imperial Government as expressed in so many despatches, they have
actually deceived the Government.
There is no evidence in the original draft of the Bill of the
slightest desire to meet the anxiety of the authorities in Downing
Street.
It is a wilful misstatement of facts to say that racial differentiation has been removed by this Bill even in regard to immigration.
Indeed, Mr. Fischer’s telegram to me completely bears out my
remark. The Free State difficulty has been, since 1911, a racial dif1
2

Vide “Munien’s Case”, 31-5-1913.
The reference is to his statement in the House of commons on June 11.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

169

ficulty. Mr. Fischer has not surmounted it, and he says distinctly in his
telegram that he will meet it by administrative action. If such a
proposal could have been accepted in 1911, the Bill of that year
would have become law, but it could not be then and it cannot be now.
The Union Government, if they have any sense of honour, are
bound to remove the racial inequality before the law, and in any
measure passed to bring about that end, they are bound not to disturb
existing rights. They have failed to carry out either part of the
compact.
Mr. Harcourt seems also to be under the impression that the few
amendments that have been made in the Bill are due to the initiative of
the Union Government or their desire to do justice. They have been
wrung from them by an Opposition in Parliament which was as
creditable as it was unexpected by the Ministry. Indeed, had the
Opposition been only a little stronger and more consistent we should
now have a law in spite of the Union Government, that would have
made final the provisional settlement of 1911.
As it is, unless the Royal sanction is withheld from the Bill, and
fresh assurances given to the community that the terms of the
settlement of 1911 will be entirely carried out, and that the marriage
difficulty will be removed, passive resistance, this time both by men
and women, will be taken up. The Union Government may be, indeed
are, indifferent whether it is or is not, but I have faith enough in this
sovereign remedy for all the ills that the civic and political life of a
community is heir to know that, if we are true to ourselves, it must
succeed.The latest proposal of the Government to remove the £3 tax
only from women demonstrates beyond doubt their consistently
hostile attitude and bad faith towards the Indian community.
The Cape Argus, 13-6-1913

170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

115. THE BILL
The Bill may now become the law of the land any moment and
Indians may find themselves deprived on the 1st August and,
thereafter, of several rights which they have hitherto enjoyed. It is not
possible to speak with certainty of the amendments so far carried or of
the full effect of the Bill. Mr. W. P. Schreiner, who put up a strenuous
fight on our behalf, was able to secure a modification of the marriage
amendment and, in spite of Mr. Fischer’s threat that he would not
only not withdraw the registration clause but that if we did not accept
the Bill in full, he might take out the whole amendment and restore
the original draft, the registration clause seems to have been omitted.
What the new clause in its latest form is one cannot judge without
having the full text.
But even if the marriage difficulty is over, there is no doubt that
the Bill leaves much that is offensive enough to compel passive
resisters to resist it. It appears to leave the question of jurisdiction of
the Supreme Court in a very unsatisfactory state. It deprives Indians
resident in Natal of the usual facility with which they have hitherto
been able to re-enter it. They may not now, as of yore, be able to do
so on the strength of three years’ previous residence in Natal. Nor
may indentured Indians who may have paid the £3 tax be allowed to
claim the right of residence therein. South Africa-born Indians may
not now enter the Cape under the Cape Act. The Free State difficulty
remains as it was before. It therefore appears that this is a Bill,
resistance to which is a duty and compliance a crime.
It is remarkable, however, that the Bill, though avowedly an
anti-Indian Bill, had a stormy passage through both the Houses and
that concessions, such as they are, were wrung from an unwilling and
hard-hearted Minister. In the Senate, on two occasions the voting on
certain clauses resulted in a tie. This is a good augury for the future
and speaks well for the effect of passive resistance. It has quickened
the spirit of in inquiry into Indian matters on the part of a large
number of members.
But, if some members of the Union Parliament have spoken
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

171

zealously in our behalf, the Imperial Government seem to have
neglected us entirely and wholly accepted the Union Government’s
view. Indeed, so far as they are concerned, they appear, incredible as it
may seem, to have accepted the Bill as it was originally published, thus
going back upon their own despatches. If Mr. Harcourt is correctly
reported, he appears to believe that the Union Government are
desirous of doing us full justice. This opinion certainly could not be
based upon the original Draft Bill nor upon what happened in
Parliament. The original draft could not well be more drastic; it was so
considered by the South African Press; the attitude of the Minister in
charge of the Bill could not well be more hostile.
But we need not feel sore if the Imperial Government have
betrayed us and neglected their trust. They are more concerned with
pleasing the Union Government who represent an infinitesimal but a
boisterous European portion of the Empire, than with pleasing India
which, though supposed to be the brightest diadem in the British
crown, represents a people who are long suffering and who do not
require to be pleased, much less pampered. Our final court of
appeal must be ourselves. If we are true to ourselves, no doubt others
will be true to us, as soon as they discover the fact, but no sooner.
Indian Opinion, 14-6-1913

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

116. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XXIV]
6. INFECTIOUS DISEASES: SMALLPOX—I

We have discussed a few things about fever and some other
ailments. It is not intended in these chapters to go into detail with
regard to all diseases. Indeed, it is unnecessary to write individually of
each disease when both cause and treatment are common to all of
them. Infectious diseases like smallpox also arise from the same cause
and it is not really necessary, therefore, to write separately about them
either. It will not be wrong, however, to devote one chapter to
smallpox.
An outbreak of smallpox creates such a scare that hundreds of
superstitions connected with it are current. In India, it is actually
ascribed to a particular goddess and countless men and women take
vows in order to be cured of the disease. Like other illnesses, smallpox
arises from polluted blood, which in its turn originates in fever of the
intestines. The body throws out accumulated poisons by way of
eruptions. If this view is correct, there is no need whatever to be afraid
of smallpox. If it was uniformly infectious, then all those who freely
touch the body of the smallpox patient would catch the disease. But
we know that this does not happen. There is no need, therefore, to
dread smallpox, though, of course, we should take precautions against
it. We cannot say definitely that it is not infectious. If anyone
pre-disposed to the disease touches a smallpox patient, he will
certainly get it. That is why, whenever smallpox breaks out, a number
of people fall a prey to it. Because the infection is caught in this
manner through contact, people are infected with cowpox and misled
into believing that the cowpox infection will induce smallpox in a
mild, harmless form and so prevent an actual attack of smallpox. The
process consists in first infecting a cow’s udder with smallpox and
then introducing the vaccine taken from that part into our body
through the skin, in order to induce smallpox in us and thus protect us
against an attack in an acute form. At first it was believed that one
vaccination of this sort would provide life-long immunity. But on
experience it was found that even those who had been so vaccinated
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

173

did not remain immune against infection for a very long time. It has
been concluded, accordingly, that after the lapse of a certain period, it
is necessary to repeat vaccination. Nowadays, the rule is to vaccinate
the entire population wherever an epidemic breaks out, irrespective of
whether the people had been previously vaccinated or not. One thus
comes across persons who have been vaccinated five or six times or
even oftener.
Vaccination seems to be a savage custom. It is one of the
poisonous superstitions of our times the equal of which is not to be
found even among so-called primitive societies. Its advocates are not
satisfied with voluntary vaccination. They insist on making it compulsory. Those who refuse to take it are prosecuted and awarded harsh
penalties. Vaccination was invented in 1798. Thus it is not an ancient
superstition. During this short period, millions of people have been
victims of it. Those who are vaccinated are presumed to be immune
against smallpox, but the presumption is without any sound basis. No
one can say that they would surely have had a severe attack of the
disease if they had not been vaccinated. On the contrary, in view of
the fact that there have been cases of vaccinated persons being attacked by smallpox, it certainly cannot be claimed that anyone getting
vaccinated will escape the infection.
Vaccination is a filthy remedy. Vaccine from an infected cow is
introduced into our bodies; more, even vaccine from an infected
human being is used. Some persons generally vomit at the sight of the
vaccine. If it so much as comes into contact with the hand, they wash
the hand with soap. If we were asked to eat it, we would be nauseated
and would pounce upon anyone who might make such a suggestion
even in fun. And yet scarcely anyone realizes that, when he is vaccinated, he is absorbing a substance which is in reality infected blood. It
is well known that patients are given medicine or liquid nourishment
through the skin and this takes effect more rapidly than if given by
mouth. What is taken by the mouth is not immediately absorbed into
the blood but anything taken through the skin is, and even a small
dose acts very quickly. From this point of view, the taking of any
medicine or nourishment through the skin is the same as eating it.
Even then, in order to save ourselves from smallpox, we, in effect, eat
vaccine. It is said cowards die before their death. Similarly, from fear
174

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of death or disfigurement by smallpox, we die before our time by
getting ourselves vaccinated.
I personally feel that in taking this vaccine we are guilty of a
sacrilege. Even meat-eaters are forbidden to drink blood, and the flesh
and blood of living animals are, I find, prohibited in all circumstances.
But here blood is taken from a blameless living creature, is cultured,
besides, and then fed to us through our skins. A religious man would
rather get smallpox a thousand times or an early death than take such
blood.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 14-6-1913

117. TELEGRAM TO GOVERNOR-GENERAL
JOHANNESBURG ,

June 16, 1913
HIS EXCELLENCY LORD GLADSTONE
[GOVERNOR -GENERAL
P RETORIA ]
VIEW

PASSAGE

SOCIATION

WOULD

ATTENTION
POINT

IMMIGRATION

TO

IT

TAKES

APPEAL

DEPRIVES

REENTER

STRENGTH

OF

INDENTURED
UNDER
PROVINCE.
INDIANS
STATE

THREE
BE

IT
ENTER

DIFFICULTY

REQUIRED

FROM

ALLOWED
TAKES
CAPE

UNDER

REMAINS
EDUCATED

AFTER

PAID

CLAIM

AWAY
AS

ITS

EXISTING
IN

ON
WHILE
NOT
THAT

AFRICA-BORN
STATUTE.

THAT

IMMIGRANT

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

MAY

RESIDENCE

SOUTH

IT

PRESENTLY

ABSENCE
TAX

RIGHT

BEFORE

RESTRICTS

RESIDENCE,
£3

RIGHT

INDIAN

IT

THE
THAT

EXISTING.

FACILITY

PREVIOUS

HAVE

STAND-

OUT
TO

RIGHTS.

PRESENTLY

PROVINCE

YEARS
WHO

EXCELLENCY’S

CARRY

OF

AS-

FROM

CONTRARY

NATAL

THAT

TO

EXISTING

COURT

MY

YOUR
BILL

FAILS
THAT

AWAY

INDIANS

BILL

IN

RESIDENT

ENJOYED,

DRAW

BILL

SUPREME

INDIANS

PARLIAMENT,

OBJECTIONS

COMMUNITY.
SETTLEMENT

SETTLEMENT
RIGHT

RESPECTFULLY

FOLLOWING

INDIAN

PROVISIONAL

BILL

FREE

DECLARATION

WHICH

WOULD

175

NOT BE REQUIRED FROM ANY OTHER IMMIGRANT AS IMMI-GRANT.
ASSOCIATION
EXCELLENCY
RECURRENCE
SUFFERING,
BY

MY

THEREFORE
TO

WITHHOLD

PAINFUL
AND

EARNESTLY
SANCTION

STRUGGLE
SACRIFICE

BILL,

WITH
FOR

PRAYS
AND

ALL

SO

ITS

COMMUNITY

MY

YOUR
OBVIATE
HARDSHIPS,
REPRESENTED

ASSOCIATION. 1

A. M. C ACHALIA
C HAIRMAN ,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION
Colonial Office Records: Cd. 6940/13

118. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
P HOENIX,
NATAL ,

June 20, 1913
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

The Bill is so bad that passive resistance is a necessity. By the
time this is in your hands, some of us may be already in gaol. I
propose to go to Johannesburg next week and from there send a final
letter to Mr. Fischer reciting our I objections and asking him to meet
them next year. If he gives a definite written promise that he would do
so, the struggle will be suspended. There is very little hope that he
would. But before I ask fellow-passive resisters to embark on what
would undoubtedly be a very bitter and prolonged struggle, I want to
adopt all legitimate methods that prudence may dictate to avert the
misery that must result from a renewal of the struggle.
These are the defects in the Bill:
(1)

The Free State difficulty appears to remain and therefore

1

Indian Opinion, 21-6-1913, published an extended version of the communication. Lord Gladstone acknowledged it on June 17 and forwarded a copy to his
Ministers. However, in reply to a telegram from Parsee Rustomjee on behalf of the
Zoroastrian behalf of the Zoroastrian Anjuman, the Governor-General informed him
that he had given his assent to the Bill the previous week.

176

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

(2)

the racial distinction.
The existing rights are disturbed in that
(a) the right of appeal to the Supreme Court is modified,
(b) the right of the South African Indians to enter the
Cape is taken away,
(c) the right of domicile of ex-indentured Indians
. . .1 pay the tax seems to have been taken away,
(d) the existing marriage position is considerably
modified, though the amendment has eased the
tension considerably.

I have only just received the amended Bill by Mr. Schreiner’s
favour. There may be other defects in it. I shall prepare a full statement2 to be sent to you next week. I am not explaining theabovementioned points, as I am anxious to spare you the trouble of having
to read a long letter.
Now for your questions.
1.

As you will have seen, the Bill has received the Royal assent.

2.

Passive resistance will be resumed probably [at] the beginning
of the next month.

3.

In order to court imprisonment we will enter all the Provinces in
disregard of the new Act and will refuse to show certificates or
any other papers. Both educated and uneducated Indians will
join the struggle.

4.

So far as I can judge at present, 100 men and 13 women will
start the struggle. As time goes, we may have more.

5.

I do not expect to raise much cash but I do not anticipate any
difficulty about getting sufficient food and clothing by
begging. If we all go to gaol, Kallenbach has undertaken to do
the begging himself. He can be thoroughly relied upon to see
that no family is starved so long he has life in him. If no funds
1

The original is illegible here.
This is not available; vide, however, “Letter to Private Secretary to Minister
of Interior”, 28-6-1913.
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

177

arrive unasked from India or elsewhere, we shall perform our
wanderings on foot, and no money will then be spent on
telegrams and cables. Just at present Miss Schlesin does all the
public work in Johannesburg but for her maintenance works
elsewhere. I am raising a special fund for the London Committee to be placed at your disposal. I am also getting rid of
other pecuniary burdens. Indian Opinion staff has been brought
down to a minimum and they will be thrown on their own
resources. Some of my private burdens are being found by Dr.
Mehta 1 .
6.

The struggle is expected to last a year but if we have more men
than I anticipate, it may close during the next session of the
Union Parliament. We are making provision for an indefinite
prolongation.7. It is difficult to answer what amount will be
required to see the community through the crisis. At the lowest
calculation made by me, nothing in cash will be required. But as
I get cash, I shall use it for ending the struggle quicker and for
giving support to families and Indian Opinion. Some people
from Natal and the Cape will certainly join the struggle.

My prayer to you is: Please do not worry about us, do not beg
for funds publicly and do not injure your health for the cause.
This prayer is selfish. I am anxious to meet you in the flesh inIndia,
work under you and learn, may I say, at your feet, all I want to and
must. In some things I want to be disillusioned if I am in the wrong
and I want you to be disillusioned if I am in the right and we do not
agree. I shall not misunderstand you if I do not receive any letters
from you. But whenever you have time and health, I shall value your
letters and advice. They would be a source of comfort.
After the receipt of Mr. Hall’s letter I had decided not to write
to you personally. But your letter leaves me no choice.
I must write another letter regarding your cable to Polak. He will
come if it is at all possible. Funds and his family are the chief
considerations. I shall discuss the situation with him tomorrow and
1

Dr. Pranjivandas Mehta, a friend of Gandhiji since his student days in

London.

178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

leave him to write to you on his return to Durban. He will have a day
more than I have for mailing letters.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From the handwritten original: C. W. 928 Courtesy: Servants of India Society

119. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XXV]
6. INFECTIOUS DISEASES [CONTINUED]: SMALLPOX—2

A number of thoughtful men in England have carried out
researches on the harmful effects of vaccination and a big anti vaccination society has been formed. Its members refuse vaccination and
oppose the law making it compulsory. Some have suffered imprisonment in this cause. They also advise others against vaccination. Many
books have been written on the subject and much discussion is being
carried on. The following are the reasons the opponents of vaccination advance in support of their stand:
l.

Taking vaccine from a cow’s udder, which in fact belongs to her
calf, is itself an act of extreme cruelty to thousands of living
creatures. This cruelty is no credit to man’s sense of pity and it
behoves him, therefore, to forgo any benefit that may accrue
from it.

2.

No benefit is derived from such vaccine. On the contrary, taking
the vaccine causes other infections. The sponsors of this movement are of the opinion that, since vaccination was introduced,
the incidence of other diseases has increased.

3.

The infection originates in man’s blood, so that the germs of
other diseases in the person are likely to be present in the
culture and in all the samples of the vaccine.

4.

Vaccination does not guarantee protection from smallpox. Its
inventor, Dr. Jenner, had claimed that vaccination at one spot on
one arm would provide life-long immunity. Later, he said

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

179

vaccination on both arms would give such immunity. Then it
came to vaccination on more than one spot on both arms. When
the disease occurred in spite of this, it was said that immunity
could not be guaranteed for more than seven years. This period
has now been reduced to three years. Thus doctors themselves
are far from certain in this regard. In fact, the idea that one who
is vaccinated will never get smallpox is entirely untrue. No one
can prove that a person who has been vaccinated and has never
caught smallpox would have caught the infection if he had not
been so vaccinated.
5.

Finally, they hold that vaccination is a filthy practice and that it
is sheer barbarism to imagine that filth can be removed by filth.

With these and many other arguments and illustrations, the
anti-vaccination society has been able to exert a great influence on the
British public. There is a town in England where the majority of the
population refuse to be vaccinated and, yet, the incidence of the
disease among them is very low. Some enthusiastic members of this
society have probed carefully into the whole question and have shown
that doctors find it in their interest to keep this superstition alive. They
earn thousands of pounds annually through vaccination. Consequently, either intentionally or otherwise, they are blind to its harmful
effects. This opinion has been expressed by certain doctors themselves
and most of these have strongly opposed vaccination.
If, then, vaccination is harmful, should we submit to it? My
personal reply would be a definite “No”. There are certain exceptions, however. I am certain that no one should get himself vaccinated
voluntarily. But in all places where we have settled, the law has made
vaccination compulsory. In this country ([South] Africa), to break the
law involves a tremendous risk, for, if we refuse to comply with it, we
shall invite on ourselves the charge of wilfully endangering public
health, in addition to the many other charges often made against us.
What should we do in such circumstances? If we live where the
majority believe in the benefits of vaccination, it becomes something
of a duty for us to fall in line with themto avoid a panic among them.
Those who object to vaccination on religious grounds, in view of the
facts I have set out above, must resist it even if they have to stand
180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

alone and must be prepared to suffer the consequences. Those who
refuse vaccination merely in the belief that they would remain
healthier on that account would not be justified in opposing the law in
this regard outright. Anyone who wants to do so must have made a
thorough study of the matter. He should be able to convert others to
his point of view and should undertake to change public opinion. If
one cannot do these things, one may not ignore public opinion
merely to protect one’s health. There are many things which we
dislike and yet feel compelled to do out of regard for the society in
which we live. Personal convenience has to yield to public interest.
The accepted principle is that only in matters of morality or religion
do situations arise in which a man will be justified in standing alone
against the opinion of the majority. Those, however, who have no
belief of their own but are possibly swayed by writings such as the
present one and are unwilling to be vaccinated through sheer apathy,
should certainly abide by the law.
Further, those who do not get vaccinated must take pains to
study and observe the rules of cleanliness, etc. One who does not want
smallpox infection [by way of vaccination] and, at the same time,
contracts diseases on account of immoral conduct or suffers in other
ways by disregarding the rules of hygiene, has no right to oppose
vaccination in a country or society in which it is regarded as a means
of preserving health.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 21-6-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

181

120. CABLE TO G. K. GOKHALE
DURBAN,

June 21, 1913
GOKHALE
LONDON
GOING

TRANSVAAL

MINISTER.
MENT

1

IF

REPLY

MADE,

TO

NO

CONTAIN

HOPEFUL.

MEET

FOUR

BEGINNING
IF

POSSIBLE

EXPENSES

FOR

ONE

STAYING
AT

OF

YEAR
HERE

PRESENT

PRESENT

SETTLEMENT,
THEN

FUNDS
HIS

TO
TRIP

ONE

IMPOSSIBLE

SETTLE-

ACT

APPEARS

CAN

BE

RAISED

WHICH

RAISE

VERY

RESISTANCE

POLAK

THOUSAND
TO

NOT

PASSIVE

IMMEDIATELY
IN

ARE

ALLOWANCE

TO

FRESH

THE

OBJECTIONS.2

FATAL

JULY.

LETTER

AND

RESISTANCE.

INCLUDING
AT

FINAL

SATISFACTORY

PASSIVE

FAILING

STARTING
LEAVE.

TO

FOR

POUNDS.

INDIA

ESTIMATED
FAMILY
IT

THESE

IS
FUNDS

HERE.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the original as delivered: C. W. 4843 Courtesy: Servants
of India Society

1
2

182

Vide “Letter to Private Secretary to Minister of Interior”, 28-6-1913.
ibid.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

121. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [—XXVI]
6. INFECTIOUS DISEASES [CONTINUED]: SMALLPOX—3

Writing of smallpox, we have so far considered the harmful
effects of vaccination. We must now study ways of preventing smallpox. One who faithfully and intelligently observes the rules concerning fresh air, water and diet described in earlier chapters is in no
danger of getting smallpox because his blood will itself contain the
antidote against the infection.
For one who has contracted the disease, the wet sheet pack is a
miraculous remedy. The pack should be applied to the patient at least
three times. This will reduce the burning sensation in the body and the
sores will subside in a very short time. It is not necessary to apply
ointment, etc., to the sores. If the latter are limited to one or two spots
where mud packs can be applied, that also should be done. The
patient should be given rice, lemons and light fresh fruit according to
appetite. I have said “light fruit” because, when the body is burning
with smallpox, highly nourishing fruit such as dates and almonds
should not be eaten. The sores are bound to subside after a week’s
treatment with the wet sheet pack. If they do not, it means that some
poison still remains in the body and is being thrown out. Smallpox
need not be regarded as so very serious a disease. It is only a
symptom of poison escaping from the body and, therefore, of the
body regaining health.
The last explanation applies to many diseases but is more likely
to be correct in regard to diseases of the smallpox group. The reason
why some patients remain weak or suffer from other ailments, after
recovery, is to be found not in the original disease but in the remedies
employed. Thus, quinine taken for malaria often causes deafness.
Some even get a serious complaint known as quininism. Venereal
diseases are cured with mercury, etc. The disorders which this gives
rise to, as is well known, remain with the patient for ever. Thus
medicines not only do not cure the disease but in fact cause new ones.
We shall find numerous instances of patients who resort to purgatives
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

183

in order to cure constipation and develop piles, etc., in consequence.
To understand and remove the basic cause of a disease and, when the
latter has disappeared, to obey the laws of Nature is a better tonic than
any bhasma1 . Metals are processed so as to make them assimilable and
turned into powders like lohabhasma2 . But it is wrong to regard these
as unfailing remedies. They do indeed seem to have some beneficial
properties, but to the extent that they benefit the body, they strengthen
the passions. Thus, they are ultimately harmful to one in their total
effect. These medicines find greater favour as cures for smallpox. One
who has had an attack of this disease rarely contracts it again. As a
matter of fact, he often enjoys excellent health after his recovery
because all poisons from the body have been drained out.
When the attack subsides and the sores dry up, olive oil should
be applied to the skin and the patient regularly bathed. If this is done,
most of the scars will disappear altogether and new skin will be
formed.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 28-6-1913

1
2

184

Form of metallic medication in Ayurveda
Bhasma with properties of iron
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

122. LETTER TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
MINISTER OF INTERIOR1
JOHANNESBURG ,

June 28, 1913
THE P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO
THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR
P RETORIA
DEAR SIR,

I have endeavoured to study the Immigrants’ Regulation Act,
and observe with thankfulness that it is an improvement upon the
original Bill.2 But I respectfully beg to point out that it fails to carry
out the provisional settlement of 1911 in at least four important
particulars. In my humble opinion, if redress is granted in regard to
these four particulars, the policy of the Government will not be
affected, and yet the terms of the settlement, as my countrymen read
it, will be just, but only just, satisfied.
The points are:
(1) According to the definition of the term “domicile”, those
indentured Indians who arrived after the Indian Immigration Law Amendment Act of 1895 and their descendants appear to become prohibited immigrants.
(2) The descendants of this class, although born in South
Africa, will, if the above interpretation be correct, be unable
henceforth to enter the Cape Province.
(3) Women married in South Africa according to the rites of
Indian religions, and going to India, and returning with
their husbands will not be on the same footing as those
1

This was published in Indian Opinion, 13-9-1913, under the title “Revival of
Passive Resistance”.
2
A detailed comparison of the draft Bill and the Act as gazetted was published
in Indian Opinion; Vide Appendix “Draft Immigration Regulation Bill and the Act”,
28-6-1913.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

185

[married]1 in India. Nor are the hundreds of women
married according to non-Christian faiths provided for by
the amendment.
(4) The Free State difficulty seems to remain as it was before.
With reference to the first point, in view of the fact that the
Minister has respected the right of the South Africa-born Indians to
enter the Cape, if they are born of Indian parents domiciled in South
Africa, but not of indentured parents if they were indentured after the
Natal Act 17 of 1895. It seems to me to be a small matter for the
Government if they were to recognize the status of the descendants
born in South Africa of those Indians who were indentured after the
Act of 1895. I am sure the Government do not intend to set up
distinctions between one class of Colonial-born Indians and another.
Nor can it affect the policy of the Government to recognize the right
of domicile of such indentured Indians themselves. There could not
be more than seven thousand such Indians at the outside. This
number, compared with the Indian population of Natal, which is
estimated at 133,000 cannot fairly be deemed a dangerous permanent
increase to the Indian population, especially when it is borne in mind
that these men are wanted by the Europeans of Natal.
To the Indian community both the first and the second points
are of the highest moment. According to the judgment of the Natal
Courts, these men, if they are paying the annual tax of £3, have a right
to remain in Natal as permanent residents. Are they now to become
prohibited immigrants? I presume that the Government do not intend
to deport them, but do they intend to enforce the provisions of the Act
as to trading or the holding of land by them?
As to the marriage question, the difficulty raised by me is, in my
humble opinion, obvious and calls for consideration.
As to the last point, in the correspondence that took place
between General Smuts and myself, doubt was expressed whether, in
spite of the reservation clause, the declaration referred to in Section 8
of Chapter 33 could be required of an Indian who might be permitted
to enter that Province under the new Act. What the people of the Free
1

186

The original is not legible here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

State want, I hope, is not a humiliating declaration from an Indian
immigrant, but his legal disability to hold land, to farm, or to trade. If
this be particularly mentioned in the Act itself, they cannot reasonably
object to the removal of the clause which requires the declaration.
For the moment, and for the purposes of a settlement, I do not
raise the question of the ousting (now only partial, I admit) of the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, and the other drastic provisions of
the Act which at once make it far more illiberal than the previous
Provincial Acts which it replaces.
If Mr. Fischer considers that it is possible for the Government to
meet the Indian community, and give an assurance that the necessary
amendments will be made next year, and if he considers it worthwhile
to discuss the points personally with me, I shall be pleased to wait on
him. I hope that Mr. Fischer will see his way to consider my letter in
the spirit in which it has been addressed. I beg to assure him that I
have no desire to precipitate an acute crisis, which is certain to arise if
no settlement can be arrived at between the Government and the
Indians.
In the event of an appointment being made, it will be necessary
to discuss at the interview the administration of the Act as to the
admission of married women in cases where the marriage is not
monogamous, as also the mode of regulating the entry of educated
Indians. I do not discuss them here for fear of making this letter too
long, and because I believe that, if the law can be set right, the
question of administration is a comparatively easy matter.
I need hardly say that I have throughout this letter assumed that
there are no other existing rights disturbed by the Act which have not
formed the subject matter of correspondence, telegraphic or written,
between the Government and myself.1
As I shall await your reply before advising my fellow-workers,
may I ask for a telegraphic reply?2
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5811
1

This paragraph, in Gandhiji’s hand, appears to have been added later.
This letter was followed by an interview on July 2. Gandhiji reduced the
points discussed to writing; vide the following item.
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

187

123. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

July 2, 1913
SIR,

With reference to the interview between us this morning, and in
accordance with your wishes, I reduce to writing the points discussed
between us:
l.
With reference to Indians born in South Africa and their
right under the Cape Immigration Act to enter the Cape, in my
opinion, under Section 5 of the new Act, such men will not be able to
enter the Cape by reason of the Proviso of Section 5. If the
Government intend to recognize their right to enter the Cape on
proving their South African birth as heretofore, they can do so
without further legislation, by regulations that would exempt them
from the operation of Section l Clause (a) of the Act. It may be
observed that, if such Indians can pass the simple education test of the
Cape, they can enter that Province under Paragraph A of sub-section 2
of Clause 5. As you are aware, most of the Colonial-born Indians have
passed through the Government Indian schools and possess sufficient
knowledge to undergo the Cape examination. It is also a well-known
fact that, throughout the time that the Cape Act has been in force,
hardly any South African-born Indian not belonging to the Cape has
endeavoured to migrate to that Province; the reason is that there is no
scope for them there.
2.
With reference to the indentured Indians who entered
Natal under the amending legislation of 1895, as I have already told
you, the Natal Courts have held that these indentured men, after they
have finished their indentures, are free to settle in Natal and could not
be treated as prohibited immigrants if they have not reindentured
themselves, and that, after three years’ residence without indenture,
these people acquire under the Natal Immigration Act full rights of
domicile in the same manner as other Indians; such Indians now
appear to be affected by the definition of the term “domicile” in the
present Act. I have already told you that we have obtained best legal
opinion in Natal, which is to the effect that the definition does not
188

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cover such Indians and that their rights will not be affected by the new
Act. However, I do not wish to take upon my shoulders the
responsibility of advising my countrymen that they may be guided by
that opinion alone. It is my sincere desire that any points which I, at
least, can foresee should not be left open or not entirely understood.
If the Government, however, give the same interpretation to the term
“domicile” that our Counsel does, an assurance to that effect settles
this point. Let me state it as clearly as I can. We are not seeking to
gain any new rights for indentured Indians, but we are anxious that
their present rights should be left intact, and these according to the
belief of the Indians are that, if an indentured Indian entering into a
contract of service after 1895, having become free at the end of his
contract, does not re-indenture, lives in the Province for three years,
then goes to India and returns, he has a right to re-enter under the
present Immigration Law of Natal by reason of his three years’ free
residence.
3. As to the Free State, I have drawn your attention to the
letter from General Smuts to the effect that, in his opinion, possibly
the Free State declaration was not required. If that is the legal position
according to the opinion of the legal advisers of the Government, a
statement to the effect that such is the position will meet the difficulty.
I venture to suggest that the declaration that will be required in terms
of Section 19 of the new Act may have all the disabilities printed at
the back thereof, including Section 28 of the new Act. Then there
need be no repetition of a declaration when a British Indian is
recognized as an immigrant for the Free State.
4.
As to the marriage question, in view of the Searle
judgment1 , it is absolutely necessary to legalize Indian marriages
celebrated or to be celebrated within the Union. This can be done by
amending the new Act by removing the words “outside the Union”
from the marriage clause of the Act, or by amending the Marriage
Laws of the different Provinces authorizing the Government to
appoint Marriage Officers for different denominations whose
certificates as to the celebration of marriages according to the rites of
the respective religions of the parties would be recognized as proper
1

Vide Appendix “Text of the Searle Judgement”, 21-6-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

189

proof of marriage.
With reference to the marriage amendment in the new Act, I
understand that only monogamous marriages will be recognized, and
I appreciate that nothing more can be done in law at present, but an
assurance is necessary to the effect that the present practice of
admitting one wife of an Indian immigrant so long as she is the only
one in South Africa, irrespective of the number of wives he might
have in India, will be continued.
Then there will remain the question of polygamous marriages.
As I have told you, there are not many such cases, but it is necessary
to admit or re-admit plural wives of Indians who are already resident
in South Africa. No new polygamous unions need be administratively
recognized. A list can easily be prepared of those who have more than
one wife either in the Union or outside it. My remarks are naturally
applicable to the children of these unions also. I may point out that, in
the July of 1911, General Smuts gave the assurance that special cases
of polygamy would be considered by the Government.
I think that I have now exhausted all the points we discussed. If
you think that there is anything omitted or that I should supplement
this letter, kindly let me know. It is clear to me that the solution of this
difficulty is very easy because, with the exception of the marriage
difficulty, all the points can be settled without an Act of Parliament.
If a settlement is arrived at, it will be necessary to discuss the
mode of admitting new entrants and the number for the various
Provinces. May I suggest that, if the solution suggested by me is
considered acceptable by General Smuts, you should telephone to me,
so that I can come over to Pretoria and a final letter setting forth the
terms of the settlement may be given to me. I make the suggestion so
that there may be no correspondence necessary in order to elucidate
any doubt that might arise as to the language of any letter that might
be given to me, and the. question of new entrants could also then be
discussed. I have told you how urgent the matter is, and may I rely
upon your courtesy to let me have an early reply?1
1
Indian Opinion reported that, for a time, the negotiations were suspended by
Smuts due to civil disturbance in Johannesburg. When, however, peace was restored,
Gandhiji resumed the correspondence on August 11, 1913.

190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am sending this letter per Mr. Pragji Desai1 , who will be at your
disposal to carry any communications you may wish to send me, and,
if you require me at the telephone, you have only to ring up 1635,
and I shall be at the telephone from wherever I may be.
Indian Opinion, 13-9-1913

124. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Jeth Vad 14, 1969 [July 2, 1913]
CHI. JAMNADAS,

You have asked me some questions about serpent-bite and cited
the experiences of others. What I say about this should be treated as
no more than my inference. It is not based on experience. The
instances you have come across do not deserve much attention. There
may be something behind the cases of frenzied shaking of the head
from side to side, but for the most part they are cases of fraud. I
believe the same about cures of snake[-bite] and scorpion[-sting].
Possibly there is something in them, but one had better not go
inquiring into these matters. We are to concern ourselves only
with activities that tend to spiritual welfare. Everything else—even
health—is subordinate to that. Certain it is thathe who strives to realize
the Self will have everything else given to him.
Many people put on woollen clothes all through the year.
Though it is true that they are non-conductors, it will be better not to
use them in summer, for one may otherwise grow a little too soft in
body. Instead of trying to maintain the body at an even temperature,
we should train it to stand both cold and heat.
God exists, and yet does not. He does not, in any literal sense.
The atman that has attained moksha is God and therefore omniscient.
The true meaning of bhakti2 is search for the atman. When the atman
realizes itself, bhakti is transformed into jnana.
1
2

Pragji Khandubhai Desai, a satyagrahi.
Devotion

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

191

Narsimha [Mehta]1 and others gave themselves to such devoted
search of the atman.
Krishna, Rama and others were divine incarnations, but we, too,
can be like them when immense punya 2 has accrued to us. The atmans
about to attain moksha are so many divine incarnations. We need not
believe in their perfection while yet alive.
It is difficult to say who was the greatest among Krishna, Rama,
the Buddha, Jesus, etc. Their achievements differed, because they lived
in different times and under different circumstances. In point of
character alone, possibly the Buddha was the greatest. But who can
say? They have been described by their devotees according to their
own inclinations. Vaishnavas attribute perfection to Krishna. One has
to, of course. Otherwise singleminded bhakti would be impossible.
Christians do the same to Jesus. In India, Krishna being the last [of the
incarnations], his figure is invested with especial greatness.
Those who deny the existence of God will end up on the wrong
path, for they will be obliged to deny the existence of the atman.
Avatar is, and will always remain, a necessity. It is only when people
are in utter despair and immorality is widespread that a belief in
avatar comes to prevail. A small number following normal morality
in the midst of a wicked majority looks for support. In a situation of
this kind, a man of great moral strength who has no fear of the wicked
but of whom the wicked stand in fear, is looked upon as an avatar
after his death, or even during his life-time. It is not probable, in most
cases, that such a person regards himself as an avatar right from the
beginning.
Comparison of religions is uncalled for. One must gain a mature
understanding of one’s own religion and then study others. For
purposes of comparison in a general way, the criterion is compassion
[taught] as a rule of life. The greater the scope for compassion in a
way of life, the more of religion it has. “The ethical way has its roots
in compassion”—that is the first principle to be taught to everyone;
and the second, “Brahman is the Reality; the Phenomenal world is
unreal.” No single principle may appeal to all, but it would seem that
1
2

192

Poet-saint of Gujarat
Accumulated merit
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

one who is in quest of the atman will have the right principle spring to
his lips at the right time.
Caste-distinctions are both necessary and unnecessary. Their
forcible observance is unnecessary. . . . G’s action in giving
encouragement to the pariah was praiseworthy.
In fact, there are as many paths as there are human beings. So
long as men differ [in temperament], their paths are bound to differ.
He who sees the identity of his atman with the atmans of others will
also see unity in the [different] religions.
When the atman is free from bondage to the body, it is said to
have attained moksha. The nature of that state is not to be described. It
can only be experienced. Ghosts, etc., are an evil order of beings.
Those guilty of wicked deeds are born in that order.
I have glanced through the book on milk-treatment. I was not
impressed by it. That is, however, because of my present frame of
mind. Even if anyone could prove that meat had a highly beneficial
effect on the body, it would remain unacceptable. I hold the same
view about milk. It is but another form of meat and man has no right
to take it. [To argue] that because a baby sucks the mother’s milk,
man should take cow’s milk is the very limit of ignorance.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

[From Gujarati]
Mahatma Gandhijina Patro

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

193

125. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

July [4], 1913
DEAR MR. GORGES,

I thank you for your note of the 3rd instant, and in view of my
conversation with you regarding Mr. Polak, may I ask you to ‘phone
to me as early as you can tomorrow, Saturday? I shall be practically
up to half-past-two at my office, telephone No. 1635.
I promised to let you have the Natal case regarding the
indentured Indians who are paying the £3 tax. The case is Subrayen
versus the Principal Immigration Officer, Natal Reports, page 638.
This is the substance telegraphed to me of the case:
Subrayen had served indentures which expired in 1906. Thereafter, he
had paid tax till May 1911. He then proceeded temporarily to India, leaving
his wife in charge of business. Subrayen returned in November 1912, but was
restricted under Section 5, sub-section A of the Natal Act, 1903. Under
sub-section B, Section 32, the Court held that Subrayen’s residence in Natal as
free Indian on payment of the tax did not come within the meaning of the
words “or the like” following after “indenture” [in] section 32 and that he was
entitled to exemption from operation of the Act under Section 4.

I think you will agree that the case completely bears out the
contention submitted by me.
I remain,
Yours truly,

E. M. GORGES, ESQ.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5823

194

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

126. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [—XXVII]
7. OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES

We have considered smallpox in some detail. Now remain allied
diseases such as chickenpox, measles, etc. The plague, cholera, and
fast-spreading dysentery are also infectious diseases. We are not afraid
of chickenpox and measles because they are seldom fatal, nor do they
cause disfigurement. Apart from this, they are very similar in effect to
smallpox and are contracted in the same manner. Cold water
treatments and wet sheet packs are the best remedies for them. Diet
during the attacks should be extremely light and bland. If a patient
can subsist on fresh fruit, his recovery will be rapid.
The “tumour fever” is a terrible disease. In English it is called
“the bubonic plague”. Hundreds of thousands have died of it in
India since 1896. Despite much fuss, doctors have so far been able to
discover no remedy for it. Nowadays, a preventive inoculation similar
to vaccination is given for this disease also. Producing with it a mild
attack of the plague, the doctors explain that this will confer immunity
against further infection. But this is a mockery similar to vaccination
and is an equally sinful experiment. Just as it cannot definitely be
stated of anyone who has been vaccinated that he would surely have
got smallpox if he had not been vaccinated, so also is it impossible to
say that one who has been inoculated against the plague would have
got it were it not for the inoculation. There is no known antidote
against the bubonic plague. Nor can any guarantee be given that water
and mud treatments will prove effective against the disease. However,
for the benefit of those who do not fear death and who have trust in
God, the following measures may be suggested:
l. On getting fever or at the very first signs of it, take a
wet sheet pack.
2.
glands.

A thick mud pack should be applied to the swollen

3.

The patient should be given no food whatever.

4.

If he feels very thirsty, cold lime juice and water

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

195

should be administered.
5. The patient should lie in a place open to plenty of
fresh air.
6. Except for one person, no one should be allowed to
go near him.
7. If anything can bring about a cure, these measures
certainly will.
No definite knowledge is available regarding the origin of the
plague. Many, however, are of the opinion that it is spread by rats and
there seems to be some basis for this impression. In areas where cases
of the plague have occurred, it is imperative that houses be cleared of
rats, and that grains, etc., be stored so that rats cannot gain access to
them and are not attracted. Rat-holes should be filled in; if a house
cannot be completely freed of rats, it must, of course, be vacated.
But the best insurance against the plague is to adopt from the
start a clean, wholesome and spare diet, give up all addictions, take
regular exercise, live in fresh air, keep one’s home and surroundings
clean and thus maintain oneself so fit that this fashion of a plague
does not touch one. This should be the normal manner of living but,
even if that is not possible, it should in any case be followed while an
epidemic is on.
An even more terrible disease and one which breaks out
simultaneously with the bubonic plague is fever accompanied by
difficult breathing, known in English as the pneumonic plague. The
temperature shoots up very high and the patient remains for the most
part unconscious. Recovery from this kalajwar 1 is rare. This disease
came to Johannesburg in 1904 and only one out of twenty-three cases
survived. Some account of this incident has already been given. For
this condition, too, the remedies are the same as those suggested for
the bubonic plague, except that in this case it is necessary to apply
mud packs to both sides of the chest. If there is not enough time in
which to keep the patient in a wet sheet pack, thin mud poultices
should be applied to the head. For this disease also preventive
1

196

Literally, deadly fever
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

measures are easier to take and more effective than remedies for cure,
and it will be wise to employ these as shown above.
Cholera appears horrible when there is an actual case but, in fact,
it is a much less serious disease than the plague. Wet sheet packs
cannot be used here because the patient suffers from cramps,
especially in the thighs. It may be of some benefit in this condition to
apply mud packs to the abdomen, but where there are cramps it is
necessary to foment the spot with hot water bottles, The patient’s feet
should be rubbed with mustard oil. No food, of course, must be given.
The patient’s friends should see that, instead of his getting scared out
of his wits, his courage is kept up. If he has frequent motions, he
should not be made to leave bed for the purpose, but he should be
provided with a shallow pan without sharp edges in which he may pass
stools. If these measures are taken without delay, there will be little
risk for the patient. During an epidemic of cholera, there are effective
measures with which to protect oneself against it. The disease usually
appears in summer. People suddenly start eating unripe or rotten fruit.
We are not as a rule accustomed to eat fruit, but many kinds ripen in
this season and are cheap, so that they are eaten in large quantities.
This is in addition to the usual food, with the result that the harmful
effect of such fruit follows immediately. Even as it is, we frequently
suffer from stomach-ache and such other complaints. When the
stomach can stand the strain no longer, we get cholera. Others’
physical condition is similar to ours and hence they also get an attack.
No special precautions are taken regarding the patient’s stools and the
germs from these pollute the atmosphere. Water also is bad during the
hot weather. With everything going dry, water becomes dirty and
infected and is drunk without being filtered or boiled. Under such
conditions, is it any wonder that diseases occur? It is only because
Nature has provided us with a tough physique that we survive at all.
Otherwise, looking at our conduct and habits, we deserve a very early
end indeed.
We shall now consider the precautions to be taken during an
epidemic of cholera. It is very important to keep the diet light and
moderate. Good fruit may certainly be eaten but it should be carefully
examined. We should never, out of miserliness or because of their
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

197

tastefulness, eat mangoes or any other fruits which are rotten in parts.
Fresh air is essential. Drinking water must always be boiled and
filtered through a thick and clean piece of khadi1 . Excreta of patients
must be burned and the place covered with dry earth. If it became a
regular practice with every person to sprinkle ashes over the excreta
after using the latrine, the danger would be greatly reduced. To tell
the truth, this should be a permanent rule. Cats dig a hole into which
they pass stools and then cover it up with earth. It is only we who
neglect to do this, thinking it to be a kind of pollution or feeling
squeamish about doing it, and so fall victims to disease. If ashes are
not available, dry earth should be used. If in lumps, the earth should
first be broken up and made into dust.
The fast-spreading dysentery is the least serious of these
infectious diseases. In this condition, if only mud packs are properly
applied to the abdomen and all intake of food stopped, the disease will
be cured. It is essential that excreta be covered up in the manner
described above. In regard to water, the same precautions should be
taken as for cholera.
Finally, when any of these infectious diseases occurs, neither the
patient nor his friends and relatives should lose courage. With fear, the
patient will succumb much sooner, and his relatives, and others as well,
will be in danger of catching the infection.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 5-7-1913

1

Any coarse cloth; later, in India, the term came to signify handspun and
handwoven indigenous cloth.

198

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

127. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
BOX 6522,

Thursday [July 10, 1913] 1
MY DEAR MILLIE,

So Henry is on the waters on his way to London. 2 Such is the
uncertainty of the life of those who are associated with me. It was very
brave of you to have permitted Henry without a murmur to separate
from you. I need hardly say that you will as before unreservedly fall
back upon me for your wants. You will not leave me to anticipate
your wants, will you?
There is no reply yet from General Smuts. I am expecting one
every day. The strike has dislocated many things.3
How are you all getting on? I am not likely to leave here, if at
all, before Monday next.
With love to you all,
Yours,

Brother
[PS.]
The Bazaar was a social success but not a financial success that it
might have been.
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives of India

1
H.S.L. Polak left for London on July 10, 1913 to assist Gokhale in representing South African Indians’ case. From the contents it is evident that the letter was
written on this day, a Thursday.
2
Vide “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 12-7-1913 and “General Knowledge about
Health (XXXII)”, 9-8-1913
3
ibid.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

199

128. RIOT IN JOHANNESBURG
HISTORY OF S TRIKE

In Johannesburg, the white workers in the mines had gone on a
big strike unprecedented in the gold area. It ended on Monday.
Nearly 40,000 labourers had struck work. It was all much ado about
nothing.1 The cause was insignificant. Forty new labourers were hired
in a mine. The management demanded a quarter of an hour’s extra
work from them on Saturdays, which the labourers refused. The
management insisted. This was a downright mistake. There was a
conflagration. The secretary of the Union gave notice that the workers
would go on strike if they were made to work a quarter of an hour
longer. The secretary was not employed in any of the mines. No
weight was attached to his letter. This was an insult to the Union, and
added fuel to the fire. The workers went on strike. The proprietors
then came round. They agreed to take back the new workers on their
terms. But the game was out of their hands. The workers were now in
no mood to listen. They considered the insult to the secretary as an
insult to themselves. The fire spread. Workers in the other mines were
also members of the Union. They, too, went on strike. One by one, the
mines began to close down. If any labourer went to work, he was
assaulted. In Benoni the workers started looting. The houses of the
manager and others were burnt down. Huge meetings were held and
bitter speeches were made. The Government was caught unawares.
There were hardly any police. The few there were proved inadequate.
This emboldened the workers still further. The Government is being
blamed by many people.
The flames spread to Johannesburg. Friday saw the worst. Life
and property were in danger. The Government requisitioned the entire
police force of South Africa. Meanwhile bloodshed continued. There
was blood in the workers’ eyes. They carried red flags and were
bedecked with red tassels. They intimidated the men working the
1

The Gujarati saying literally means: “a mustard seed being magnified into a
mountain!”

200

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

trams. The authorities showed wisdom and stopped the trams. The
leader was a woman named Mrs. Fitzgerald. Accompanied by a gang
of 50 people, she threatened the shopkeepers and made them close
down the shops. Trade came to a standstill in Johannesburg. People
were in panic and began to store food grains, etc. The cost of a bag of
coal went up to ten shillings.
Things did not stop there. At night, Mrs. Fitzgerald and her
companions went to the railway station, where they broke windows
and doors. The ticket-office and the godown were reduced to ashes.
They were in no way deterred by the police. One Kaffir employee was
burnt to death. Then, at about nine at night, the crowd went to the
office of The Star. There some of the men broke the windows and
went in. They made a heap of all the copies of the paper and put a
lighted match-stick into it. A few hours, and a beautiful building was a
heap of ashes. This newspaper has been under a cloud many a time. It
has not come out till Tuesday. The fire brigade which came to
extinguish the fire was driven back by the workers. Then they looted
the arms and ammunition shops and, taking possession of guns and
powder, prepared themselves to fight. Other shops were also
plundered. Three or four Indian shops, too, were looted. This seems to
have been the work not of the workers but of ruffians. When there is
chaos, who will listen to whom?
Meanwhile, the Government had woken up. Johannesburg was
crowded with police. Guards were posted at important buildings. On
Saturday afternoon, the strikers began an attack on the Rand Club.
The police warned the people, coaxed them. The law-breakers paid no
heed. Shots were fired over their heads. But they were not frightened.
Thereupon, they aimed the guns exactly at their bodies. Bullets descended in a shower, killing the guilty and the innocent. Blood flowed
in streams. Many died and many were wounded. The Red Cross came,
removed the dead and took the wounded to hospital. Terror reigned
now. People began to run for their lives, The Rand Club was saved.
Meanwhile, someone spread a rumour that Mr. Chudley had fired a
shot from the Club. Immediately people rushed to his magnificent
shop to wreak vengeance. There they broke the window panes and
sacked the shop.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

201

Such was the state of affairs when General Botha and General
Smuts came to Johannesburg. At a meeting with the strikers’ leaders,
an agreement was drawn up and signed by the two generals and three
leaders. The terms of the agreement are that the workers in the mines,
as also the other workers, will be reinstated, that the Government accepts responsibility for the dead and the wounded and, as far as possible, will compensate their dependants and that it will inquire into the
other grievances. The leaders demanded that no action be taken
against those who had incited the people and taken part in looting.
General Botha said that he would do his best, but that he could not
promise to interfere with the course of justice. At present, nearly 100
people are under arrest. Mrs. Fitzgerald has also been arrested. Newspapers had stopped publication. Except The Star, all the others resumed publication on Tuesday. Other activities have also been resumed.
At the moment of writing, it looks as if nothing had ever happened in
Johannesburg. Man soon forgets his misery and his danger.
On Monday, Johannesburg observed mourning. Flags were
flown half mast, all the dead were buried at four in the afternoon. It is
estimated that a crowd of 30,000 followed the funeral procession.
These same people, the previous day, saw blood. On Monday they
followed the funeral procession in a slow, sad march.
It is now that the difficulties of the strike-leaders have begun.
Some of the strikers abuse the leaders and say that they were cheated
by the Government. Some say that the leaders betrayed them. Some
want to fight on still. The bulk have accepted what the leaders have
done. Votes of the different unions were taken. The railway workers,
too, were defiant. In the end, however, they calmed down. Quite a few
hold that they should watch how the Government keeps its promise
and so normal activities have been resumed. The miners have also
been warned, at a meeting, that they should be vigilant lest the
Government let them down, as it had done with the Asiatics.
Regarding this suspicion, one leader said that, if the workers remained
strong, the Government dared not play foul and that, if it did, they
should reply with a still bigger strike.
At the special request of the Government and in order not to
excite public feeling, both the leading newspapers have refrained from
202

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

commenting on this epic strike and apportioning blame.
Pressure is being put upon Mr. Harcourt in England. Imperial
troops are stationed in South Africa. The understanding is that these
troops are not to be used to deal with a situation of this kind. Mr.
Harcourt was, therefore, questioned why Lord Gladstone used the
Imperial troops. He is being blamed by several people. Thus, the story
of this uprising is not yet over. At present, no one can say who has lost
and who has won. In Johannesburg, the loss on account of looting and
arson alone is estimated at £50,000, apart from the losses in business
and those sustained by the railways, trams, etc. The number of deaths
is put at 18. In all, nearly 400 people are believed to have been
wounded. There are still ten wounded men lying in the hospital in a
critical condition.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 12-7-1913

129. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XXVIII ]
8. CONFINEMENT

We have so far considered general diseases. It is not the
intention, in these chapters, to write on all the maladies one may come
across in this world or make suggestions about them, but rather to
show that most diseases have a common origin and a common form
of treatment. Those who have been driven to desperation by illness
and are afraid of death will certainly consult a doctor, whatever books
are placed before them. The most that these chapters can indicate is
how those who suffer from ordinary ailments may recover and,
observing the laws of good health, may not fall ill again or become a
prey to a serious disease. Only a few have the courage even for this.
That those few may find these brief articles useful is one of the objects
in view in the present series. We have now reached a point when, after
a brief consideration of confinement, infant-care and accidents, we
may conclude these chapters.
The subject of confinement has been made too much of. DeliVOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

203

very is nothing very dangerous for a woman whose body is healthy.
Among villagers, a confinement is regarded as a very ordinary occurrence. Pregnant women perform their usual tasks right up to the last
and suffer no harm during child-birth. There have been cases of
Bharwad1 women resuming normal work immediately after giving
birth to a child. Animals, we know, suffer no pain.
Then, why do urban women suffer so much pain? Why do they
suffer such unbearable agony during the birth of a child? Why does it
become necessary to give these women special care before and after
delivery? Let us take up these questions.
The city women’s way of life is completely unnatural. Their diet
and dress are opposed to Nature’s laws. The most important. reason,
however, is something quite different. If a girl becomes pregnant
while she is still a child, if her husband does not refrain from
intercourse with her even during this period and, soon after delivery,
so conducts himself that within a short time she becomes pregnant
again, why will she not suffer? We see hundreds of thousands of girls
and women in this fearful and pitiable condition. City-life of this kind
is no different from hell. As long as men continue thus to behave like
monsters, women can never be happy. Many men blame women. It is
not our business in this chapter to say who is more to blame. Whether
it be the fault of both parties or of one, having realized that something
is wrong, parents, child husbands and child-wives should take heed. As
long as intercourse during childhood, during pregnancy and
immediately following confinement is not given up, deliveries can
never be easy. Because the women do not have to suffer excessively
for a very long period and as it is considered inevitable that they will
be weak for a month and a half afterwards, they put up with the
ordinary pains of child-birth and, thanks to the prevailing ignorance
about this state of affairs, a race of cowardly, emasculated and
spiritless creatures is coming into existence day by day. This is a
terrible thing indeed, and each one of us needs to work tirelessly to
prevent it. If even one man or woman shuns such evil practice, that
will be so much gain to the whole world. In this matter, one should
never wait for another to make a beginning.
1

204

A Community of shepherds in Gujarat
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

According to this view, then, the first step to be taken in the care
of a pregnant woman is for her husband to stop all sexual intercourse
with her. Many responsibilities are to devolve upon her during the
nine months of pregnancy. It should be realized that the future
conduct of the child will depend to a great extent upon that of the
mother during this period. If the mother is affectionate, so will the
child be. If she is bad-tempered, the child too will be bad-tempered. It
is quite important, therefore, that the mother should maintain a very
pure state of mind during these nine months. She should be engaged
in virtuous deeds, avoid anger, be particularly compassionate and
generous, be free from anxiety and fear, not allow carnal thoughts
even to enter her mind, not waste time in useless gossiping, and never
tell an untruth. If a woman observes all these rules, the child to be
born to her cannot but grow to be an illustrious person.
Just as it is imperative that the mind be kept pure, so also must
the body be kept clean. It is essential always to have fresh air. During
pregnancy, the woman’s respiration becomes more rapid. Consequently, she must be in a place where the air is much fresher. Her diet
should be regular, easy to digest and nourishing. A good diet should
be planned along the lines recommended in earlier chapters. She
should consume during this period olive oil, bananas and wheat in
quantities which she can digest. If she gets constipated, she should not
go in for any medicine but increase the quantity of olive oil. If
suffering from nausea, she should take lime juice in a little water without sugar. Spices, chillies, etc., should be completely stopped, during
these nine months, at any rate.
Some women feel all kinds of fanciful desires and aversions at
this time. The best way to combat them is to have regular Kuhne
baths. This bath will increase strength, improve the lustre of the skin
and ensure easy delivery. Many women have had this experience. It is
also necessary to control these fancies when they come. It is possible
to forget an object which the mind hankers after by disregarding the
desire on one or two occasions. At all times, both mother and father
must be careful of the safety of the child she is carrying.
It is the husband’s duty not to agitate the wife by starting
quarrels with her during this period. She should be kept happy and
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

205

relaxed. If she has to carry too heavy a burden of domestic work, the
husband should try to lighten it. It is essential for her to have a short
walk in the open air every day. During pregnancy, it should be seen to
it that no medicine of any kind is swallowed by the mother.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 12-7-1913

130. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
“MOUNTAIN VIEW ’,
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

July 12, 1913
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

I hope you duly received the cable1 I sent you. As there was no
certainty about a settlement being arrived at and as your wires were
imperative, it was thought best to send Polak to you. There is up to the
time of writing no definite information from General Smuts. In reply
to a personal letter2 , his secretary telegraphs saying owing to the crisis
General Smuts has no time to go into the points raised by me. There
are internal dissensions too in the Cabinet.
In the event of a settlement, I have suggested to Polak that he
should unreservedly place himself at your disposal. If you can use
him for your own secretarial work, he will, I know, feel honoured and
he can be spared. If you think that he may be the Secretary of the
London Committee, you may appoint him as such.
Regarding his expenses the position is this. Mr. Rustomji has
advanced for his start nearly £250. His monthly expenses I am paying
out of the little I have still left with me. Mrs. Polak and the rent of his
office need at least £35 per month. His passage and other expenses
have already come to roughly £50. If it is at all possible, I have
therefore asked him to suggest to you that £300 at least should be sent
1
2

206

Vide “Cable to G. K. Gokhale”, 21-6-1913.
This is not available.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to me for the time being.
But if the raising of the money means any mental [strain] 1 or
trouble to you, may I beseech you not to trouble about the funds.
I shall manage somehow or other till his return. In my cablegrams
I felt bound to place before you my position. But the cablegrams
need not worry you at all. All I care for is, selfishly, to see you alive
for some years at least. And nothing would grieve me more than to
find that our troubles hastened your departure from this earth. Nor is
it at all necessary in the event of the struggle reviving, for you to go to
India in August or before your health is restored. I have spoken to the
passive resisters and they have all asked me to tell you that they are
not frightened by the prospect of prolongation of the struggle. I
personally feel that but for a Cabinet crisis and but for strikes, the
struggle, if it is revived, will be sharp and swift.
I hope you will be able to read my horrible writing.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From the handwritten original: C. W. 929 Courtesy: Servants of India Society

1

The original is damaged here.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

207

131. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
July 13, 1913
MY DEAR MILLIE,

Herewith a cheque for £12.
I had a wonderful meeting last night. Manilal insists on
observing the same penance vow that I am. His fast too therefore starts
from today. And yet I know that in spite of all that, there may be no
change of heart. But I must continue to trust and believe. I take it that
you will bank all the monies that may be received there and send me
the deposit slips. Is Solomon keeping the books?
Of course you may come down during the fast week too. And if
Voysey offers to come during the week, let him come. West will attend
to him.
With love,
BROTHER
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

132. IMMIGRATION LAWS
Regulations have been framed under the Immigration Act and
published in The Union Gazette.1 We have no time just now to give a
summary of the regulations. We must study them carefully and decide
what is best to be done about them. The administration of the Act will
depend on these regulations. Even an otherwise excellent law can be
made oppressive, and an oppressive law can be made milder, through
regulations. We have glanced through these regulations and have so
far not seen any section which may prove particularly dangerous. But
we can also see that much has been left out in them and that
supplementary regulations are likely to be published. We must state in
this connection that some gentlemen have drawn our attention to
section 19 of the Act and told us that we have either overlooked or
failed to understand the implications of that section. It has certainly
not escaped our attention. We have gone through it again, word by
word. We see nothing dangerous in it. The section is to the following
effect:
Every person who enters or is found within the Union will,
if required, have to appear before an [immigration] officer and
satisfy such officer that he is not a prohibited immigrant either
in respect of the Union or in respect of any particular province.
The officer may require every such person to give a declaration
in the form prescribed under the regulations and to produce
documentary or other evidence relative to his claim to enter or
remain. The person must submit to any examination or test. If
he is suspected of being afflicted with any disease [which would
render him a prohibited immigrant], the officer may also
require him to submit to a medical examination. Every such
declaration will be exempt from stamp duty. After such test,
every person whom the officer considers not to be a prohibited
immigrant will be free [to enter or remain,] but if any person
fails to undergo the test as above or, having given it fails to
1

For an analysis of the Regulations and the related documents, vide Appendix
“Immigration Act Regulations”, 26-7-1913.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

209

satisfy the officer that he is not a prohibited immigrant, he will
not be permitted to land and will be informed in writing that he
may, if he chooses, appeal to an immigration board. If the
person is on board a ship, such notice [of appeal] will have to be
given immediately; otherwise, within three days of the receipt of
written intimation from the officer.
This is the meaning of Section 19 as we understand it, and
according to this interpretation we find nothing objectionable in it.
This Section can be used oppressively. But so can many other
sections. Under this Section, the Government can authorize an officer
to demand finger prints or other humiliating means of identification,
but it has not done so. There are such sections even in the old Act. If,
when the regulations are framed, the Government prescribes under
this Section evidence which it would be a hardship to produce, we
must certainly protest. But this is a separate question and does not
arise from Section 19. We cannot object to the Government being
invested with such power under the law. Laws cannot even be enforced
unless the Government is armed with such powers. What we must do is
to protest every time against their abuse. As we have said above, we see
no provision in the regulations framed under Section 19 which need
cause alarm. After we have read the regulations again, and made sure
of their correct interpretation, we shall be in a better position to advise
the community.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 19-7-1913

210

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

133. NEW IMMIGRATION ACT
ITS OBJECTIONABLE F EATURES

Mr. Gandhi has returned from Johannesburg. In a message to
him, General Smuts says that the current agitation by white Railway
workers leaves him no time for anything else, and he will, therefore,
think about the matter when conditions become a little more peaceful.
The following are the points in this Act which remain to be settled:
1.

Indentured labourers who arrived after 1895 seem to lose
their right of settling down [in Natal] on the expiry of
their term of indenture.

2.

The right of entry into the Cape which all Indians born in
South Africa have enjoyed seems to disappear.

3.

Indian marriages celebrated in South Africa must be
recognized as valid. Moreover, the term “monogamous”
used in the Bill must not be interpreted by the
Government to imply that any woman intending to
immigrate should be the only wife of her husband in
India. So long as the husband does not have another wife
in South Africa, there should be no objection to the entry
of such a woman. Further, if any of those who are already
resident in South Africa have married twice in India, or
here, both the wives should be free to leave and return [to
South Africa].

4.

An Indian entering the [Orange] Free State as a fresh
immigrant should not be required to sign the declaration
that he has to at present.

5.

Particulars about the admission of Indians this year must
be settled.

[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 19-7-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

211

134. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XXIX]
9. CARE OF CHILDREN

It is not intended in this article to go into the details with which
midwives are concerned. We shall therefore turn to the time after the
child has been delivered. Those who have understood the previous
chapters will realize that even during confinement it is not necessary
that the mother and child must be kept roasting in a dark, unventilated
room, with bedding all too dirty and heated from beneath. However
old the practice of keeping a confined woman in a dark room, it is
cruel all the same. Keeping out fresh air is even more cruel. The
custom of placing fire under [the cot] is entirely unnecessary and one
full of risk. During the winter the patient will certainly need greater
warmth. For this purpose, she should be supplied with extra coverings.
If the room is cold, a fire, first lighted outside, may be brought in after
the smoke has subsided, and the air in the room be warmed but it is
absolutely unnecessary to place it under the cot. A hot water bottle in
the mother’s bed will as well help to keep it warm. It is also a cruel
and superstitious practice to provide her with dirty sheets to sleep on.
After recovery, the clothes can be thoroughly washed and used again.
The child’s health depends on the condition of the mother.
Therefore, in addition to these precautions, she should be given an
easily digestible and nourishing diet. There is no evidence that [tonic
foods made with] gum and things of that kind are particularly
beneficial. If the mother eats a diet of wheat, banana and olive oil,
sufficient heat will be generated in her body and she will have
plentiful supply of milk. Olive oil will give milk a mildly laxative
quality, and this will ensure clear motions for the child. If the baby
has any complaint, it is the mother who should be examined. To give
any drug to the baby will be risking its life. The child’s intestines
being extremely delicate, the toxic effects of the drug will be felt
immediately. At such times, it is the mother who should take the
medicine as its curative properties will in an imperceptible manner
pass into her milk. If the baby appears to have too many motions or
to be coughing frequently, there is no need for panic. Instead, one
212

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should wait for a day or two. The specific cause of the trouble should
be removed and the child will recover. Flying into a panic and giving
medicines will definitely harm the baby’s health.
Infants should be bathed in lukewarm water and should have a
minimum of clothing. For the first few months it will be better for the
baby to have no clothing at all. It is best wrapped in a soft white sheet
and then covered with a warm shawl. In this way the bother of
dressing the child is avoided. Fewer clothes will be soiled and the baby
will come to have a tough rather than a weak constitution. A folded
thin cloth should be laid over the umbilicus and a bandage tied over
it. The custom of tying the umbilical cord to the neck with a string is
bad. The bandage should be changed every day. If there is any raw
skin round the umbilicus, finely strained powder of cleaned rice
should be sprinkled over it with clean cotton wool. This will help the
part to dry up.
As long as the mother has a plentiful supply of milk, it is
unnecessary to give the infant any other food. When the supply
decreases, the child should be given the flour of roasted wheat, mixed
with warm water and a little jaggery and this will have the qualities of
milk. Alternatively, half a banana mashed and well mixed with half a
spoon of olive oil will prove very beneficial. If cow’s milk is to be
given to start with, a mixture of one part milk and three parts water,
heated to boiling point, should be used. A little quantity of pure
jaggery should also be added to this. Substituting sugar for jaggery
seems to be harmful. If the child is gradually given increasing
quantities of fresh fruits, its blood will remain in excellent condition
from the very start and it will grow strong and vigorous. Many
mothers feed babies with dal, rice, vegetables, etc., as soon as its teeth
appear or even earlier than that. But this is undoubtedly no good for
it. Tea and coffee should in no case be given to a child.
When the baby has grown up, that is, has learnt to walk, it may
be dressed in a shirt, etc. Shoes are quite superfluous. An infant does
not have to walk among thorns. If, therefore, it remains barefoot, the
child’s feet will be toughened and there will be no obstacle to the
circulation of blood which might otherwise be constricted because of
the shoes. It is both vulgar and cruel to dress up a child, for the sake
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

213

of show, with silken clothes, or dresses padded with cotton, narrow
pyjama, a cap on head and ornaments round the neck. To imagine
that we can improve upon the appearance that Nature has given the
child is sheer vanity and ignorance.
It must be realized that the child’s education begins right from
its birth and that its real teachers are its father and mother. To threaten
a child, to pad its body [with dresses], to overload its stomach all these
are a violation of educational principles. If the parents are irritable, the
child will grow likewise, and from parents who are soft it will learn to
be soft. Its ways of speech also it will learn from the parents; if the
parents pronounce words correctly, so will the child; if they use
stammering or foul speech, the child will do likewise. If they follow
immoral ways, to be sure, the child will learn them. “As the father so
will be the child, as the banyan tree so will be its fruit”1 —is indeed a
true saying. Here the word ‘father’ stands for both parents. The child
learns to eat the food the father eats. Later on, it will never get
elsewhere the education that it can receive in its home.
When we consider all this, it becomes clear how very delicate is
the responsibility the parents carry. Man’s primary duty is to teach
children purity of conduct so that they may bring credit to themselves
and the parents. We observe of trees and their fruits that only plantains
can come from a plantain tree and that an excellent tree alone
produces good fruit. A fine animal has fine offspring. Man falsifies
this rule. Parents with a reputation for purity have children of impure
conduct and apparently healthy parents have unhealthy offspring.
The chief or rather the only reason for this is that, though not worthy
to be parents, we frequently become such merely in consequence of
self-indulgence. How then can we be mindful of children’s interests?
But it is incumbent on right-minded parents to bring up their children
in the best possible manner. To be able to do this, both father and
mother must have received true education. Parents who have not done
so should, if they realize their error, leave their children in the charge
of other well-educated and virtuous persons. It is vain to hope that
children will learn good behaviour at school. There is only one way of
teaching good behaviour and that is to give the child an opportunity
1

214

A Gujarati saying
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to live constantly in that kind of atmosphere. If there is one sort of
training at home and another at school, the children can never
improve. It follows from this that there are no fixed times when a
child is to receive its education. Its education commences at its birth
and from that very moment begins its physical, mental and spiritual or
religious training. Its training in language starts the moment it begins
to prattle. Instruction in letters also it can have from its parents, as it
plays. In olden days, this was what usually happened. Now, it has
become the custom to send children to schools. If parents would do
their duty by their children, there would be no limit to the heights the
latter could reach. But, if we regard children merely as toys, fondle
them excessively, spoil them out of a mistaken notion of affection
with sweets and rich clothes right from their childhood, allow them to
do as they please, if we are greedy for money ourselves and teach this
greed to children, are engrossed in pleasures and set that example
before children, are lazy ourselves and make them lazy, are dirty and
teach them dirty ways, tell lies and teach them lies, then is it any
wonder that our progeny grow up to be feeble, immoral, lying, lustful,
selfish and greedy? Thoughtful parents need carefully to ponder over
these remarks. India’s future, a good half of it, lies in the hands of
parents.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 19-7-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

215

135. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
[PHOENIX,]

Ashad Vad 1 [July 19, 1913] 1
CHI. JAMNADAS,

I got your two letters together. I advise you to marry because I
do not credit you with spiritual strength of a high order. By
obstinately refusing to marry, you will cause extreme pain to your
parents, and still more to your prospective father-in-law. You can do
all this, but for that you require higher knowledge. When you have
achieved it, you will ask me no questions, nor will your parents or
anyone else take your words amiss. You cannot say with certainty that
your present state of mind will last for ever. When Lord Buddha had
an indirect knowledge of the truth, he went away, abandoning his wife
as she slept, and causing much grief to his parents. Yet, the world has
admired his action. At present, your ideas rest on your faith in me. I
have, therefore, given you advice in keeping with your state. You may,
however, remember my condition. I have told you that you will have
to marry. All the same, if you have no sexual union with your wife,
this cannot but conduce to the welfare of both of you. It will also be
an excellent example to others. It is more difficult to observe
unbroken brahmacharya in marriage than without marrying. You will
be able to observe it only if you are strongly impressed with its great
virtue. This will happen only if you have earned extraordinary punya
in your previous lives. If you have the strength, you should do this.
You should respectfully tell your parents of your views and your
father-in-law through them. You may tell them: “I desire to observe
inviolate brahmacharya and feel that it will be better for me not to
marry. If you understand my ideas, kindly help me. If you think this
to be mere childishness in me, I will obey you and marry. But I shall
have no union with my wife. I shall try to persuade her also to observe
brahmacharya and seek her cooperation in my effort. We shall not
1

The letter appears to have been written after the addressee’s departure for
India in December 1912.

216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

share the same bed. I shall look after her in all other ways and bear
her pure love.” If you can speak these words with knowledge they
will have effect and, having announced this, you will find it extremely
difficult to seek union with the lady, notwithstanding the fact that you
two are married. You will see that this course will keep you free from
the difficulties of looking after children, etc., which you have been
thinking of.
There has been no settlement yet. I believe there will be one.
Even if there is, it is not possible now to leave here before September.
I shall send you a cable when I start.
You have correctly explained why unwholesome food produces
an immediate effect on persons like us. When Lord Buddha ate the
flesh he received as alms, his body fell dead. If, through ignorance or
oversight, eggs have been used in Mrs. Besant’s1 food, she vomits it.
It will be a good—an excellent—thing for Valji Fojdar’s son to
take in water through the nostrils. He should also modify his diet.
First, he should fast for a day or two. For some days he should live on
fruit diet, and of that, too, only one meal every day. He should take
Kuhne baths and eschew supper altogether. Ghee should be washed
and mixed well with camphor powder, and this may then be smelt. It
will be good to do this three or four times every day. There is no
harm in smelling tobacco either. Tobacco can be used with
discrimination for medicinal purposes.
You are right in what you say about Sir Isaac Newton’s
discovery. The well-known scientist Wallace has recently expressed the
same view. He says that people’s moral sense has in no way improved
as a result of all these discoveries.
Don’t suppose that no one has ever thought about milk. I am
sure there must be quite a few who go without milk. But as I said
once, 2 the giving up of meat-eating in India at the instance of some
great man was a change of such far-reaching importance that we do
not find anyone to have thought or written about milk. This, however,
is due to our ignorance. We have not read everything and seen
1

Annie Besant (1847-1933); theosophist leader, politician and social

reformer
2

Vide “Letter to Jamnadas Gandhi”, 29-3-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

217

everyone. The best test is this: “Does the thing appeal to reason,
leaving aside the question whether or not it was considered in the
past?” Moreover, nobody has said or believed that it is a sin to do
without milk. Swami Ramatirth’s1 teaching appeared to me very gross
in many places. Some of it also seemed morally unsound. His ideas
about travel are much too rough and ready. Malbari2 has better ideas.
There is no need whatever for a religious leader from India to go
preaching to America. Karmayoga3 imposes limits on us and to cross
them would be moha 4 and mamata5 on one’s part.
I have never believed that Japan and America are advancing.
The man who gave up his life to no purpose did nothing worthy. That
was self-will on his part and, therefore, a sinful act.
If the husband and wife belong to different religions, there can
be no sense of oneness.
Printing presses and newspapers are also evils. Knowing this, we
should not venture upon new ones. What I have written in Hind
Swaraj 6 on this still holds good.
Manilal has written about the episode involving him . . ., so I will
say nothing here. It has many lessons to teach.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 5647 Courtesy: Narandas
Gandhi

1
2

(1873-1906); Hindu religious thinker, philosopher and poet
Behramji Mervanji Malbari (1854-1912); poet, journalist and social

reformer
3

The concept of doing one’s duty disinterestedly and in a spirit of worship,
no one type of service being intrinsically superior to another
4
Self-delusion
5
Sense of “I” and “mine”
6
Vide “Hind Swaraj”, 22-11-1909.

218

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

136. LETTER TO UMIASHANKAR MEHTA
Ashadha Vad, 2 [July, 20, 1913] 1
CHI. UMIASHANKAR,2

I have your letter. It is not certain when I shall be going. There
may or may not be a settlement. I have written to Jayashankar to look
for an escort. But I see that Jayashankar does not intend to contribute
a single pie towards the expense of their Journey. If you would care to
meet the expense of sending them I shall send them. I do not think
your contributing half the expense will be enough. You may pay half
their school expenses. I do not remember the exact month, but it
should be twelve months since they came. If that is so, it would be £36
for food and £2 for 10 books every six months, that is, £38 in all. Out
of this amount you send £19. It does not matter if you cannot send
the money immediately; but keep it in mind and try to send it early.
Shanti’s health is very good. But he has not grown much in size.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1631. Courtesy: Gunavant Umiashankar
Mehta

1

From the contents and the dateline, this appears to have been written four
days before the letter to the addressee (C. W. 1628) written on Ashadha Vad 6, the date
of which has been inferred July 24, 1913.
2
Son of Dr. Pranjivandas’s brother.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

219

137. LETTER TO BHAVANI DAYAL
[PHOENIX,]

Ashadh Krishna 5 [July 23, 1913]
DEAR SHRI BHAVANI DAYAL,

I have your letter. I could not inform you of my departure
from Johannesburg because it was so sudden; for this I beg to be
excused.
The correspondence with the Minister of the Interior has not
come to an end. However, I had a telegram from Pretoria which says
that the Government could not attend to any other matter so long as
the strike1 trouble was there. When that is over, I shall go to Johannesburg. We shall know then whether the struggle will continue or a
settlement will be arrived at. I am unable to advise whether Swami
Mangalanand Puri should come here to preach or to court
imprisonment.
Shri Satyadevaji may come here on a visit any time he likes.
Bande Mataram from

MOHANDAS
From the Hindi original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 5735 Courtesy: Vishnudutta
Dayal

1

The reference is to the strike in the Johannesburg gold mine area; vide “Riot
in Johannesburg”, 12-7-1913.

220

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

138. LETTER TO REGISTRAR OF ASIATICS
[PHOENIX,

After July 23, 1913]
THE R EGISTRAR OF ASIATICS
P RETORIA
SIR,

[Re:] Mahomed E. Bhayat: 41/E/857
With reference to your letter of the 23rd July last, as per the
telephonic message sent to you when I was recently in Johannesburg,
I have now traced the correspondence I had with Mr. Lane. I beg to
refer you to my letter to him of the 11th April 1912 and the official
reply dated the 8th May of the same year.1 Reading the two together, I
venture to submit that my interpretation that the permit is to be
indefinitely renewed (naturally during the minister’s pleasure) is not
unwarranted. It always has been my intention as it is now also to ask
for a permanent certificate. But I was waiting for the new legislation to
be passed. Unfortunately although the legislation has been passed,
there remain outstanding questions yet to be settled. If they are
satisfactorily settled, I shall hope to make my due submission regarding this lad. Meanwhile, may I ask for further extension of the permit? I observe that you have suggested in your letter to Bhayat of the
26th ultimo that Mr. Bhayat should deposit £10 for the extension to
be issued to the boy. I presume however that the powers given to you
under Act 36 of 1908 remain unimpaired. If you agree with my interpretation, a deposit is not required. In view of my submission, I hope
that you could waive the undertaking required by you in that letter.
I may draw your attention to the fact that the boy is not 17 years
but that he is under 16.
I have, etc.,
From a Photostat of the handwritten draft: S. N. 5848

1

Vide “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 11-4-1912.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

221

139. LETTER TO UMIASHANKAR MEHTA
Ashadha Vad, 6 [July 24, 1913] 1
CHI. UMIASHANKAR,

I have your letter. I have sent a cheque to Chi. Jayashankar. I
have decided to send the children since Bhai Joshi will be accompanying them. He will be leaving tomorrow (Friday). Chi. Jayashankar
has flatly refused to pay the expenses, so I have given instructions that
the money should be put to my account.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1628. Courtesy: Gunavant Umiashankar
Mehta

140. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Thursday [July 24, 1913]
When will that incomparable time come when I shall be free
from bondage outward and internal! When shall I go along the path of
the good, having burst the bonds of all associations?
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I propose in my letters to send you translation of one verse per
day from the hymn I explained during the fasting week. Let the verse
you receive be your chief thought during the day and may it be also
your guide.
I have your letter. I was delighted to find you fared so well. I
1

From the contents and from Ashadha Vad 6 in the dateline which was a
Thurs-day.

222

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

was somewhat afraid. The portion you gave yourself was very
moderate. I am just now extra cautious, so much [so] that I am very
hungry tonight. I had only four tomatoes boiled with the skin off and
a pineapple with a few monkey-nuts. I had besides a spoonful of the
pawpaw vegetable and a lemon squash. I worked a little in the garden
too. Manilal is much better today. He takes two meals. He feels very
hungry. He eats well. He worked at the office today and was not so
morose as yesterday. I cannot describe to you how I miss my bed
companion.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

141. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Friday [July 25, 1913]
Having become detached from the qualities of matter, I
should consider the body as given to me only for the sake of
self-control. There should never be any thought about anything
else. There should be not the slightest trace of attachment to
bodily pleasures.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Such is the second verse. I am quite aware of my limitations in
translating. I can neither give you the music of the language nor the
full spirit of the thought. These you must fill in from your imagination.
I have a letter from Mr. Gokhale in which he apologizes again
for not writing to you.
Manilal has given full day’s work today. The strain had told on
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

223

Mrs. Gandhi. She is now in bed. Did I tell you that Jeki had become
saltless? She is that for 8 days as a trial.
Hope you have seen Strukey (?), also the people who were to be
seen about the Farm. You should try to pay a visit to the Farm before
you return.
You ought to give yourself some time every evening for some
uplifting reading.
I am still feeling weak and have not the courage to walk even to
the station and back tomorrow, at 11 a.m. I could do it about 7 or 8.
But I may feel better tomorrow. I had a fair meal today 6 bananas,
pawpaw vegetable, orange and date jam and spoonfuls olive oil, also 2
oz. monkey-nuts.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

224

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

142. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XXX]
10. ACCIDENTS: DROWNING

We have made a brief study of certain ailments. Everyone
should have some knowledge regarding accidents that may occur at
any time so that he can render assistance if anyone is in mortal
danger. If children are given such knowledge from quite an early age,
they are likely to develop kindliness in greater measure.
We shall begin with the treatment to be given to one who may
have fallen into water. In England, a philanthropic association has
been established to render assistance in such emergencies. It has
issued some valuable suggestions. The following note is chiefly based
on these, with some modifications and additions. It is said that a
person can live for hardly five minutes after he stops breathing. That
means that, when a drowning man is taken out of the water, there is
little life left in him. Immediate measures have to be taken to keep life
going—to bring the drowning person back to consciousness. Two
things must especially be attended to in such a case. One is to make
the victim resume normal breathing by giving artificial respiration and
the second is to give him warmth. When thinking of remedies, it has to
be kept in mind that immediate treatment has to be given, if needed, at
places like river banks where no equipment is available. It is possible
to render treatment to a drowning man only if there are two or three
other persons present. These must possess presence of mind, courage
and promptness. If they themselves fall into a panic, nothing can be
done. If each of the two or three men wants to follow his own method
or starts advising the others, there is little hope for the victim. They
must immediately recognize the most capable among the themselves
and follow his instructions at once.
As soon as the victim is taken out of the water, his wet clothes
should be removed. His body should be wiped with any cloth the
companions may have. A hand should then be placed on his forehead
and he should be gently turned over for a minute. A hand should be
pressed against his chest and dirt and water removed from his mouth.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

225

When the tongue comes out, it should be held. This can be easily done
with a handkerchief, etc., kept ready in the hand. The tongue should
be kept pulled out all the time, till there are signs that life is reviving.
The patient should then be turned on his back, but with the head and
upper parts a little higher than the feet. A man should now kneel
behind his head. The patients’ arms should be slowly lifted and drawn
full length towards the person volunteering this service. With this the
ribs will be lifted and air from without will enter the patient’s body.
Then the arms should be bent and placed on his chest. Thereby the
ribs will be pressed down and the breath exhaled. Hot and cold water
should be dashed against the chest. If the materials required to make a
fire are within reach or if fire can be obtained immediately from some
source, fomentation should be applied and the victim be made warm.
Those present should cover him with whatever clothes they have. His
body should be vigorously rubbed so as to make it warm. It is
necessary to continue these measures for quite some time. Hope
should not be abandoned too soon. Dr. Moore states that with these
measures a victim resumed breathing even after five hours. They
should be taken, therefore, with great energy and promptness. If he
comes round, the patient should be given a hot drink. If given orange
juice in hot water or a decoction of cinnamon, cloves and pepper, he
will quickly rally. It may also help if he is made to smell tobacco.
People should not crowd round him as he has need of all the fresh air
he can get. Signs of death in these cases are generally as follows:
The victim does not breathe and no heart-beat can be detected
by the hand or stethoscope. There is no pulse, the eyes are half closed,
the pupils are dilated, the jaws are clenched, the fingers are bent, the
tongue is between the teeth, there is froth in the mouth, the nose is
slimy and the whole body extremely pale. A feather held over the
mouth does not flutter nor does vapour collect on the mirror. If all
these symptoms are present, it may be taken that life is extinct. But Dr.
Moore says that even with these signs, life is sometimes not over. The
only definite symptom of death is that decomposition starts within the
body. We may conclude from this that hope should be abandoned
only after prolonged treatment has been given.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 26-7-1913
226

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

143. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Monday morning [July 28, 1913]
When the ignorance that deflects true vision is removed and
when a knowledge that the body is totally different from the soul is
acquired, the seeker will remove all obstacles to true knowledge of the
soul and begin to centre on the soul.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

According to our contract I have omitted the Sunday letter for
want of train service.
Manilal, Raojibhai, Maganbhai, Ramdas and the new boy
Gokuldas walked to Inanda Falls yesterday. Manilal has gone back to
one meal only now.
Parsee Rustomjee is here for a few days. Jalbhai has rejoined his
father. You will fix up the oil when you return.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

227

144. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Monday night [July 28, 1913]
Steadfastness of the soul shall last to the end of one’s earthly
existence. And it shall not be capable of being disturbed by afflictions
from without or within, no matter of what nature.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Your two letters before me. Your start was certainly extremely
encouraging. I hope that in spite of the temporary outburst of anger,
you have been able to continue the progress. May you have strength
to carry out your resolutions. I envy you your walks. I do not think I
have yet regained my strength. It is an effort to rise up the hill.
Manilal is now almost normal. He seems to have picked up
strength.
With love,
Upper House
[PS.]
If the Farm cannot be sold, the security you have offered seems
all right.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

145. CABLE TO G. K. GOKHALE
DURBAN,

July 29,1913
GOKHALE
LONDON
INDUSTRIAL

CRISIS

BLOCKS

PROGRESS

NEGOTIATIONS

SETTLEMENT.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the original as delivered: C. W. 4844 Courtesy: Servants
of India Society

146. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Tuesday night [July 29, 1913] 1
Even the religious discipline must be only with a view to gaining
self-control. In a full knowledge of the soul, one must abide by the
precepts of the Prophet (Jin). And even these fade away as the soul
rises higher in the acquisition of self-knowledge.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Naturally there was no letter from you today as you could have
none from me. Friend Rustomjee is still here. He causes me no trouble
and takes very little of my time. He does not want to go to Durban
until the two boys have quietened down.
Praying for the continuation of your progress, with love,
UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
Do not forget to bring the oil please.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

229

147. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Wednesday [July 30, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I have your two letters in one cover. Have written to both B.
Alexander and Mrs. N. Kallenbach.
Your statement of figures is somewhat rosy. But if the loan can
be raised and the office fixed up as you suggest and Mountain View
safely let on a lease subject to the right to you to sell and cancel the
lease if necessary, you may come out all right. I certainly think that
the £500 for the material on the Farm should be somewhere included
in your figures. It is as well. The money need not be paid now,
especially while the struggle is considered probable. But the matter
should be kept in view.
Have you been able to fix up John of the Farm? And what of D.
Pollock?
My advice still will be to let the Farm go if there is a buyer for
the full value.
Manilal is regaining himself. He works out his hours. He eats
very well. I am eating well, take a long time over my meal and am not
satisfied. I am very weak. The after-effect has been the worst with me.
The ringing noises in the ears were there before but they are very
persistent. I am not capable of great physical effort. But I think I shall
slowly regain my strength. The mental capacity is still great. The mind
seems never to be fatigued. It is an effort now to get up at 4.30 a.m.
Today I got up at 5.45 a.m.
Jeki works away nicely and cheerfully. Did I tell you that
Manilal had reverted to one meal? Raojibhai, Maganlal, Ramdas,
Devdas, Dahya, Sivpujan and Revashankar also have one meal. Mrs.
Gandhi is still bed-ridden. She is purely fruitarian. It is hard for her.
Here is the 6th verse.
There shall be freedom from indulgence in the passions rising
from the five senses and there shall be no attachment to the working
230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of the senses. The soul must move without being limited by the
bondage of place, time and matter, subject only to the working out,
without attachment, of its own previous actions.
Of course you will not hurry to come here so long as you are
enjoying peace there and attending to and winding up your affairs in
the spirit of the above lines, with sufficient detachment.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

148. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Thursday night [July 31, 1913]
He is angry with anger, he has sense of respect for his own
humility, he is the seer of the false show about him but untouched by
it and he is avaricious of avarice itself.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

You are certainly keeping up the momentum. Am glad you
have taken up spiritual reading. It is proper food for the soul.
Have you heard from or about Albrecht?
I am too much disturbed to say more.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

231

149. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

August 1, 1913
There shall be no anger even against one who does us serious
harm and there shall be no pride even though an emperor should bow
the knee before us; there shall be no self-delusion even though the
body may perish and no ambition though we may command the
wealth of a Croesus 1 .
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Yes, you need not come away leaving work that may be
progressing under you. I am glad you had a heart-to-heart chat with
Mrs. Binion. I know that when we meet again, you will have a great
deal of your experiences to give me.
We may take it that the loan will not be an easy matter. If
Gordon can take over the Mountain View property as a business
propo-sition, your troubles are practically solved. He can hang on to it
and therefore he can have nothing to lose. Did you mention it to him?
He may do it in order to free you for your spiritual growth. The
knowing friends may reserve you for work they will not or cannot do.
It is true they may say yours will be purely an experiment. Why not?
We make experiments in mundane business. So we may in spiritual
matters.
If you are staying long, how about your food? The best thing
would be for you to buy sufficient meal and bake bread and biscuits
yourself. You [need] not go in for the thing wholesale. The wheat you
have there you may bring with you when you come. As you are
falling in love with your solitude and as you light the stove regularly,
it is no trouble to bake once or twice a week. We have made here
banana flour and almond coffee. As Mrs. Gandhi is a fruitarian, you
may expect all these delicate complications.
1

The last king of Lydia, 560-546 B.C., reputed to be the wealthiest man of

his age

232

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

150. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
[JOHANNESBURG ,

August 1, 1913]
MY DEAR HENRY,

I see that you have not allowed the grass [to grow] under your
feet. Already you have worked the oracle. I see your hand in Reuter’s
cable also. All this does not surprise me. You have accustomed me
to those experiences of your ability to identify yourself with your
cause.
The strike affair here paralyses all other activity. It is impossible
to expect the ministry to do anything just now for us. But your work
there will tell whenever the negotiations are reopened. I see that I have
now hardly £150 left with me. I do not know how to tide over the
prolongation of the agony. If the struggle were to start, we should be
independent of funds. For the maintenance will come from the
begging. But in the state of suspense the difficulty is very great. If Mr.
Gokhale is well, you may discuss the situation. On no account do we
want a public appeal. But a private donor will solve the difficulty. You
must however use your judgment. Please let it be made clear to the
donor if there be one that he will give, if he does, not for families in
distress but to facilitate my hanging on and to enable me to continue
in comparative ease the undertakings we have in hand and which will
enable us to declare passive resistance whenever we want to. Whilst I
give you the financial position, you need not give yourself anxiety
over it. If you can do anything, you should do it. If you cannot, I
shall manage somehow. We have still got the jewellery!—the gifts—in
the Bank.1 I shall not hesitate to use it, if the necessity arises.
1

The reference is to a trust, created by Gandhiji in 1901, of gifts and
ornaments presented to him; vide “Letter to parsee Rustomjee”, 18-10-1901.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

233

With love to all,
Yours sincerely,

BHAI 1

[PS.]
You will study the remarks on the regulations. I have reproduced the Senate debate for your use, should the struggle revive. It so
thoroughly discredits Fischer.
From the original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 930

151. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XXXI]
11. ACCIDENTS: BURNS

When any person’s clothing or something else about him
catches fire, we get into a panic, which is like branding a man who has
already sustained burns2 —instead of being helpful to the victim, we
make things worse for him. It is everyone’s duty therefore to know
what remedies to apply to a man who has suffered burns.
The person whose clothes catch fire should also not become
terrified but, if it is the loose end of a garment, should promptly rub it
with the hand. If the entire clothing has caught fire, he shouldroll on
the ground or, if there is a carpet or similar thick cloth within reach,
he should wrap himself in it. If water is available, it should be thrown
on the flames. As soon as the fire is extinguished, he should be
examined for burns. If there are any, the cloth is likely to stick to
those parts. This should not be pulled off. The remaining clothing
should be cut round with a pair of scissors and the part that has stuck
to the skin left in place. Great care should be taken not to tear the
skin. Leaving the victim in this condition, one should collect clean
earth forthwith and mix it with cold water to make a poultice and this
should be tied over the burns so that the victim will suffer the
minimum of pain. If cloth is sticking to the burns, it may safely be left
1
2

234

“Brother”; this was how associates addressed Gandhiji.
A Gujarati saying
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

under the bandage. As soon as the mud dries, the poultice should be
changed. There is no need to be afraid of using cold water.
For anyone who may not think of this treatment at the moment,
here are others which will be useful to note. They are taken from a
book by a British writer. Take a green banana leaf and spread olive oil
or sweet oil [sesame oil] over it. Then place it over the burn and tie it
up. In the absence of a leaf, a clean soft cloth soaked in oil will do as
well. A mixture of linseed oil and lime water in equal proportion and
well shaken is also effective. If cloth pieces get stuck and cannot later
be removed, lukewarm milk and water should be used to soak them.
When they are softened, it will be possible to remove them. If oil
bandages have been used, they should be changed after two days in
the first instance and subsequently renewed every day. If a blister is
formed, it is necessary to open it. The skin need not be removed.
If the burn has only caused redness of the skin, there is no better
remedy than a mud poultice. The burning will cease immediately.
If the fingers have been burnt, they should be kept carefully
separated from each other by clean bandages. Sometimes a person
receives burns through a strong acid which falls on his skin. The
remedies suggested above are effective in this case also.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 2-8-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

235

152. LETTER T0 JAMNADAS GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG , ]

Shravana Sud 6 [August 7,1913] 1
CHI. JAMNADAS,

You say you were scared by what Harilal told you about baths.
There is no reason for it, though. Harilal has been talking in his
ignorance. All that caution is unnecessary. I never bother to take the
temperature and so on. There is no need to. The temperature of the
water should be lower than that of the body. The rest one knows from
experience. Whenever Kuhne baths seem to be called for, they may be
taken without the least hesitation.
This is the reason behind the notion that tomato, lime, etc., are a
cause of fever. When they are taken with a heavy meal and illness
follows, it is blamed on them. Secondly, when a person whose blood is
excessively hot through the use of spices, such as chillies and pepper,
and pulses and things of that nature, starts taking lime, etc., there is
likely to be a crisis at first. If, however, he gives up the use of spices
and similar things and starts the use of lime, etc., according to need,
there is no doubt that his blood will be purified. A man who has been
in a very hot place and then suddenly exposes himself to a breeze
may get cramps. It is possible that lime may have a similar effect on
one who has been accustomed to eating chillies, etc.
I think I have written to you about looking upon Brahmins with
reverence
I am not against a good school, but I believe that a school with
too many pupils cannot be a good one. Moreover, that alone is a
school in which the pupils are on the campus for all the twenty-four
hours. Otherwise, one receives education of two different sorts.
When I am there, the Press will continue to work as usual. Mr.
Polak will carry on his practice. Miss Schlesin is already fixed up
elsewhere. Mr. Kallenbach will very likely accompany me. Miss West
1

This appears to have been written after the addressee’s departure for India in
December 1912.

236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will stay on in Phoenix for the time being. Manilal will go with me.
We need not assume that all our shastras have been written after
careful thinking and from knowledge. Charvaka’s1 is also ashastra. If
by the term shastra we mean that alone which contains perfect
knowledge, then, of course, we can say that all shastras have been
written from knowledge. From this point of view, any shastra which
mentions human sacrifice, etc., should be taken to be mere ignorance.
The idea may have been interpolated in the genuine shastras at some
later time. One who wants to realize the atman need not go in for such
research. It is the concern of the historian; we, on the other hand,
should look for the essence, the spirit, of every text or utterance. Why
should we put ourselves to the bother of reading sense in their
nonsense in the belief that all shastras are shastras [in fact]?
In India, as elsewhere, knowledge and ignorance go hand in
hand and so we find obnoxious practices, like offering sacrifices to
Kali2 , followed in the name of religion. We may not concern ourselves
at present about stopping them either. Our first concern is that we
should realize the atman. When we have learnt that lesson and
mastered it, we shall be able to solve all others with little effort.If
Vibhishana3 went over to Shri Ramachandra with no selfish motive,
what he did was perfectly right. Who would conceal from God the
fault of even a blood brother? One is, moreover, justified in seeking
God’s help to undo a brother’s evil.
It is not possible to cling to the literal meaning of the verse you
have quoted from the Bhagavata 4 . Krishna alone knows the meaning
of His sport. He may, submitting to the urge of desire, pursue love, but
we creatures of flesh and blood cannot do likewise. The freedom He
may have by virtue of his Godhead, we cannot possibly take. Apart
from this, the author of the Bhagavata wrote what he did about
Krishna within the limits of his own knowledge. No one knows the
1

A philosopher who propounded materialism
The Mother Goddess in her destructive form
3
Younger brother of Ravana in the Ramayana, who urged his brother to return
Sita and make peace with Rama
4
One of the 18 Puranas, sacred narrative poems in Sanskrit, part history and
part legend; it depicts the love of Radha and Krishna as symbolical of the love of the
human soul for God.
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

237

real Krishna.
For the present, you should spend your time in the service of
your parents, in manual labour and studies.
I cannot say where I shall settle down permanently. I don’t
know where a photograph of mine may be found. You need not insist
on securing one. Mr. Kallenbach’s will be available.
I have not passed the test qualifying me for moksha. All my
desires have not been subjugated. I cannot still claim to havemastered
the palate. I dare not assert that the desire for sexual pleasure will
never get the better of me in whatever state I may be. Love for the
wife, the sons and other members of the family has not yet melted
away. All that can be said about me is that I am one who is striving
earnestly to attain moksha.
All your letters, which I have been carrying with me for so many
days, are now answered. You may ask whatever else you may yet feel
like asking.
I have been in Johannesburg for the last ten days. I have come
here to revive the struggle in case a settlement fails to come off. I
cannot say what will happen. I am waiting for a reply from Pretoria.
Mr. Polak has gone to England as desired by Mr. Gokhale.
Let me know your daily routine. Write to Kotwal. His address:
Kotwal House, Thana.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 5648 Courtesy: Narandas
Gandhi.

238

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

153. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XXXII]
12. ACCIDENTS: SNAKE-BITE

Men have always feared snakes. There are countless superstitions, too, connected with the serpent. We are afraid even to mention
its name. At night we refer to it as “the big creature”. Among
Hindus, the snake is an object of worship. Nagpanchami1 is regarded
especially as the day of snake worship. There is a popular belief that
the earth is supported on the head of the serpent Sheshnag. God also
is held to be Sheshshayi, i.e., lying on Sheshnag. God Shiva is said to
wear a snake as a garland. “Sheshnag with his thousand mouths could
not describe this”; in saying this we attribute intelligence and
knowledge to the serpent. There is a similar idea in Christianity also.
“Be wise as the serpent”, so runs a saying in English. The serpent
karkotak conferred a boon upon Nala2 by biting him, thereby making
him so ugly and deformed through its poison, that none would look
upon him with evil intent as hewandered in the forests. The serpent
also stands, in the Bible, for the Devil. It was he who tempted Eve.
Thus there are all kinds of beliefs and tales about this creature.
It is easy to understand the dread of snakes. If a snake-bite takes full
effect, death is inevitable, and no one wishes to die. Hence this fear. It
is also easy to see how snakes have been worshipped out of fear. If the
snake had been a tiny creature, it would not perhaps have inspired
such worship despite its being the terror that it is. But being long,
large, beautiful and of strange aspect, it is even ceremonially
worshipped.
It is more difficult to say without thinking why the snake has
been credited with intelligence. Modern scientists aver that it has none.
According to them, a snake should be killed at sight. Government
statistics show that in India 20,000 people perish annually from
1

Fifth day of the bright half of Bhadrapad
A victim of the Kalipurusha, the malignant spirit of the Iron Age, he lost
his kingdom and was cruelly separated from his wife, Damayanti. The story is told in
the Mahabharata for the benefit of Yudhishthira.
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

239

snake-bite. I think the figure must be higher. The Government offers
a reward for every poisonous snake killed; it is doubtful, however, if
the offer has served any useful purpose. This confirms the general
experience that the snake does not bite without cause. It bites only if
attacked or teased. Does this possibly indicate intelligence, or, if not
that, harmlessness? It uses its fangs in its own defence. Man also uses
teeth for that purpose often enough. To attempt to make India or any
other place entirely free of snakes is like trying to wrestle with the air.
Snakes can be prevented from coming to a particular spot. Killing the
ones found entering the place will prevent others. They will come to
realize that going to the place is like walking into the jaws of death.
But this can be done only for a limited area. The attempt cannot be
made over a vast country like India. To seek, therefore, to kill and
extirpate the snakes entirely in this way from the country amounts to
throwing money down the drain.
Moreover, it is the same God who creates snakes [as well as
ourselves]. We cannot understand all the works of God. Surely, He has
not created beings like tigers, lions, snakes and scorpions only so that
we may kill them! If the snakes themselves were to get together and
consider how men killed them at sight, they would ask if God had
created man for the sole purpose of destroying them. Just as that
would be a mistaken belief, so would be ours regarding snakes.
St. Francis was a great Yogi in Europe. He used to wander in the
forests among reptiles, etc., but they never harmed him. On the
contrary, they were friends with him. Thousands of Jogis 1 and fakirs
live in the forests of India. They move fearlessly among tigers, wolves,
snakes, etc., and one never hears of their coming to any harm on that
account. It might be argued that there must be casualties even among
them through snake-bites, or predatory animals; this is very likely. We
know, though, that in comparison with the great number of reptiles,
etc., the jogis and fakirs are so few that if these deadly creatures, were
set on destroying them, not one of them would survive. We are told—
and we believe it to be true—that these jogis and fakirs keep no
weapons with which to withstand these beasts. This proves that some
dreaded beasts are friendly to or, at any rate, do not touch some Jogis
1

240

Corrupt form of Yogi, used commonly for ascetic
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and fakirs. I personally feel that when we rid ourselves of all enmity
towards any living creatures, the latter also cease to regard us with
hate. Compassion or love is man’s greatest excellence. Without this he
cannot cultivate love of God. We come to realize in all the religions,
more or less clearly, that compassion is the root of the higher life.
Furthermore, is it not possible that the very existence of creatures like snakes or the cruelty in their nature reflects our own attitudes? Is there not cruelty enough in man? On our tongues there is
always poison similar to a snake’s. We tear our brethren to pieces as
wolves and tigers do. Religious books tell us that when man becomes
pure in heart, the lamb and the tiger will live like friends. So long as in
our own selves there is conflict between the tiger and the lamb, is it
any wonder that there should be a similar conflict in this world-body?
We but mirror the world. All the tendencies present in the outer world
are to be found in the world of our body. If we could change ourselves, the tendencies in the world would also change. As a man changes his own nature, so does the attitude of the world change towards
him. This is the divine mystery supreme. A wonderful thing it is and
the source of our happiness. We need not wait to see what others do.
The purpose of writing at such length on the subject of snakebite is that if, instead of merely suggesting a few concrete remedies, we
go deeper into the matter, we discover a miraculous remedy with
which to face all such terrors and, if even one reader adopts it, my
writing this will not have been in vain. It has been said earlier, moreover, that the purpose of these chapters on health is not merely to promote physical health but examine the means of cultivating health of
every kind.
Even modern research-workers admit that a man who is healthy,
whose blood is not overheated and whose food is wholesome, will not
be affected by snake venom. On the other hand, if a man’s blood is
overheated with intoxicants, spices, or hot foods, snake venom spreads
through his body in no time and he succumbs to it quickly. All this
has been experimentally established by medical experts. One of them
has gone so far as to declare that the blood of a person who discards
salt and lives exclusively on fruits becomes so pure that it is able to
combat poison of any kind. It is not possible to confirm from experi-

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

241

ence how far this last statement is true. Moreover, having abstained
from salt, etc., for a year or two, one is not justified in believing that
the blood which had lost its quality through a life-time’s abuse had
regained it because of wholesome living for a year or two.
It has also been demonstrated through experiments that if any
poison gets into the system of one who is nervous or in a rage, the
effect is instantaneous and more potent. Everyone can discover for
himself that, when frightened or angered, the pulse is faster and the
heart-beats increase. Whenever the blood circulates at a greater speed,
it becomes hot. Heat generated by anger, etc., is unnatural and,
therefore, deleterious. There is no reason to doubt that rage is a kind
of fever. We can at least infer from this that one of the best defences
against snake-bite is to have only as much as we need of wholesome
food, that is, food which Nature has placed at our disposal, to avoid
anger and fear and, even when bitten by a snake, not to fall dead with
fear before even a remedy has been tried. One should have confidence in the potent effect of the purity of one’s life and ultimately
take courage in the thought that the length of one’s days is that
ordained by God.
That many deaths which are apparently due to snake-bite are in
reality caused by fear or wrong treatment has been confirmed by
Mr. Fitz-Simon, head of the museum in Port Elizabeth. He has studied
snakes for many years and performed experiments on their poison.
He has written much about the different types of snakes and also
suggested remedies for their bites. He states that he has known cases
where the condition had become serious owing to sheer panic and
others where the persons had died as a result of extremely painful
remedies.
All snakes are not poisonous and even the venom of those that
are does not cause instantaneous death. Moreover, the most poisonous
snake does not always get time to empty the entire poison from its
fangs into our blood. Knowing this, no person need be terrified by a
snake-bite. An easy remedy is current nowadays which one can apply
oneself. This is as follows:
A handkerchief should be bound tightly just above the spot
where one has been bitten by the snake. This can be tightened by
242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

means of a tourniquet made with a pencil or piece of stick. Theidea is
to prevent the venom from circulating through the arteries. Then a cut
should be made, half an inch in size, over the bite with a fine blade
and allowed to bleed. After this, the purple powder of a salt called
potassium permanganate should be rubbed into the cut. This powder
is said to be a potent and unfailing remedy. A tube about one and a
half inches in size and shaped like a stick, with facility for holding the
potassium permanganate on one side and with a small, sharp blade on
the other, is also available in the market for one shilling. If this
implement is not at hand, either another person or the victim himself
should suck the wound and spit out the matter he has sucked up. This
cannot be done by anyone who has sores in the mouth as the
sucked-up matter contains poison. This method is effective only if it is
employed within five to seven minutes of the bite. Once the poison
has entered the blood stream, it is rarely that it can be neutralized.
Juste, who has experimented with mud treatment, declares that he
cured a patient who was supposed to have succumbed to a snake-bite.
The victim was placed in a hole dug in the earth and given warmth;
the poison was drawn out, and there he was, rising again. Juste reports
other similar instances. I have no personal experience of snake-bite
but, having tried the mud treatment in many other cases, I have come
to have unshakeable faith in it. Immediately after a cut has been made
at the spot where the bite has occurred and potassium permanganate
rubbed in, or the poison sucked out, a large mud poultice, half an inch
thick, should be placed over it. For instance, if the hand has been
bitten, it would be well to cover the entire arm with the poultice.
Everyone should keep a tin of such earth ready in his house. It will be
excellent if the earth be ready powdered and strained, and better still if
kept outside in the sun, at a level where water cannot reach it.
Bandages made from torn clothes should be kept handy. These
preparations prove useful not only in cases of snake-bite, but also for
other accidents, injuries, etc.
If the patient feels drowsy or his breathing stops, artificial
respiration, as in the case of drowning, should be given. In the former
case, he should be given warm water or a decoction of cloves and
cinnamon. The victim should be kept in the open air but well covered.
If his body is getting cold, hot water bottles should be placed round
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

243

his body or he should be warmed with the help of flannel pieces
wrung out in hot water.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 9-8-1913

154. LETTER TO IMMIGRATION OFFICER
[JOHANNESBURG ,

August 10, 1913]
THE IMMIGRATION OFFICER,
P RETORIA
SIR,

I understand that an Indian named Purshotam Mavji was, whilst
on his way to India, deprived of his registration certificate last week.
This certificate was obtained by him in terms of Act 36 of 1908. Will
you kindly let me know whether the information given to me is
correct, and if it is, in terms of which section of the new Act
Mr. Purshotam Mavji was deprived of his certificate?1
I have the honour to remain,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5854

1
On August 15, the Registrar of Asiatics wired Gandhiji, asking by whom and
at which place Purshotam’s certificate was taken. Vide “An Effect of the New Act”,
16-8-1913 and also “Letter to Registrar of Asiatics”, after 1-9-1913.

244

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

155. TELEGRAM TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

August 11, 1913
WROTE

MR.

LANE

COULD

YOU

SMUTS

COULD

ON HIM

LAST

PLEASE
NOW

IF REQUIRED.

WEEK. 1

ASCERTAIN
DEAL
WIRE

I

OBSERVE

AND

WITH
PHOENIX.

WIRE

MY

HE

IS

ON

WHETHER

PROPOSALS.

LEAVE.
GENERAL

WILL

WAIT

2

GANDHI

Indian Opinion, 13-9-1913

156. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
P HOENIX

Thursday [August] 15 [1913] 1
He shall be naked, he shall be shorn, he shall be unwashed, he
shall not have to wash his mouth; he shall neither ornament his hair
nor any other part of his body and he shall have gained complete
mastery over himself and have been free from every form of
bondage.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

It is now nearly 5 a.m. It has been intensely cold and windy
these two days and we have been obliged to sleep inside the room. I
have a cable saying Polak is leaving on the 30th August and reaching
here on the 28th Sept. I am delighted. If there is a settlement, he will
1

The letter referred to is not available.
To this the following reply was received: “Yours yesterday. Your proposals
are receiving Minister’s careful consideration and he hopes to let you know a little
later what his views are, as he wishes first to consult his colleagues. I will advise you
in due course whether necessary for you to come here.” For the letter which followed
this, vide Appendix “Letter from E. M. Gorges”, (19-8-1913).
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

245

be here just when we are ready to leave. And the cable from Dr.
Mehta says:“I do not agree with you. Terrible outrage has been done,
damaging to all. I do not approve of your action.” This has reference
probably to hair-cutting or to all the penances and vows.2 We shall see.
He cannot understand. He is too much in the world. Hope the fire
generated by the fast continues.
With love,
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

157. AN EFFECT OF THE NEW ACT
We understand that an Indian named Purshotam Mavji, a British
Indian, duly registered in terms of Act 36 of 1908 (Transvaal), was
deprived of his registration certificate whilst he was on his way to
India and was told by the officer who took the certificate from him
that it would be restored to him if he returned within one year of the
date of his departure from the Transvaal. We do hope that our
information is not correct or that, if it is correct, it is merely an error
committed by an overzealous officer. But if the Act is interpreted by
the Government to mean that the rights acquired under the Registration Act of the Transvaal are adversely affected, it would be one
more grievance against the Government and a further justification for
a revival of the struggle.
Indian Opinion, 16-8-1913

246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

158. THE LATE SIR ADAMJEE PEERBHAI
We learn through Reuter’s cables with regret that Sir Adamjee
Peerbhai, a great philanthropist of Bombay, is no more. He was a
wealthy merchant who knew how to use his money. He was best
known to many as the owner of a famous sanatorium in Bombay. But
his charities were not confined to a particular project or persons. They
were most catholic. Sir Adamjee’s son, Mr. Cureembhai, it will be
remembered, paid a visit to Natal some years ago. Ever since that time,
a link was established between the Indians of South Africa and the late
Sir Adamjee, who always took a kindly interest in all South African
Indians who visited him. We sympathise with the deceased’s family in
their loss.
Indian Opinion, 16-8-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

247

159. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XXXIII]
13. ACCIDENTS: SCORPION AND OTHER STINGS

We have a saying, “May none suffer the agony of a scorpion
sting”, so unbearable it is. As a matter of fact, it is far more painful
than snake-bite and yet we dread the latter more, for it is likely to
prove fatal. A scorpion sting rarely causes death. Dr. Moore says that
one whose blood is pure suffers less pain.
The remedies for this and similar stings are simple. A cut should
be made at the spot with a sharp knife or with the special instrument
used for snake-bite, and some blood allowed to escape. The cut
should then be sucked and the poison spat out. A bandage should be
tied a little above the spot, to prevent the poison from spreading, and a
large mud poultice applied. With the latter, much of the pain will
probably subside at once.
Some books recommend the frequent application of a compress
soaked in equal parts of water and vinegar or washing of the area with
salt water. If the affected part can be held in the solution, it should be.
But the mud poultice is by far the most effective remedy, as anyone
unfortunate enough to be stung by a scorpion can test for himself. It
must be remembered that the poultice should be as large as possible.
The use of two seers of earth for the purpose will not be excessive. If a
finger has been stung, it will not be too much to extend the poultice as
far as the elbow. If the mud is placed in a long vessel and the arm
buried in it, the pain is immediately relieved. Even for the stings of
centipedes, bees, etc., the remedies are the same.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 16-8-1913

248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

160. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-XXXIV]
CONCLUSION

These chapters on the subject of health have been appearing for
the past few months. They have now come to an end. If I get time, I
plan to publish, as a sort of supplement, the qualities and uses of a
number of simple materials. The present series, however, ends with the
preceding chapter. Before I take-leave of my readers, I feel it will
not be out of place if we once again examine the purpose of these
chapters.
I have repeatedly asked myself why I wrote them. I am not a
vaidya. My knowledge of the subject is but superficial. Is it not likely
that my suggestions have been made after inadequate thought or
observation? In truth, both study and observation are bound to be
incomplete, a process without end. Every day new facts are observed
and new ideas emerge. Why, then, this effort? Thus has my mind been
perplexed.
And yet, medical science is itself based on inconclusive
experiments. Most of it is quackery, as I have shown. With so much of
it about, if these chapters are also reckoned as such, no great harm will
be done ! They have been written from a worthy motive. The intention
is not to recommend what medicines to take after the onset of a
disease. The more immediate purpose, rather, has been to show how
sickness may be averted. A little thought will show that the steps
for prevention of diseases are easy enough. No specialized knowledge
is necessary for this. The difficulty lies in taking to that way of life. I
have felt it proper to write on certain diseases, but only in order to
show that most ailments have a common origin and, as a result, the
treatment also should be common to them all. Moreover, despite all
precautions, the diseases mentioned in these chapters do occasionally
occur. Some remedies for these, one finds, are known to all. If my
experience is added to these, nothing is likely to be lost.
The main question, however, still remains to be considered. Why
is good health necessary? We behave as if no such necessity exists. To
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

249

be sure, rather than build a stout and healthy body and give it over to
the enjoyment of luxuries, regard the body as the only thing worth
preserving and be puffed up with pride to see it strong, it will be better
to have it rotting with leprosy.
All religions have looked upon this body as a place where one
may meet and recognize God. It is called the House of the Lord. It
has been leased to us, all the rent we have to pay being praises of the
Master. Another condition in the rent note is that we must not misuse
it. It should be kept clean and pure inside and out and returned to the
Master in due course in the same condition in which it came to us. If
all the conditions are duly fulfilled, the Master will reward us at the
end of our tenure and will make us his heirs.
All living creatures have bodies alike in their design, in that they
have organs for hearing, sight, smell and pleasure. But the human
body has been described in prose and verse as a ratnachintamani. The
term signifies a jewel which secures to one anything one may wish for.
In an animal body, the soul cannot attain to the highest knowledge
and cultivate devotion to God. Without these, there can be no freedom
for the soul and, so long as the soul has not attained freedom, there
can be no true happiness and no ending to our real suffering. This
body is of some service only if it is well used, that is, made the abode
of God, otherwise, it is a filthy mass of bones, flesh and blood, and the
breath and water that exude from it are full of poison. Of all the
excreta coming out of the innumerable openings in the body, there is
nothing that we would wish to retain. One is nauseated at the very
thought or sight or touch of them. It is only with the greatest
difficulty that we can prevent them from being infested with worms.
By means of the body, we practise a thousand things which we would
do better to avoid, cunning, self-indulgence, deceit, stealing, adultery,
etc. Its desires are endless.1 Even when they are all gratified, it is so
like a glass bangle that it has less strength to resist a blow than has a
broken vessel. It is destroyed in an instant.
Such a state is quite natural for the body. Anything that can be
used for the highest purpose is also capable of being misused.
1

The original Gujarati saying literally means: “That little pot must needs
have thirteen things.”

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Otherwise, it would be impossible to know or estimate its value. We
can measure the value of sunlight because we experience the darkness
that follows the sun’s absence. In that same sun, without which we
cannot live, resides the power to turn us to ashes. A king can be both
magnanimous and wicked.
God is striving for mastery over the body, and so is Satan
engaged in a desperate struggle for it. When it is under the control of
God, it is like a jewel. When it passes into the control of the Devil, it is
a pit of filth. If engrossed in pleasure, gorging itself the wholeday with
all variety of putrifying food, exuding evil odours, with limbs
employed in thieving, the tongue uttering unworthy words and taking
in unwholesome things, the ears hearing, the eyes seeing and the nose
smelling what they ought not to, the body is worse than hell. Everyone
recognizes hell for what it is. But though we use the body as if it were
hell, we go on pretending that it is heaven. Such is our hypocrisy in
regard to the body. Knowing a latrine for what it is, we shall know its
right use. If a splendid hall, however, comes to be used as a lavatory,
the result is bound to be evil. Therefore, if the body be in the Devil’s
control, it would be far better to desire its destruction, rather than its
well-being.
In these chapters on health, an effort has been made to bring
home the truth that the body can remain in health only by obeying
the laws of God. It can never be healthy if it the Devil. Where there is
real health, there alone is true happiness possible, and in order to
achieve real health we must conquer the palate. If we succeed in this,
all other organs will be automatically under our control and one who
has this body under control can subdue the world because such a one
becomes God’s heir, a part of Him. Rama is not in the Ramayana, nor
Krishna in the Gita. Khuda is not in the Koran, nor Christ in the Bible.
They all live and have their being in the purity of human conduct,
which springs from morality. Morality consists in truth, which is the
same as Shiva1 . You may know it by whatever name you please. That
one may have a glimpse, if only occasional, of this truth in these
chapters on health has been the underlying purpose of this effort.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 16-8-1913
1

God of austerity and self-mastery in the Hindu trinity

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

251

161. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
August 16, 1913
He is equidisposed towards friend and foe; he is equiminded
whether he is respected or insulted; he is the same whether he lives or
dies and is of the purest mind when he is released from the bondage
of the world.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

This I am writing at the Press whilst the preparations for printing
are going on. I expect to hear from you about Hoosen and Jalbhai. If
an opportunity occurs you will not fail to sell either Mountain View or
Tolstoy Farm. I wish you could now let the mules and the wagon go. I
suppose you have already paid many times 4/- to make up the £2-10
which you would have lost if the mules had gone a fortnight ago.
When you run short of your supply of provisions, you will not fail to
bake I know. What about the oil bill? If you let me have it, I shall send
you cheque.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

162. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
IN THE TRAIN ,

ON

WAY TO P HOENIX,

[After August 16 1913] 1
CHI. MANILAL,

I hope you have taken with you the I[ndian] O[pinion] file. You
should be very much on your guard against laziness.
See that you get up not later than four in the morning, even
if you have to force yourself to do it. Being none too fit, I am rather
weak in this matter; you should not take my consequent irregularity
on this account as an example to be followed.
Make it a regular practice to complete the appointed work for
each day. Do everything after careful thinking and with
understanding. When asked by Mr. Ritch, you should have given
whatever reply you wanted to. Now, however, when you are yourself
again and have settled down to regular work, you should pay him a
visit one evening and spend an hour or two with him. It would be
better not to go before the middle of next week.
Also, be regular with the exercises in Arithmetic. Among the
hours we counted, one for these exercises.... 2
... and it will also be possible to include it in the table of
contents of the Chapters on Health.
Write to me every day without fail, even on Sundays, and let me
know whatever you want to say.
Always take pleasure and keen interest in being of service to
others. Last evening, it should have immediately occurred to you to
carry the lantern. When the guests arrive, they should be immediately
received and welcomed with due regard. Protect yourself against heat
and cold, but don’t feel miserable.
There is a leather bag of ours there, the one which Kallenbach
1
The last instalment of articles on health referred to in the letter was
published in Indian Opinion, 16-8-1913.
2
Here two pages of the letter are missing.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

253

had taken away. There are some baskets also. Keep them all. They will
be useful to us.
Since there is some wheat in stock, it should be ground into
flour and used for making bread. Afterwards, it will be better to order
flour. The bread made of it is generally good.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 101 Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

163. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Monday [August 18, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I am glad the loan is about to be paid up. The calmer you are in
all your dealings, the better you will be and feel. This is a truism but it
is well to see it repeated by a friend in black and white. For according
to yesterday’s verse, you have to stare lions and tigers in the face in
lonely mountains unmoved. That day may be far off but a beginning
must be made and the face set forwards. Dickson is friendly to an
extent only. He has to serve not two but three masters … you, the
company and himself. The order of service is, of course, the reverse.
If he can serve you after serving himself and the company, he will
certainly do so, equally certainly not otherwise. Let us realize this
fully and act accordingly. We must not expect the impossible from
him.
The Doke memorial service1 may bring me to Johannesburg on
Sunday. I am awaiting a reply from Smuts too. I take it you are taking
an active part in alleviating the grief of the family. You will sign no
documents regarding the loan or anything else.
Of course it would be monstrous if you thanked [me] for
1

254

For Rev J.J. Doke; vide “The Late Mr. Joseph J. Doke”, 23-8-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

anything done there. Either it is your home equally with mine or it is
not. Love does not must not speak, never thank.
Mrs. Gandhi is getting on but slowly. She becomes in the same
proportion that I can become impersonal and therefore purely gentle
towards her, no matter how she behaves. If I consider her my own
specially and then become hot, she too becomes heated and both of us
suffer. How true that we are all in the same boat. One man springs a
leak and if we sit with folded hands, all must sink. Another who knows
repairs it and even the mad one who sprang the leak is saved! Why
not? Both did according to their lights.
Here is the 12th verse:
He does not wince even whilst he is going through severe
austerities; he is not pleased because he has delicate dishes spread
before him; he believes that a particle of dust and the riches of the
gods are all transformations of the same matter.
With love,
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
It was very cold here too during last week.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

255

164. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
P HOENIX,

Wednesday morning, August 20, 1913
Thus having gained victory over impediments to the building
up of character, he shall enter upon a stage where one’s acts are of the
purest; and then having thus gone up step by step, he arrives at a state
in which there is contemplation of the Highest and Purest.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

You must have received the news from Miss Schlesin of my
intended departure for Johannesburg on Friday, reaching there early
on Sunday morning. I can ill afford to come just now. Mrs. Gandhi is
so bad and she is helpless and entirely reliant on me for everything
just now. But I fancy that I ought to attend the memorial service. If
Mrs. Gandhi is very bad by Friday, I might be obliged to cancel my
departure. And if she is not well, I would like to return on Monday. If
she is well I would stay and force the pace with General Smuts from
whom I have now a wire saying my proposals are under consideration
by the Cabinet.1 Thus you see one has to be at the mercy of fate even
regarding one’s immediate movements. But as Carpenter has pointed
out, we make emphatic arrangements about the future. The more
ignorant we are, the surer we become!
With love,
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India.

1

Vide also “Telegram to Secretary for Interior”, 11-8-1913 and “Letter from E.
M. Gorges”, 19-8-1913.

256

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

165. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
P HOENIX,

August 21, [1913] 1
Having crossed the great ocean of illusion, he shall rest where
there is no darkness and having become entirely free from desires and
being centred in Self, he shall attain the pure knowledge.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Am preparing to come. Manilal will probably go with me and if
I have to return to Phoenix immediately he will stay there till I return.
Dahya also comes with me. So you see I am not pressing anyone to
keep his boys with me. Hanif is in Durban on his way to Mombasa.
What a tragedy! Mrs. Gandhi seems to be somewhat better.
I am glad you find in Grimmer a good man. The firmer you are
in your ideals, the more you will naturally impress people who should
be impressed. But it is a long discipline of which we dare not be
weary. Yes, you may have to mix with and live among stinking men.
Better therefore to make a virtue of necessity by travelling 3rd. But of
course I had suggested your travelling 2nd, as you had your 2nd
excursion [ticket]. That you phoned to Gordon having gone earlier is
nothing. But the whole thing is nothing. I simply pointed out how a
poor man would have less acted.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

`

From the contents

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

257

166. THE LATE MR. JOSEPH J. DOKE1
Mr. Doke is no more! The thought is terrible. He who was seen
only the other day by a host of friends, when he set out on his
journey) to the North-western border of Rhodesia, close to the Congo
border, full of hope and buoyancy, has gone to his reward. And he
quitted this mortal frame without any of his relations by his side. Even
his son Clement, who accompanied him, was sent home. But in a death
like this is summed up Mr. Doke’s life. He claimed no exclusive
relationship with anybody. To him every human being was truly a
friend and brother. He, therefore, died surrounded by newly-made
friends. His life preached the gospel of work. He died in harness,
doing his duty. His life preached love to his fellowmen. He died whilst
finding further fields for his loving activity. And as he loved, so is his
death today mourned by not only his European congregation, not
only by Englishmen, but also by many of his Native, Chinese and
Indian friends. In a place where even men of religion are not free
from the local prejudice against colour, Mr. Doke was among the few
who know no distinction of race, colour or creed. Though dead, Mr.
Doke lives through his work of love and charity in the hearts of all
who had the privilege of coming in contact with him.
Mr. Doke’s energy was inexhaustible. He was a man of many
activities. In his own department—that of preaching—he was eloquent
and earnest. He said nothing he did not mean. He advised no rules of
conduct for which he was not himself prepared to die. His preaching,
therefore, was effective. He was an able writer. He wrote a memoir of
his own grandfather. He contributed to magazines. He wrote An
Indian Patriot in South Africa—a popular history of the story of
Indian passive resistance. Lord Ampthill wrote a very flattering
introduction to it. To Mr. Doke it was purely a labour of love. He
believed in the Indian cause and the book was one of the many ways
in which he helped it. Only a short time ago was published his book,
The Secret City— a romance of the Karoo. It is a wonderful piece of
imaginative work. The book has already passed through the second
1

258

This was published as “A Memoir specially written for Indian Opinion”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

edition and has been translated into Dutch. He was so impressed with
the Indian campaign of passive resistance that he was engaged in
writing an elaborate treatise on passive resistance as a rule of conduct.
For writing it, he had specially studied a number of books bearing on
the subject.
He was an artist of no mean order. Some of his paintings are
worth treasuring. His irrepressible humour can be traced in many
cartoons he drew for a New Zealand paper.
Mr. Doke had a frail body but a mind of adamant. His jaws
showed the determination of the owner. He feared no man because he
feared God so. He believed in his own religion with a burning passion,
but he respected all the other great faiths of the world. He detested lip
Christianity, but he considered that final salvation was possible only
through heart Christianity.
His special work for Indians during practically the whole of his
stay in Johannesburg is too well known to the readers to need
recapitulation here. But it is not known to many that he came to the
Indian cause uninvited. He was ever a seeker, ever a friend of the weak
and oppressed. As soon, therefore, as he came to Johannesburg, he set
about finding out the problems that engaged people’s attention. He
found the Indian problem to be one of them, and immediately sought
out the leaders, learnt the position from them, studied the other side of
the question and, finding the Indian cause to be wholly just, allied
himself to it with a rare zeal and devotion. He risked loss of popularity
among his congregation. But that was no deterrent to him. When the
Editor of this journal was in India, Mr. Doke’s was the guiding hand,
and never did a week pass during a period of nearly six months, but
Mr. Doke sent his ably-written and well-informed leading articles. He
guided, too, the deliberations of the British Indian Association, jointly
with Mr. Kallenbach, at a most critical period of its history. When he
went to America in connection with his Church, a grateful community
held a banquet in Mr. Doke’s honour at which Mr. Hosken presided.
Mr. Doke’s words then uttered still ring in the ears of those who heard
him. It may truly be said of Mr. Doke that he lived well and he died
well. He is mourned by many more than the members of his family,
and may that thought comfort and sustain them in a loss which is just

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

259

as much that of those who had learnt to love Mr. Doke as of the
members of his family.
The late Rev. Joseph J. Doke was born at Chudleigh, Devonshire,
on the 5th November, 1861. He was the younger, by some two and a
half years, of a family of two. His father was the Baptist Minister of
Chudleigh. His brother, the late Mr. William H. Doke, died as a
missionary at the end of 1882 on African soil.
The late Rev. Doke had very little schooling, owing to delicate
health. At the age of 16 he lost his mother. At the age of 17, on the
resignation of his father from the pastorate, he became pastor. At the
age of 20 he came to South Africa, where he was in Cape Town for a
short time. Later, he was sent by the South African Baptist Union to
open up a new cause in Great Reinet. Here he met and married Miss
Biggs, in 1886. Shortly after, he returned to Chudleigh. From
Chudleigh Mr. Doke was called to the pastorship of the City Road
Baptist Church, Bristol, where, with the exception of a visit to Egypt,
Palestine and India, he remained until 1894. In 1894, Mr. Doke
removed with his family to New Zealand. Here he was Minister of the
Oxford Terrace Baptist Church, Christchurch, for a period of seven
and a half years, returning to England in 1902. In addition to the
duties connected with his pastorship, Mr. Doke conducted a class for
Chinese, which was greatly appreciated and which is still being
continued by his successors.
Towards the end of 1903, Mr. Doke received a call to the
Grahamstown Baptist Church, and took up his work in South Africa
again. After four years in Grahamstown, he came to the Rand as
Minister of the Central Baptist Church. He remained Minister of this
Church until his death. All his life, more especially since the death of
his brother, Mr. Doke’s ambition was for missionary work, but
owing to his health and family circumstances, the way was not clear,
until, just at the end of his life, it seemed to open up. Together with his
son, Clement, he decided to visit a lonely mission station in
North-western Rhodesia close to the Congo border, and on the 2nd
July they set out on this trip, which was to take about six weeks. Mr.
Doke was also entrusted by the South African Baptist Mission Society
to visit a mission station near Umtali, they taking advantage of his
260

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

being in Rhodesia to secure particulars which they wanted. Mr. Doke
enjoyed the trip to the ’Ndla District immensely, and maintained good
health throughout. He suffered, however, from footsoreness —the
distance to be traversed was some 350 miles—and he travelled most of
the way by “machilla”—a hammock slung on a pole and carried by
two natives—, but despite this he was in the best of spirits and had the
greatest hope for the success of his mission. Through an interpreter he
spoke at numerous villages, and he did a great deal of writing and
took many photographs with a view to lecturing on his return. On the
4th August, Broken Hill was reached, and on the 7th August, Mr.
Doke parted from his son at Bulawayo, the latter being called home
by business duties. Mr. Doke then proceeded to Umtali, after a few
days’ waiting at Bulawayo, reaching the end of his train journey on
the morning of the 9th instant. Here the Rev. Woodhouse met him and
the greater part of the day was spent in the discussion of
missionary matters. In the afternoon the party proceeded to the
residence of Mr. Webber—a friend—just outside the town, where,
owing to Mr. Doke’s feeling too unwell, they remained for the night.
The next morning, Mr. Doke was up before sunrise, feeling very ill,
and all thought of going to the mission station then was abandoned.
Mr. Doke complained of severe pains in the back and had to take to
his bed again. The usual remedies for fever were applied, but, as there
seemed to be no temperature, it was concluded that the malady was
not fever, and a doctor was sent for, who at once ordered him to the
Umtali Hospital, whither he was conveyed by “machilla”. Here he
was under the best doctors and nursing supervision possible. On the
12th a telegram was sent to Mr. Doke’s family, saying that he had a
slight attack of pleurisy, but that there was nothing serious and no one
was to come. On Friday evening, the 15th, a further telegram was
received by Mrs. Doke saying that Mr. Doke was seriously ill with
enteric. Mrs. Doke at once made preparations to leave by Saturday
night’s train, but on the morning of that day a telegram was received
that Mr. Doke had passed away at 7 o’clock the previous evening.
Owing to the great distance, the remains were not conveyed to
Johannesburg, but the funeral took place at Umtali at four o’clock on
Sunday last, a service being held at the Baptist Church, Johannesburg,
at the same hour.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

261

During his sojourn on the Rand, Mr. Doke was prominently
connected with many religious organizations.
Besides the widow, the deceased has left three sons: Willy,
Clement, and Comber, and one daughter, Olive. The eldest boy, Willy,
is training in America as a medical missionary.
Indian Opinion, 23-8-1913

167. THE LATE MR. DOKE
In the death of Mr. Joseph J. Doke, the Indian community of
South Africa has lost one of its truest friends. This is not the place to
recount Mr. Doke’s general public work, great and substantial as it
was. But, paying our humble tribute to the memory of the deceased,
we cannot help contemplating Mr. Doke’s noble work for us. When
Mr. Doke came to the cause, he threw himself into it heart and soul
and never relaxed his efforts in our behalf. It was usual with Mr. Doke
to gain complete mastery over the subject he handled. He, therefore,
became one of the best informed men on the subject in South Africa.
He loved passive resisters as they were his own congregation. The
poorest Indian had free access to this pious Englishman. His pen and
his eloquence were continually used by him during the troublous
times through which the community has passed. He missed no
opportunity of visiting passive resistance prisoners in gaol. And at a
critical period in the history of the community and this journal, he
magnanimously and at no small inconvenience to himself, took
charge of our editorial department, and those who came in contact
with him during that period know how cautious, how painstaking,
how gentle and how forbearing he was. It is such a noble soul whose
withdrawal from this transitory world we, the Indian community,
mourn in common with his family and his congregation. We tender
our respectful sympathy to Mrs. Doke and family.
Indian Opinion, 23-8-1913

262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

168 THE LATE REV. JOSEPH DOKE
This great and altruistic man has given up his earthly life. The
writer’s pen shakes in his hand even in writing this sentence, and
various are the thoughts surging in his mind. As a human being, Mr.
Doke was full of nobility; as an Englishman, his conduct was such
that, had all Englishmen been like him, there would be no bitterness
between them and the Indians. As a priest, he was a man of faith in
God and, although he was very zealous in his religion, he never
vilified other religions. Not only that, but he did his best to understand
the importance of other religions. However, it is for his excellent
services to the Indian community of South Africa that it will for ever
cherish the name of Mr. Doke. In 1907, when preparations for the
satyagraha campaign were in full swing, Mr. Doke had recently come
to the Transvaal from New Zealand. He began taking a keen interest
in the Indian problem from the very day he arrived, and continued to
help till he died. With the exception of one or two, no other Englishman, and hardly any Indian, had such clear grasp of our problem as
Mr. Doke. He had gone through all the documents and laws having a
bearing on it and equipped himself to meet anyone or, the subject. He
never concealed his sympathy for the Indians. In his house, every
Indian, whether rich or poor, was given the same consideration. One
of his many hopes was to see a satisfactory solution to our problem,
and for achieving this he was ever ready for any sacrifice. Who will
not grieve over the loss of such a friend and well-wisher? We had
learnt to look upon Mr. Doke as our shield. That shield is now gone.
Our duty is clear. After the death of a friend, we must not forget his
kith and kin. We must show our sympathy for them. But the most
important duty is to live up to Mr. Doke’s ideas of us. Mr. Doke
believed that we were true satyagrahis, that we were ready to sacrifice
our lives for the sake of our honour and our religion, that we would
not wish ill of anyone who might injure us but, leaving justice in the
hands of God, would love even those who boreus ill-will and fight
them with the sword of love. Maybe all of us cannot be so good or
behave so well but we can all make an effort. Even if a few of us
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

263

succeed, we shall have honoured his memory aright and God will send
us another Doke. It is not as if one becomes a saint on meeting a saint;
it is rather that on becoming a saint one finds a saint.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 23-8-1913

169. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
JOHANNESBURG ,

August 24, 1913
I thank you for your letter1 of the 19th instant.
I have come to Johannesburg in order to attend the Doke Memorial Service and shall be here for a few days. If, therefore, General
Smuts desires my presence in Pretoria, I would be pleased to come
down. I submit the following for General Smuts’ consideration regarding the points dealt with in your letter.
As to South Africa-born Indians, it is perfectly true that I did
not raise, in the correspondence of 1912, this point. It had entirely
escaped me until a friend drew my attention to it. But I assured the
friend that no difficulty need be anticipated as the correspondence
setting forth the provisional settlement of 1911 protected all existing
rights of British Indians. I freely admit that I do not lay claim to a full
knowledge of all such rights possessed by my countrymen throughout
the Union or even the Transvaal. The fact that very few South Africaborn Indians availed themselves of the right was used by me to show
that the Government had no occasion to fear a sudden influx into the
Cape of South Africa-born Indians if the right was retained. From the
Indian standpoint, I wanted to emphasize the fact that we were fighting
for the sentiment, viz., that the liberal and reasonable view, taken by
the old Cape Legislature, should be left untouched. And I fear that I
must press that view again on General Smuts’ attention. I have already
submitted that the Cape members laid stress on this point because the
Right Hon’ble Mr. Fischer fostered, I submit, without a knowledge of
1

264

Vide Appendix “Letter from E. M. Gorges”, 19-8-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the facts, the view that there was a large influx of South Africa-born
Indians into the Cape. I observe that your letter seems to suggest that I
am asking for a breaking of the Provincial boundary altogether.
Though this would be a legitimate desire, I have not asked for it as I
know that it is no part of the provisional settlement.
As to the second point, I am glad that the Government interpretation agrees with that of the Indian community.
As to the Free State difficulty, the point raised by me has not
been understood. I do not ask, for the sake of asking, that the attention of intending immigrants should be drawn to the disability. But I
have submitted that the wording of the Act seems not to require the
declaration in question at the Free State border. If such is also the
Government interpretation of the Act, the Free State difficulty could
be solved without any statutory alteration. In order to allay anxiety on
the part of the Free Staters, I suggested that the disability in the Free
State might be notified on the general declaration to be made at the
first port of entry at the coast. I need hardly say that I have assumed
the legal possibility of an Indian being permitted under the new Act to
enter the Free State.
As to the fourth point, the question of the legality of the
marriages already solemnized in South Africa of the resident Indian
population, as also of the marriages hereafter to be solemnized within
the Union, is of vast practical importance. A definite assurance that
legislation will be introduced next session is necessary to settle this
very thorny problem. Regarding the plurality of wives, I have not
asked for a general recognition of polygamy. All I contend is that, in
continuation of the practice hitherto followed, existing plural wives of
domiciled residents should be allowed to enter. And this was the
assurance given in the letter quoted by me in my correspondence with
you. 1 The number of such wives could be easily ascertained at the
present moment, and the toleration may be restricted only to the
number so ascertained.
I observe that cases have already arisen in Natal out of the new
Act. I cannot help remarking that the marriage case is inconsistent
with the assurance contained in your letter under reply. For Kulsam1

Vide “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 4-7-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

265

bibi is admittedly the only wife in South Africa of her husband. I
would respectfully suggest that the case be withdrawn and the lady set
free The other cases are regarding domicile. The Government contention seems to be that, even where there is no dispute as to facts or the
bona fides of the holder of a certificate of domicile, his right should
be impugned if he has been long absent from the Province of
domicile. If such is the Government interpretation of the new Act,
existing and acquired rights are threatened. And in the event of a
decision unfavourable to the Indian community, a position will be
created that would be totally intolerable and inconsistent with the
provisional settlement as also the declaration of the Right Hon’ble
General Botha and other members of the ministry that there is no
desire to harass the resident Indian population. I, therefore, venture
also to suggest that these cases may be withdrawn. I have assumed that
you are fully aware of these cases. They are reported in the current
issue of Indian Opinion.
May I ask for an early reply?1
Indian Opinion, 13-9-1913

1

To this communication Gandhiji received the following reply on September
10: “Am directed by Minister reply your letter 24th August. As to first point, regrets
he can add nothing to statements already made in my letter 19th idem. Second point
calls for no further action. As regards third point, there is no difficulty, as any
declaration made would be on entry into Union and not at Free State Border. With
regard to marriage question, cannot give any assurance that a marriage law will be
introduced next session on lines asked by you which would apparently alter whole
basis of existing law in South Africa. Your reference to an assurance given to you that
plural wives would be admitted not understood as I can find nothing in
communications from this Department to that effect. Should you please elucidate?
Regarding appeal cases at Durban, those you refer to are apparently still sub judice
and Minister would consequently not be able to interfere.”

266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

170. SPEECH AT MEMORIAL SERVICE1
[JOHANNESBURG ,

August 24, 1913]
Mr. Gandhi said that the Indian community revered Mr. Doke’s memory for the great work done by him for them. He was one of its truest friends. It
could not be said of every man that death was swallowed up in victory and that death
had no sting. But it could undoubtedly be said of Mr. Doke. A death like Mr. Doke’s
really called for no mourning. Mr. Doke’s was a life of perfect self-surrender. He had
dedicated his all to his Maker. He would now rise with a glorified and better body for
the service of his Maker. But it required men like Mr. Doke not to mourn. For him (the
speaker) with whom probably the soul was crushed in the care for the body, he needed
a friend in the flesh. He therefore mourned for a true friend and wise counsellor. Mr.
Gandhi here recalled the assault committed on him2 by a countryman which he said
was delivered in order to redress a wrong which his assailant thought, rightly or
wrongly, he had done to the community and which, in the assailant’s opinion, could
only be redressed by an assault. Mr. Gandhi proceeded:

When I was lying in the office of a friend in a helpless condition
there stood over me Mr. Doke, and his words ring in my memory
today, as they were so appealing to me that afternoon. They were
something like these: “Would you rather go to hospital, or would you
rather be carried to my home? I am sure that Mrs. Doke and my
family will welcome you, and we shall do all we can in order to relieve
your pain.” I had no hesitation in making my choice, and I shall
never regret the choice I made. I remember the evening when, at my
request, the whole family sang to me the beautiful hymn, “Lead,
Kindly Light”. That tune will never die from my memory; it will
never fade out. It is as fresh to me to-night as it was soothing to my
nerves on that great evening when I saw myself surrounded by people
who were no longer strangers. During the night, whether it was 12 or 1
or 2 o’clock, I could see peeping through the door, that had been
1

A memorial service was held at 7.30 p.m. for Rev. J. J. Doke at
Grahamstown Baptist Church, Johannesburg, of which he was pastor. Gandhiji, who
had specially arrived from Phoenix to attend the service, paid a tribute to the
deceased.
2
Vide “My Reward”, 22-2-1908.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

267

purposely left open, Mr. Doke’s face, just glancing in occasionally to
ascertain whether I was suffering or whether I needed anything. The
whole family were at my disposal in order to nourish me, in order to
serve me, in order to soothe me, although I was a stranger to them and
had never done a single service to them.
Mr. Gandhi added that he was certainly proud to have had such a friend. Mr.
Doke had always been willing to help those who needed his help, and those who
needed his help had not to go to him. He went to them. The speaker also recalled to
instance Mr. Doke’s fervent faith in his own religion and his (Mr. Doke’s) efforts to
convert him to Christianity. Mr. Gandhi told him that he, as a Hindu, believed that
the fullness of Christianity could only be found in its interpretation in the light and
by the aid of Hinduism. But Mr. Doke was not satisfied. He missed no occasion to
bring home to him (the speaker) the truth as he (Mr. Doke) knew it and which brought
him and his so much inward peace. Mr. Doke’s was not modernized and civilized
Christianity. He practised the original. Mr. Doke believed in practising as he
preached. The speaker thought the deceased was quite capable, like the martyrs of old,
of being burnt at the stake for the sake of his convictions. The binding tie between
them was the belief they shared in the doctrine preached by Jesus of non-resistance to
evil-a doctrine that was smothered nowadays in a multiplicity of exceptions. With
Mr. Doke hatred was to be conquered by love, vice by the fullest exercise of virtue.
Mr. Gandhi wished that Mr. Doke’s mantle would descend to his children and that the
thought that Mrs. Doke had such a noble husband, whose memory was revered by so
many men and so many races, would sustain and comfort her.

Indian Opinion, 30-8-1913

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

171. INDIA’S GRAND OLD MAN
Our readers hardly need a reminder that India’s G.O.M.
celebrates his eighty-ninth birthday on Thursday next, the 4th
September. We again have the pleasure of expressing our good wishes
to India’s greatest son. Mr. Dadabhai Naoroji has done more than one
man’s share of public work and is now enjoying rest from his labours.
The memory of his strenuous life in the interests of his countrymen is
a constant spur to our small efforts. Such lives make a nation rich—
not in material possession—but in all that goes to make national
honour and faithfulness to duty. For those who may wish to send
messages of congratulations and who may not know his cable address
we may state that messages addressed “Dadabhai Naoroji, Versova,
Bombay”, will find him. We present with this issue a special supplement, giving the portrait of Mr. Dadabhai Naoroji.
Indian Opinion, 30-8-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

269

172. MORE FRIENDS GONE
The fates seem to have decreed that South Africa should lose, in
quick succession, some of its best men. Following on the heels of the
news of Mr. Doke’s death, comes the shocking news of the death of
Dr. Ross, that well-known Presbyterian Minister on the Rand who
relinquished his ministry only last year and the death of the popular
Editor of The Natal Mercury, Mr. Milligan. Dr. Ross’s was an influential personality. We say nothing about him as a public man of Johannesburg. But we cannot help recalling with gratefulness the fact that
Dr. Ross had made himself acquainted with the Transvaal Indian
struggle and that he had joined Mr. Hosken’s Committee 1 . He was
often present at Indian functions and never hesitated, in unequivocal
language, to show his sympathy towards us. We know that, when
passive resistance was at its height, he even carried on personal correspondence with General Smuts, urging him to grant the demands of
passive resisters.
With Mr. Milligan’s services to the Indian cause Indians are
quite familiar. He carried out the best traditions of the Mercury and
worthily filled the chair that used to be occupied by the late Sir John
Robinson2 and the late Mr. Ramsay Collins—no easy task. Only the
other week, we had the pleasure to reproduce a trenchant leading
article written in his paper by the deceased regarding the arbitrary
action of immigration officials. His pen was ever ready to be used for
any just cause.
In the passing away of such men, South Africa is undoubtedly
the poorer. And the loss will be difficult to make up. We tender our
sympathy to the families of the deceased.
Indian Opinion,30-8-1913
1

Committee of European sympathizers of the Indian cause led by William
Hosken, M.L.A. It had “pledged itself to support the British Indians in their struggle”
and to secure justice for them; vide “Interview with Natal Mercury”, 5-1-1909 &
“Letter to the Press”, 5-11-1909.
2
(1839-1903); Prime Minister and Colonial Secretary of Natal, 1893-7

270

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

173. IMPORTANT JUDGMENT ABOUT MARRIAGE
An Indian woman named Bai Manchhi was stopped by the
Immigration Officer when entering [the Cape Colony] with her
husband. The latter, Bhagwan Bhikha by name, obtained an interdict
to enable her to land. Since their marriage in India was not recognized, the counsel advised marriage with the woman here. On the
counsel writing to the magistrate, the latter expressed his inability to
register the marriage on the ground that the woman was a prohibited
immigrant. The husband thereupon went in appeal, which Mr. Justice
Gardiner decided in his favour last week. The judge has held that
under the law anyone’s marriage can be registered. The parties must
only prove that they are both eligible to get married under the law in
force here. At the time of marriage, whether one is a prohibited
immigrant or not is an irrelevant question. Accordingly, the magistrate
has been ordered to register the marriage without raising any such
issue, provided there is no other ground for objection. As a result of
this judgment, if any Indian brings out his wife and she is stopped by
the Immigration Officer, they can get married after landing. Whether,
after the marriage, she can stay on or not is a different question, which
the judgment referred to above does not decide. It is also a separate
question, and a big one, whether or not one should go through a
marriage in this manner. If a man, having married a woman once,
declares that he has not and so marries her again, his action will prove
him to be a man without honour and, therefore, a coward. The poor
people must have patience and assure themselves that the problem will
solve itself in due course. If they fail to get relief meanwhile, the
honourable course for them is to leave their wives in India.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 30-8-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

271

174. LETTER TO REGISTRAR OF ASIATICS
[JOHANNESBURG ,

After September 1, 1913]
THE R EGISTRAR OF ASIATICS
P RETORIA
SIR,

[Re:] Purshotam Mavji 17162
With reference to your telegram herein of the 15th ultimo in
reply to my letter of the tenth1 ultimo, I regret the delay that has been
caused in dealing with it. Before replying I had to make inquiries and
I find that the information, given to me was misleading. Purshotam
Mavji having left for India, it is difficult to ascertain what actually
happened. But it is now surmised that Purshotam Mavji referred not to
a Transvaal certificate but to a Natal one.
I have, etc.,
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5854

1

The original has “ 15th tenth”, evidently a slip. Vide also “Letter to
Immigration Officer”, 10-8-1913.

272

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

175. LETTER TO ASSISTANT SECRETARY
FOR INTERIOR
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

September 3, 1913
As I informed you through the telephone, today, I am leaving
for Phoenix tomorrow. But, before I leave, I would like to draw
General Smuts’ attention to the eagerness and impatience with which
many of my co-workers are looking forward to some final answer.
Indeed, I have even been blamed for writing the first letter. Their
impatience is natural. All our activity is at a standstill. Several have
been obliged to refuse offers of handsome employment owing to the
suspense. I hope, therefore, that among the many important matters
that engage General Smuts’ attention, this will find its proper place. If
nothing definite is vouchsafed by Tuesday next,—the day given by
you—may Mr. Gorges’ letter be taken as the final answer? I would
also like to mention that, if the negotiations now going on prove
abortive, the struggle will be revived on a wider issue. Several most
important items have been omitted from my correspondence for the
purpose1 of securing a settlement and in order to show that we are not
pining for a revival of the struggle.
I hope that General Smuts will appreciate the spirit in which this
letter has been written.
Indian Opinion,13-9-1913

1

The original has “purchase”.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

273

176. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
ON THE TRAIN ,

Thursday [September 4, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

You must be firmer with yourself. You often speak and give
opinions on the spur of the moment. That is called being impulsive.
And you are impulsive very much so. Now the last hymn we sang was:
“Take my life”, etc. I know that neither you nor I have given our life
or anything completely to God. But is it our earnest longing to do so?
If it is, our impulsivenss must go I can give you scores of instances
where you would have spoken otherwise if you had thought before
speaking. Do you know that you harmed Manilal by suggesting that
you would surrender your ticket if he wanted to go or was going as
far as Germiston. The ticket is untransferable. That is one thing. I had
to say that there was no occasion for him to go whereas he might have
thought differently and therefore he might consider my judgment to
be harsh. This is the last illustration of what I want to say: ‘Think
before you speak and look before you leap’ (as in the case of the
proposed lease in Pretoria). You have need to examine yourself much
more than you are doing ≈ though you are doing a great deal, it is not
enough. I shall save the 2/6 for the bed. I know there will be no need.
I saved 6 d. by not buying tomatoes on the spur of the moment.
Medh did not stock my basket with tomatoes. He had sent his
messenger. Manilal did not pluck your nice tomatoes. The flesh
wanted to spend 6 d. the spirit resolutely declined to yield and
triumphed. I am none the worse for having not had them. I did not act
on the spur of the moment. This does not mean that I never act or
speak hastily. But you must not copy me in my weaknesses.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
Please hand [over] the enclosure to Manilal at the first
opportunity.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

177. THE DEBATE IN THE LORDS
We have now the full text of the debate initiated by Lord Ampthill in the House of Lords on the Immigration Act of the Union.1 The
debate is memorable for more than one reason. Most weighty
contributions were made to it by an ex-Governor of Madras and
one-time acting Viceroy of India in the person of Lord Ampthill, by
an ex-Governor of Bombay in the person of Lord Sydenham 2 who
has only just returned from India and who, therefore, knows the pulse
of India on this question, and by an ex-Viceroy of India in the person
of Lord Curzon. All these noblemen spoke fervently in our behalf
and admitted the full justice of our demands. They did not satisfy
themselves with general statements but each of them showed a mastery
of details of the question which one is not accustomed to in such
debates. Of Lord Ampthill’s great pains, care and attention we have
now known for a number of years. His Lordship has made our
question his own. But it is most consoling and refreshing to find
Lords Curzon and Sydenham also possessing a wonderful grasp of the
subject. Their interest in our question is a happy augury for the future
and it considerably strengthens Lord Ampthill’s hands in his
advocacy of a cause he has found to be just and of such Imperial
importance as to warrant, in the midst of his many other activities, his
constant and personal attention.
The debate shows, too, that Lord Crewe had no case. The
attitude of non possumus that he took up is dangerous in the extreme.
We venture to think that the doctrine of non-interference by the
Imperial authority with the domestic affairs of self-governing
Colonies is being carried too far and is reaching a point that
endangers the very stability of the Empire. It is a mockery to describe
self-governing Colonies as part of the British Dominions if they are to
1

His speech was published in Indian Opinion, 20-9-1913 and its four
subsequent issues.
2
George Sydenham Clarke (1848-1933); British soldier and administrator, an
authority on military matters; Governor of Bombay, 1907-13
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

275

be so independent that they may defy Imperial traditions and Imperial
considerations. They cannot, for any length of time and with safety to
the Empire to which they pretend to belong, always take and never
give. As has been pointed out by the great English newspapers which
we have already quoted, the Union Government were ready enough to
fall back upon Imperial troops in the hour of their need. 1 May they
not be expected to show equal readiness to help the Imperial Government out of a serious situation facing them in their Government of the
Indian Empire by doing a simple act of justice? India will certainly
demand and have a satisfactory answer some day.
Indian Opinion,6-9-1913

1

276

Vide “Riot in Johannesburg”, 12-7-1913,
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

178. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

September 6, 1913
15

There, all the evil-producing acts are destroyed, the very seed of
incessant births and rebirths is burnt up, and the soul shines all light,
all power, all purity and the knower of everything.
16

There, only the natural actions are performed automatically
without touching the soul which lives out the life in the present body
and after leaving it ceases to be liable to put on more bodies.
17

There, all the bondage of matter is loosened in thought, speech
and body. That state is one of supreme bliss and completely free from
bondage.
18

There, untouched by anything, the soul sits spotless and
steadfast. It is the essence of life incomparable, indescribable; it is in
its natural state.
19

It is a state attained by previous effort. It is the highest and it is
the abode of the Perfect. The soul is there all knowledge and absorbed
in divine contemplation.

20

Even thought-perfect soul, although it realized this state, could
not describe it. How can anyone else describe it? It is only to be
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

277

known fully by self-realization.
21

My mind is fixed upon that state. I am incapable of reaching it
in my present state but it is my sole ideal. Rajchandra, the author, is
determined by God’s grace to attain it.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Here are the balance of the verses. You may take them down
one by one or together. But contemplate them well.
Hoosen I found a little better.1 He now wants some of the books
Daniel has sent. I am forwarding them.
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
Please tell Manilal I am not writing separately. The verses are
my letter to him.
192

[September 7, 1913]
My house is high, my sons are respected by good men, I have
inexhaustible wealth, I have a beautiful wife, I am young ≈ thus
reasons man steeped in ignorance and considers this universe to be
indestructible and allows himself to be imprisoned in it. But those who
are far-seeing renounce the world, knowing it to be transitory.
20

O my soul! live joyously on fruits, roots and leaves. Let mother
earth cover you; let us go to the forest where we do not have to meet
1

Haji Hoosen Dawad Mahomed who had been ailing, passed away on September 22, 1913; vide “The Late Mr. Hoosen Dawad”, 24-9-1913 and “The Late Mr.
Hoosen Dawad”, 1-10-1913.
2
The numbering of verses here is evidently duplicated; vide “Letter to
Hermann Kallenbach”, 6-9-1913

278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

people who know not discrimination, who being diseased with money
fever, utter thoughtless words and where we do not even hear such
people’s names.
September 9, 1913
34

There is fear of disease in enjoyments, there is danger of
destruction in having a family, there is danger from kings in having
riches, there is danger of ignominy in trying to be respected, there is
danger of creating enemies in showing one’s physical power, there is
danger of disfigurement in having beauty, there is danger of
disputation in discussing scriptures, there is danger from the evilminded in being endowed with high qualities, there is danger of death
in having the body thus is everything a cause of fear. Only complete
renunciation is free from fear.
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I have your two letters. I am glad that realization of weakness
now does not make you despondent but nerves 1 you for the struggle
that is to come. I find that if we have trust in the Supreme, every
difficulty we face shows its own way out of it. ‘One step enough for
me’ was not spoken by an inexperienced man.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

The source has “ennerves”.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

279

179. TELEGRAM TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[DURBAN,]

September 10,1913
THANKS
STRUGGLE
MINIMIZE
MOUS

WIRE. 1

FOR

IMPERATIVE
POINTS

MARRIAGES

1911

AND

SAME

FEAR

MONTH.

REPLY

MAKES

NOTWITHSTANDING

OF

DIFFERENCES.

REFER

ASSOCIATION

INTERIOR

MINISTER

REVIVAL

EVERY

REGARDING
LETTER

EFFORT
POLYGA-

5TH

REPLY

JULY
10TH

2

Indian Opinion, 13-9-1913

180. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
September 10, 1913
What is there not surrounded by its enemy? Birth is swallowed
up by death, beautiful youth by old age, contentment by desire for
wealth, the happiness of calmness by the blandish-ments of a clever
woman, high qualities by the jealousy of the jealous, the forest beauty
by snakes and adversity by instability. (That is, a man loses his
tranquility in adversity which should otherwise be for him a
beneficent school of experience).
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

These verses require pondering over again and again. They are
1

Vide 3rd footnote to “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 24-8-1913.
To this Gorges replied on September 19: “I was somewhat at a loss to
understand what assurance you were referring to; hence my enquiry. Looking now at
the past correspondence on this subject, I fear that the very wide interpretation
you are seeking to apply to the Immigration Officer’s letter of 10th August, 1911, is
not one which was ever contemplated or one which would be accepted by the
Minister”
2

280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

results of experience double distilled.
I saw reference in your letter to business talk. But you should
not hesitate to write about it when you are thinking about [it]. To me
it is an index to one’s mental state. I know what friend Rustomjee is
when the first thing in the morning he talks about what there should
be in his store and how his sons should behave towards him. If he
were to suppress the talk, he would want to appear to be otherwise than
he is. You should therefore cease to talk business when you cease to
think it. For the time being, therefore, I expect you to discuss all your
business with me. There is no wire from Pretoria yet. It is now 4.45
a.m. and the boys are preparing to walk to Durban. They will witness
the football match and return in the evening.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

281

181. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

September 11, 1913
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

So the struggle is to start.1 I have sent you a wire today. You
should see Chaplin2 and suggest his writing to Smuts. See also
Hosken. Draw attention to Gokhale’s doing and Lord Ampthill’s
[and] Lord Curzon’s advocacy, etc3 . We start on Monday or Tuesday.
Further news tomorrow. You should clear post on Sunday morning
and Saturday evening, the latter if you are in town.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

The reference is to the impending Indian struggle; vide “Letter to Secretary
for interior”, 11-9-1913.
2
Drummond Chaplin, Member of Parliament
3
Vide also “Lord Ampthill’s Advocacy”, 22-3-1913.

282

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

182. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR1
110, FIELD S TREET,
DURBAN,

September 11,1913
THE S ECRETARY FOR THE INTERIOR
P RETORIA
SIR,

I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 21st ultimo in reply to mine of the 15th idem regarding the
regulations framed under the Immigrants’ Restriction Act.
On behalf of the Anjuman, I respectfully submit that most of the
objections raised by my Anjuman are to principles and not to details.
Lapse of time will certainly fail to affect principles. That certificates of
identity whose applicability is limited to a period of one year would
be of infinitely less value than the permanent certificates that were
issued under the old Natal Act is a fact of which the value will not be
affected either way by lapse of time. Nor will the fact of the
imposition of the fee of £1 for even interprovincial visiting permits be
affected by time. In the humble opinion of my committee, the objections raised on its behalf merit early and favourable consideration.
With reference to the appointment of Immigration Officers as
members of Appeal Boards, their inclusion is open to serious objection in spite of their not deciding all the individual cases themselves in
the first instance. They are the officials who are responsible to the
Government for administering the Act in accordance with their instructions and they are the officials who will, my committee presumes,
issue instructions to their subordinates. They, therefore, could not be
considered unbiased judges applying their minds without preconceived ideas to cases before them. My committee, therefore, strongly
urges that the appointment of these officials should be cancelled in
order to give the public interested in the proceedings of the Appeal
1

An office copy of this letter is found in the Sangrahalaya papers and it is
presumed that this was drafted by Gandhiji.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

283

Boards a sense of security and to inspire that public with confidence
in the decision of these Boards.
I have, etc.,

C HAIRMAN ,
ZOROASTRIAN ANJUMAN
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5858

183. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR1
[JOHANNESBURG ,

September 12, 1913]
SIR,

On behalf of the British Indian Association, I have the honour to
submit, for the information of the Hon’ble the Minister, that, after
having read your telegram2 of September 9, addressed to Mr. Gandhi,
it has been most reluctantly and with the utmost regret decided to
revive passive resistance, owing to the inability or unwillingness of the
Government to concede the points submitted by Mr. Gandhi in his
letters to you, which my Association has seen.
I venture shortly to explain the position that unfortunately faces
the community represented by my Association.
Ever since the British occupation, the position of the Indians
residing in this Province has admittedly grown worse than it was
during the Republican regime. In 1906 it culminated in the Bill of
that year, which not only summed up the black past but foreshadowed
a blacker future, and which, though then vetoed; was repassed almost
as the first Act of the Responsible Government, and became known as
Act 2 of 19073 . As the measure was considered by the community to
1

This was published in Indian Opinion, 20-9-1913, under the caption “The
Indian Demands”.
2
Vide footnote 3 to “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 24-8-1913
3
The Transvaal Asiatic Law Amendment Act, also known as the Transvaal
Asiatic Registration Act.

284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be humiliating, and as the circumstances surrounding it showed a
policy deliberately hostile to an honourable existence of the community in the Transvaal, my countrymen solemnly decided in the
month of September, 1906 to adopt passive resistance. 1 As is well
known, over 3,500 imprisonments were suffered by my countrymen
during the struggle, over 100 deportations to India took place, and
even two deaths occurred, owing to the suffering gone through during
the crisis. Several families were rendered homeless, and they had to be
supported from public funds. Then came the provisional settlement of
1911, which the Indians thought not only promised them what they
had been suffering for but also meant an attitude of friendliness
towards them such that, almost complete prohibition of Indian immigration being obtained, the resident Indian population would be free
from the state of uncertainty it had lived in and might look forward to
a steady improvement in its status, as a permanent element of the new
nation that was forming in South Africa. Moreover, the inauguration
of the Union gave it some hope, though it filled it equally with
misgivings and threw on the passive resisters a responsibility for the
whole of the Union instead of for the Transvaal only.
But the community was soon disillusioned. The administration
of existing laws specially affecting it grew steadily harsher. The Cape
Licensing Act, the Natal Licensing Act, the Gold and the Township
Laws of the Transvaal and the existing Immigration Laws of the Provinces began to be administered as they never had been before. What
has been termed the “northern,” spirit began to pervade the administration in Natal and the Cape. Thus the spirit of the settlement certainly began to be broken as soon as it was effected.
The abortive Bill of 1912 showed that even the letter would be
broken. The original draft contained serious flaws and was in conflict
with the two principles of the settlement—the removal of the racial bar
and the maintenance of existing rights throughout the Union. I must
admit in fairness that, so soon as the defects were pointed out, there
was a willingness on the part of the Minister to remodel his objectionable clauses. But that Bill fell through, and fresh assurances were
issued to the community that the settlement would be carried out.
1

Vide “The Mass Meeting”, 11-9-1906.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

285

Then came the memorable visit of the Hon’ble. Mr. Gokhale.
High hopes were again raised. The position was made perfectly clear.
And declarations were made by responsible statesmen inducing the
expectation that a satisfactory Bill would be passed during the ensuing
session, and that the iniquitous and admittedly unjust tax of £3 on
certain ex-indentured men and women would be withdrawn. The
Hon’ble Mr. Gokhale declared at public meetings that he had every
confidence that the tax would be abolished both for men and women.
But the last session dashed all hope to the ground. The Draft
Immigration Bill broke almost every condition of the settlement of
1911, and it showed that the community was to expect nothing from
the Government, who would have carried the Bill as it was, could they
have done so. That the Act itself is a great improvement on the
original Bill is due entirely to the unexpected opposition that the
Government met from all quarters of both Houses of Parliament. The
attempt of the Government to remit the £3 tax only on women showed
also that they, at any rate, were not prepared to remove it from men.
Notwithstanding such gloomy indications of the hostile spirit of
the Government, Mr. Gandhi was authorized to enter into negotiations
for a settlement by submitting proposals which, if accepted, would
have just, but only just, sufficed to fulfil the letter of the provisional
settlement of 1911 above referred to. The community had hoped that,
if even such a settlement were effected, the terrible passive resistance
could be avoided, and that other grievances could be pressed on the
attention of the Government by means involving less personal
sacrifice and suffering by the community.
But the Government evidently thought otherwise. They have not
only rejected most of Mr. Gandhi’s proposals, but they are showing
by their administration of the new Act in Natal and by their having
passed regulations under the Act, some of which are harsh and
unjust, that it is their desire not only to keep out new immigrants, but
also to keep out domiciled residents who, before the new Act, found
no difficulty in re-entering, and to put obstacles in the way of wives of
domiciled Indians entering the respective Provinces.
In the circumstances, there is now no course left open to the
community but to take up passive resistance again, which now
286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

naturally will not be confined to this Province alone, and which, on
this occasion, will be taken up by women as well as men. The leaders
of the community fully realize their responsibility in the matter. They
know also what they and their countrymen will have to suffer. But
they feel that, as an unrepresented and voiceless community which has
been so much misunderstood in the past and which is labouring under
a curious but strong race prejudice, it can only defend its honour and
status by a process of sacrifice and self-suffering.
Passive resistance has been recognized by the Government as a
legitimate means of securing redress. It is, therefore, hardly necessary
to assure the Government that the community has no desire to defy
the laws of the land, to which it will submit by bearing the penalties
provided for a breach of the obligations thereunder which the community cannot discharge consistently with its honour and self-respect.
In conclusion, I beg to state that the struggle will be continued
so long as:
(1) a racial bar disfigures the Immigration Act;
(2) the rights existing prior to the passing of the Act are not
restored and maintained;
(3) the £3 tax upon ex-indentured men, women, and children is
not removed;
(4) the status of women married in South Africa is not secured;
(5) generally, so long as a spirit of generosity and justice
does not pervade the administration of the existing laws referred to
herein.
And it is respectfully submitted that a smooth and just working
of the laws is not possible until the Government consult the leaders of
the community in the different Provinces.
[I have, etc.,]

A. M. C ACHALIA
C HAIRMAN ,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION

Rand Daily Mail, 15-9-1913
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

287

184. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[Phoenix, September 12, 1913]

MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I have your letter. It is strange you did not receive my letter on
Monday. I gave it to Sorabji to post. But the careless boy evidently
never posted it or posted it too late.
If I receive a reply tomorrow that Cachalia’s letter has gone, I
shall send the resisters from here on Monday. They will reach
Volksrust on Tuesday. You should leave Monday night by the mail
train so that you are at the station when the Kaffir Mail reaches
Volksrust on Tuesday evening. You should simply watch as a
spectator. They are not to speak in English. One of them only will
speak in that tongue, interpret for the others. They will not give
finger-prints. If the police arrest them, they must ask for shelter at the
police station. If the police do not arrest them, you should, there and
then, buy tickets for them and proceed to Johannesburg. I then
suggest their being housed at Mountain View. If strangers don’t
come, it might be well to make Mountain View the headquarters. But
you are to be the judge, not I, of this thing. If they are to go to
Mountain View, you may buy nothing but leave instructions for
purchases so that you have full stock at once. No more than Boer
meal and a little dholl and rice will be required and fruit and nuts of
course. If they are arrested, you should attend court, send full wire to
me from Volksrust as also full letter. If they are imprisoned you
should immediately see the gaol doctor and the jailor and tell them of
religious and health foods they may take and may not take. But you
should also say that they will not complain if they do not get what
they want. Mrs. Gandhi will be purely fruitarian. Jeki and others will
not touch bread. Some of them will be able to take only one meal.
The names and further details later. It is well that you will be free
from your business even if passive resistance is to start. Your whole
time will be wanted for the struggle. You should read my letter to be
288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

signed by Cachalia most carefully.1
Yours

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

185. NO SETTLEMENT
We reported earlier that negotiations for a settlement were going
on between the Government and Mr. Gandhi. We have now to
announce that they have failed and that satyagraha will be revived. In
this, too, there must be some divine purpose. So far as we can judge,
the revival of the struggle is to our advantage. Had there been a
settlement, it would have barely fulfilled the letter of the terms of the
1911 settlement. The object of the settlement would have been
defeated, for the settlement would have been honoured only in the
letter. The rights of Indians born in South Africa to enter the Cape
would have been safeguarded. The marriage problem would have
been solved and, in theory, the colour bar would have disappeared.
Even this would have been all right, though it was not likely to have
satisfied the community. Now the Government has placed us under an
obligation by not granting even that much. The real object of our
fight must be to kill the monster of racial prejudice in the heart of the
Government and the local whites. We feel the presence of this monster
in the Government’s administration of the Gold Law in the Transvaal
and the new immigrant law, in its insistence on the collection of the £3
tax from poor, miserable, helpless Indians, and in its attitude towards
our women.
The best cure for all this lies, not in securing the repeal or
amendment of the respective laws, but in rooting out the evil from the
heart. There is only one way to kill the monster and that is to offer
ourselves as a sacrifice. There is no life except through death. Death
1

Vide “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 12-9-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

289

alone can raise us. It is the only effective means of persuasion. It
is a seal which leaves a permanent imprint. We will not conquer the
whites by hating them. We can gain no victory by killing them. We
may kill a white in the body, but the monster inside will survive and
multiply. A tree will grow the larger when a branch is cut. It will be
destroyed only if it is pulled out by the roots. In the same way, we are
not concerned with the body of any white, but only with the evil in his
heart. The only effective way of bringing about a change in his
attitude is satyagraha. It is a divine law that even the most hard-hearted
man will melt if he sees his enemy suffering in innocence. The
satyagrahi volunteers to suffer in this way. There is another remedy,
but it is not likely to be adopted. For the prejudice in the heart of the
whites against us, we are partly responsible. We have several defects.
We tell lies and follow wrong courses. We give false evidence. We are
dirty in our ways. We can overcome the whites’ prejudice only if we
give up these bad habits. But this is not likely to happen. The Indian
who is full of faults will not read writings of this kind. Nor can those
who do make him see reason. Satyagrahis should die for his sake as
well. Their death will be an education for these our brethren, whom
ignorance has made blind. It has always been the way of this world
that the fruit of one’s death is reaped by others. Not to seek gain
through one’s death is in itself a gain. This difficult saying needs to
be pondered over. It is the great secret by which one can gain true
life. Those alone who join satyagraha in this spirit will win in this great
fight that is beginning. We entreat those who cannot join the fight not
to oppose it, but to give whatever help they can. They should think of
the community’s interest. If they can do or say nothing good, let
them stay quiet. If they are weak, let them admit their weakness rather
than weaken others. In this way we can help one another. The
campaign this time has no programme or plan of action. The plan will
unfold itself as we proceed. This is a fight for bringing about a
change in the Government’s hostile attitude to us. The obnoxious £3
tax must go at any cost. That is a debt we owe to the defenceless
Indians, and to Mr. Gokhale.
The Government, breaking a promise made to him, has broken a
promise made to us. We hope that many Indians will utilize this
golden opportunity and that God will give the requisite strength and
290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

faith to those who join the fight.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 13-9-1913

186. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX],

[September 15, 1913] 1
DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I am dictating this to Ramdas as I am eating. I have your two
letters. When you meet the train tomorrow you will not at once
identify yourself but simply watch as a spectator. I am sending special
foodstuff for Mrs. Gandhi. Until she is in jail she will use the food I
have prepared. When she is sentenced you should take charge of her
food and after you have received permission to give her special food
you should take charge of the food. After the sentence and after you
have made arrange2 ments you should give it to the gaoler. So far as
possible you would arrange for her to receive the food from the
Government. She is only fruitarian, for health and religious reasons
and she can take olive oil, bananas, plums, dried figs, almonds,
tomatoes, grapes, oranges, lemons, banana flour, apples. You will stay
there until everything is fixed up and either come here or return to
Johannesburg according to the exigencies of the struggle and of your
own personal affairs.
About your business, we shall talk later or I shall write later on.
Yours,

F OR BAPU,
C HHAGANLAL
1
The addressee was to meet the train with the satyagrahis on Tuesday; vide
“General Knowledge about Health (XXIX)”, 19-7-1913. From the reference to
“tomorrow” it is evident the letter was written on Monday which was September 15,
1913.
2
The letter up to here is apparently in Ramdas Gandhi’s hand, the remaining
half being identifiably written by Chhaganlal Gandhi. The word split here
(“arrange-”) marks the end of the first page of the letter.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

291

[PS.]
The party includes Mr. Rustomjee Parsee.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

187. LETTER TO KASHI GANDHI AND SANTOK GANDHI
[September 15, 1913] 1
CHI. KASHI 2 AND SANTOK3 ,

Today is Friday and I have finished my writing work. So I have
some free time. Jeki4 wants to know whether the children will be able
to live without you. Parents fondly imagine that their children would
not be able to live without them. To uphold their conceit, parents
believe that their children will be fretting restlessly in their absence.
They do not realize that all the people about them get deprived of
their parents and still none of them pines away to death. To children,
those who love them at the moment are their parents. Rukhi laughed
and frisked about as soon as the train moved out. Radha cried a little
after the train had left but when I told her of a prize for her, after
about five minutes, she also started talking to others. Krishna and
Keshu were not even aware that anything had happened. They were
shouting and running all the way back. All of them lifted up one
another and played among themselves. When they reached home, they
asked for the finest dishes to be served. I even had to tell Krishna and
Keshu, “See now, your parents have gone to jail and so, though you
are children, you ought to exercise some self-control.” They, then,
felt a little abashed. These two do not call to mind anyone even for a
moment. Rukhi and Radha are real ladies. I gave them the salt cakes
1

A party of 16 Satyagrahis, led by Kasturba and including Kashi and Santok
left Durban on September 15, 1913 to cross over into the Transvaal and thereby court
arrest. The Satyagrahis were arrested on the 22nd and on the 23rd, were sentenced to
three months’ rigorous imprisonment each. Gandhiji seems to have written the letter
after seeing the Satyagrahis off at the Durban railway station.
2
Wife of Chhaganlal Gandhi
3
Wife of Maganlal Gandhi
4
Jayakunvar Doctor

292

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

which I have preserved specially for them. All that Rukhi wants is to
be served vegetables. Whatever vegetable is served to her, she likes it as
if it were her mother and her father. Children are not born with
infatuations of any kind. They forget the infatuation of their previous
existence, too. Thus, they are unconsciously like saints who are free
from all desires. Grown-up people consciously become sannyasis.
Even otherwise, children and sannyasis are alike in their state of mind.
I do not wish from this to draw the conclusion that parents should
abandon their children. But they should give up their fond attachment
and stop believing in what does not exist. They should not shower so
much affection on the children that the latter would pine away in their
absence, nor should they believe that the children would suffer when
separated from them. But children are born as a result of our sin and
are dependent on usand therefore we ought to have compassion and
love for them. When there are others to look after the children and it
becomes necessary for us to leave them for the sake of some other
duty, we should not yield to blind love, nor suffer. The children will
get along quite well without us. That we may not do without them is
another matter. Even so, we have never heard of any mother who has
pined away to death at the loss of her only son. Shravan’s parents 1
burnt themselves to death. They were helpless and the significance of
that story is quite different.
I meant to write to you quite a worldly letter, but have written
one with a deeper meaning. So, read it attentively. Show it to
Chhaganlal, Raojibhai, Maganlal and Jeki. If Ba wants to read it, I have
no objection but I fear she might not be able to draw the right lesson
from it and might unnecessarily be distressed.
You know how well I love both of you. I had wanted to tell you
many things here but could get no free time. Today the bag of
thoughts unfolded itself.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33098

1

The story of Shravana and his parents occurs in the first canto, named
Balakanda of Valmiki’s Ramayana.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

293

188. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[DURBAN,]

Wednesday September 17, 1913
CHI. MANILAL,

... 1 Ba and others boarded the train with great courage on
Monday.... 2 Besides tamas, there are the qualities of rajas and sattva.
The first keeps a man blind, ignorant and lethargic. The second makes
him rash, daring and energetic in worldly pursuits. The quality of
rajas predominates among the nations of Europe. Most of our
activities are also of a like nature. Those endowed with the quality of
sattva are tranquil, self-collected and discriminating. They do not
bother themselves with the affairs of the world, but keep their minds
fixed on God. This sattvic disposition has been rightly described as
“soothfastness”. “Soothfast” means calm. With “ness”, the word
becomes a noun and means peace. Only when the mind is peaceful
can one realize God, and the state of mind in which such realization
becomes possible is the sattvic state. God, as transcending the three
qualities, has no activity, good or otherwise, but [through] maya3 He
exists as chaitanya4 . He is beyond the three qualities. When, however,
He does engage Himself in some activity, such as instructing Arjuna,
the impulse behind it is a sattvic one and, since activity as such is a
mode of qualification, He [Krishna] is described as [God] in his
sattva-qualified aspect. Keep your mind very steady.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Jivannu Parodh

1
2
3
4

294

There is indication of some omissions here in the source.
Mental propensities derived from one’s physiological equipment.
A Vedantic concept, seeking to explain phenomenal existence
Principle of life and consciousness
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

189. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX],

[September 17/18, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

You are carrying out your resolution to do your very best, as
you have said in your rail-post letter from Johannesburg. But it causes
no surprise as I have never doubted your ability to rise to the
occasion. In some cases I impertinently consider that I know your
merits and demerits more than you do. And it ought to be so, seeing
that I am the Upper House your better half. Only please do stop me
when I go too far in piling on the agony. You know my way. I do not
consider co-workers I hope including myself, when we are moving
towards an ideal as we are in this connection.
On no account should the officers know the names of the
passive resisters who, I now think [should] even decline to sign their
names in Gujarati before being sentenced. Of course, you will be
conducting your office from Volksrust whilst the passive resisters are
awaiting their fate.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
I am wiring post restante. You will instruct the Telegraph office
where the wires may be delivered.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

295

190. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Thursday [September 18, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I have your letters and wire. What a relief you are there. The
party should not give any further information to the authorities and
they should not give even Indian signatures certainly not fingerimpressions or other means of identification, until they are sentenced
to be imprisoned and then, too, if they are satisfied that they will have
to fill in the full term of imprisonment. I had intended to leave here
on Saturday.
Now unless you all those at Johannesburg think otherwise, I do
not propose to leave here until the trial is known. 1 Meanwhile you
should devote your leisure to study. I take it you are keeping
Johannesburg well-informed. I am wiring to you just now.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

296

The trial came off on September 23.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

191. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[DURBAN,]

Bhadarva Vad 3 [September 18, 1913] 1
CHI. HARILAL,

You have not kept your promise about writing to me. You gave
such a promise more than once and you have broken it every time.
I am very unhappy that your health has gone down. I always
thought it would. I even warned you. You know that, though you went
with my consent, I did not want you to go. Even now, your way of life
and your ideas do not appeal to me. Personally, I feel that the
education you are having is of the wrong kind. You have harmed
Chanchi’s interests and now you are harming those of the children.
Still, I regard you as friend, with due affection, so that I do not wish to
order you. I want to bring you round only by appealing to you. I do
not wish to exploit your filial piety to make you do anything. There is
no anger in this. I do this as a matter of duty. Still I must advise you
to shake off this craze for examinations. If you pass, it won’t impress
me much. If you fail, you will feel very unhappy. However, take the
course you think is best. If you give up the thought of examinations
and if, when you get this letter, the struggle here is continuing, come
over here along with Chanchi, both of you prepared for
imprisonment.2 Chanchi has otherwise no right to come now. If the
struggle ends soon, I shall go there immediately and we shall have a
good hug and a talk.
There is only one remedy for your dyspepsia—a daily walk of
15 miles. By way of diet, you should have solid food, according to
1

The arrests referred to in the letter took place on Tuesday, September 16.
This letter was written on the following Thursday.
2
Gokhale, however, detained Harilal and cabled Gandhiji on December 26,
saying: “Your son Harilal saw me Bombay, told me you had asked him return South
Africa immediately rejoin struggle. I have taken on myself responsibility asking him
remain India and continue studies. Forgive my intervention.”
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

297

appetite, which you can chew. If you have read the chapters on
health, 1 the experiments described there will help you to get rid of [the
complaint] altogether. It is not surprising that you have lost your
mental powers. The education there is useless because it is
ill-conceived. Since you have never reflected over the mental vacuity
of thousands of educated people, what can I say and to whom am I to
say it? What have your studies been that you should acquire strength
of mind through them? Where the aim is merely to pass an
examination, the result is bound to be unhappy. As far back as thirty
years ago, Mr. Ranade2 used to discuss this problem. Just think of the
condition of the ordinary B.A. What can you do if, after passing a big
examination, you find yourself a physical or mental wreck? Have you
had a careful look at things round you?
Ba, Ramdas, Kashi 3 , Santok4 , Chhaganlal, Kuppu, Govindoo5 ,
Revashankar6 , Shivpujan, Raojibhai7 , Maganbhai8 , Sam, Rustomjee
Sheth, Solomon9 and others have set out to get imprisoned. They were
arrested at Volksrust on Tuesday. I am writing this letter on the
morning of Thursday. There has been no telegram yet about what
happened yesterday. 10 Devdas is in Phoenix. He has acquired great
efficiency. I get up at 3.30 a.m. and Devdas at 4.30 a.m. At 5, studies
and other activities begin. He has filled out a little. Of course, changes
do occur in this schedule. For the present, the boys who have
remained behind go without salt on all days except Sunday. They
propose to continue the practice as long as the satyagraha lasts.
1

Vide “General Knowledge about Health (XII)”, 22-3-1913, and “General
Knowledge About Health” 5-4-1913 & 12-4-1913.
2
Mahadev Govind Ranade (1842-1901); judge of the Bombay High Court,
social reformer, economist and politician
3
Wife of Chhaganlal Gandhi
4
Wife of Maganlal Gandhi
5
A compositor in the Phoenix Press
6
Son of Rambhabai and Ratanshi Sodha.
7
Raojibhai Manibhai Patel, a life-long associate of Gandhiji
8
Maganbhai Patel, a teacher in Phoenix School
9
Solomon Royeppen, nephew of Joseph Royeppen, who was one of the
educated Indians admitted to the Transvaal in 1912
10
The trial came off on September 23 and all the 16 satyagrahis were
sentenced to three months’ imprisonment with hard labour.

298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Maganlal and Miss West1 will look after the children. I shall leave for
Johannesburg on Saturday. 2 People at Johannesburg will then try to
get arrested. I shall get arrested last. I have thought out a way of
getting arrested, one which will require a little especial courage. I am
constantly praying to God to grant me that. Manilal is in
Johannesburg. He has now subjected himself to strict vows and is
going through a course of penitence. He will court arrest in
Johannesburg. Jeki3 has accompanied Ba to get arrested. She, too, has
changed her way of life altogether. Medh and Desai are also in
Johannesburg. Jamnadas is impatient to be in gaol. I shall most
probably wire to him to come over. I have not made up my mind,
though. Please remember that you have not sent me your examination
papers, which I had asked for. I am trying to make arrangements for
the maintenance of Gangabhabhi. For the present, my desire to go
over there has come to nothing.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
My wish is that whatever steps you take should be without
reference to me or my views.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 9540

1

Miss Ada West, sister of A. H. West, manager of International Printing

2

In fact, Gandhiji left Durban on Thursday, September, 25.
Jayakunvar, daughter of Dr. Pranjivan Mehta

Press
3

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

299

192. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[DURBAN,]

Thursday [September 18,1913] 1
CHI, MANILAL,

I have your letters. Today too I don’t have time to write much.
Ba and others have been arrested in Volksrust. They were to attend
court yesterday.2 I am, however, waiting for a telegram to know what
happened. I wanted to pass on the news to you, but I haven’t got any
so far. The more disappointed you are, the more miserable I shall be.
I have not budged from the promise I made to you. I have made no
great change. It cannot make me unhappy, surely, to cultivate inward
serenity. I do not suffer by being bound by vows; rather, I feel happy.
It is ignorance on your part to be concerned on this account. I can be
unhappy only if you misbehave. Whether I am happy or otherwise
depends on how you behave. By thinking about what I do, you cannot
remove my suffering. You can make me happy if you think of your
duty.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 107 Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

1

Mrs. Gandhi’s arrest referred to in the letter took place on Tuesday, Septem-

2

Actually, the trial came off on September 23.

ber 16.

300

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

193. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Friday [September 19, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I hope you have been receiving my letters regularly there. As I
have already said, you would ask the resisters to demand being sent to
gaol as awaiting-trial prisoners, if the proceedings are delayed. Do the
merchants find the food there or do we have to pay for it?
You are yourself controlling your purse there, I hope. I shall
want an account of every penny you spend. How do you pass the
spare time there? Do all the merchants of Volksrust get I.O.? You
should look up Chergan Dhobi who is living on the boundary line. He
was, during the late struggle, the most hospitable of all. I believe he
once vacated his own house in order to find shelter for resisters. Have
you heard further about the lease in Pretoria? I have been thinking
over the trap.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
Polak lands at Cape Town on Saturday. You may read the letters
(herewith) which are in English.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

301

194. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Friday afternoon [September 19, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I may send you more men in advance of me. Three may leave
Pietermaritzburg today. In that event, they will wire you names and
train of departure. It might be as well, if they place a trap at your
disposal to meet these men at Charlestown and have a chat with them
before they reach Volksrust. They may leave with me also. I take it
you have made arrangements for delivery of wires to you promptly. If
you want me to make other arrangements, please give me the address
to which I should send your letters and wires.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
Indian Opinion is being sent to the gaoler. 3 copies will be sent
to Mr. Badat so that all may get copies to read. If Mr. Badat is not a
subscriber, you should collect one subscription from him at least.
Perhaps you want the enclosed embossed envelope.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

302

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

195. MR. CACHALIA’S LETTER1
The irrevocable step has been taken. The British world knows,
through the magnificent agency of Reuter, that the handful of Indians
in South Africa have declared passive resistance— that this
microscopic minority of men have pitted themselves against a mighty
Government, against a European population comparatively overwhelming in numbers and enjoying the privileges which cannot belong to
Indians in this sub-continent, perhaps, for generations. Indeed, this
time, passive resistance is not merely against the Govern-ment and the
Europeans of South Africa, but it is equally against the Imperial
Government. Lord Ampthill, in his great speech in the House of
Lords, has made it clear that, had the Imperial Government done their
duty, the course of legislation would have been different; had they
been only neutral, the Immigration Act would probably have not been
passed. We may not, therefore, expect any assistance from them
unless, by passive resistance, we open their eyes and they begin to see
clearly how criminally they neglected their trust.
Mr. Cachalia has made it perfectly clear why the great and awful
step has been taken—a step that may mean ruin to hundreds of our
countrymen. He states definitely the demands of the community. He
asks for (l) removal of the racial bar from the Immigration Act, (2)
the restoration of rights that existed prior to the legislation, (3) a
generous and just administration of the existing laws throughout the
Union affecting Indians, (4) the removal of the £3 tax, and finally (5)
a spirit of friendliness towards the community in place of one
ofhostility which one notices in all their acts concerning Indians. And
this is what Lord Ampthill asked in his speech just referred to.
Let us examine each point as briefly as possible. We notice that
The Natal Mercury, in its otherwise admirable leaderette on the
situation, falls foul of the objection to the racial bar. We feel sure that
our usually well-informed contemporary has in this instance secured
the service of a leader-writer who is not yet au fait with the question.
1

Vide “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 12-9-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

303

That the racial bar should be removed has been common cause since
1910. Indeed, the Union Government have defended—and the
Imperial Government have approved of—the measure, contending
that there is no racial bar in it. Nor does its removal in this case
involve racial equality in every other case. To remove the racial bar
merely means a reversion to the state that existed in 1906. It refers to
racial equality in law for purposes of immigration. Even when this
equality is granted, as it must be sooner or later, there will still remain
racial inequality in respect of many other laws in all the provinces.
That, in spite of the Government’s protestations, racial inequality is to
be found in the Act has been clearly shown by Lord Ampthill. The
Act requires from an Indian immigrant an unnecessary and insulting
declaration which it does not from a European immigrant. The
declaration is merely an admission of the legal disabilities imposed on
the Indians of the Free State. Without the admission the disabilities, as
had been admitted by the Government, will remain. The retention of
this racial bar is due merely to the unreasoning obstinacy of the Free
State Members of the Union Parliament. The Government do not wish
to offend these, their supporters. Otherwise, removal of the racial bar
means nothing to the Government and it may not add a single Indian
resident to the Free State population. As a matter of fact, removal of
the racial bar is one of the items of existing rights. It has been
separated from other such rights because the struggle hinged, prior to
1911, only round the racial bar question.
The existing rights attacked by the new Act are. for instance, the
right of South Africa-born Indians to enter the Cape under the
now-repealed Cape Act by reason merely of their birth, the right that
existed, or was assumed to exist, of the wive of resident Indians
married in South Africa according to non-Christian rites, to be
regarded as legally married; the right of Natal Indians to absent
themselves for any length of time from Natal and to return if they
were proved to be bona fide holders of certificates of domicile. We do
not touch upon minor existing rights which may or may not have
been taken away by the Act.
The £3 tax is the sorest question from many points of view. It is
a burden imposed upon a most helpless class and it is a tax which was
universally condemned during Mr. Gokhale’s stay last year in South
304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Africa and, as Lord Ampthill most emphatically states, “the Ministers
in South Africa definitely promised Mr. Gokhale that this £3 poll-tax
should be removed and Ministers told the Governor-General that they
had given him this promise”. We hold that a promise given to Mr.
Gokhale is a promise given to the Indian community. It, therefore,
becomes our sacred duty to offer passive resistance until the tax is
repealed.
Indians cannot be expected to sit still if the administration of the
existing laws is made harsher day by day. Formerly Indian wives were
admitted without fuss and without much questioning. Now the
Government have instructed Immigration Officers to demand closest
proof, and then, too, there are all kinds of quibbles raised. Kulsambibi’s case is the latest. There never has been any justification offered
for such harshness of procedure in admitting Indian wives. There has
been no charge brought against us of having attempted to bring in
women of questionable character or of our women having offered any
competition. Then, take the unreasonable deposit of £25 required
from men who want to prove their domicile as against £10 which used
to be demanded before. Visiting passes which used to be issued fairly
liberally are now being granted in a most niggardly spirit. We know of
cases in which sons have been refused permits to visit their parents and
business people to visit other provinces to collect their debts. It is no
easy matter for an Indian creditor to secure a permit to visit the
Transvaal for the purpose of collecting his book-debts. The tendency
of the administration is to wipe out the resident Indian population by
making its life in South Africa as intolerable as possible. The
administration of the Gold Law and the Townships Act in the Transvaal and of the trade licensing laws in Natal and the Cape has been
simply scandalous. Mr. Cachalia, therefore, insists that this method of
administering the laws affecting us must be changed.
And none of the reforms Mr. Cachalia desires can possibly be
attained unless the Government and the Europeans of South Africa
adopt a less hostile and more reasonable attitude. If the former
continue to frown upon us and the latter continue to pass resolutions
demanding our destruction by a process of compulsory civic starvation, we must meet them by showing that we are capable of dying for
our honour and an honourable existence in South Africa, not by
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

305

fighting them bodily, but by a process of voluntary suffering which at
once purifies and dignifies.
Indian Opinion, 20-9-1913

196. HOW TO DO IT
Passive resistance, this time, will be comparatively an easy matter,
as it will extend to all the Provinces of the Union,—not that the
sufferings will be less; indeed, they are likely to be greater, but to
court imprisonment will be easier. Hitherto, passive resisters have
challenged arrest by crossing the Transvaal border. That is how the
present struggle, too, has been commenced. We may, on this question
of the crossing of the border, at once say that this method of
resistance does not mean that we are asking for a breaking of the
provincial boundaries. On the contrary, as soon as the reason for the
struggle ceases, those who will have crossed the borders of different
Provinces will return to the Province of their domicile. Passive resisters
are not fighting—Dare not fight—for personal and individual rights.
But the crossing is an expensive business. Those who feel
inclined to take an active part in the campaign can, in a quiet and
dignified manner, court arrest by hawking or trading without licences,
or, if they have their licences, without showing them. They should, in
each case, inform the police or the courts that it is not their intention
thus to break the law but that, until there is a settlement with the
Government, they propose not to assist the authorities in carrying out
the laws of the land which have no moral or natural but only an
artificial basis. This is not a struggle of a day. Each one can think out
for himself how he can best court arrest. Time and experience will
show the right way if we have the will to suffer for the sake of our own
and our country’s honour.
Indian Opinion, 20-9-1913

306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

197. HOW TO ORGANIZE THE STRUGGLE
This third campaign will embrace the whole of South Africa. We
believe, therefore, that going to gaol will be an easy matter. It does not
mean that this time the sufferings in gaol will be less. They may even
be more. Only, it will not be difficult, as it was before, to find ways of
going to gaol. So far, people courted imprisonment by entering the
Transvaal. There is no need to do that this time. If, in every town and
every province, a few Indians at least take intelligent interest in the
fight, they will be able to participate in it in some measure, however
small, and help it. The easiest way is for the hawkers. Those who are
hawkers by profession, as also those who are not, can get arrested by
hawking without licences. For this, the imprisonment will be only for a
short term. It will involve no risk of goods being auctioned. Moreover,
they can pause and rest when tired. If we can have such a movement
in every town, we shall have put up a big fight. It will agitate the whole
of South Africa and compel the most serious attention from those in
power. Even those who hold licences can act in this manner. The
police demand licences from time to time. If, having them, we do not
produce them, it will be their duty to arrest us. Store-keepers and even
their assistants can do this and so get arrested. As we think of it, we see
that this is the easiest way and the simplest. It will involve comparatively little of suffering, the initiative will always be with us and we
shall be able to have rest whenever we want. The hawkers and storekeepers should remember that their interests are deeply involved in
the struggle. Both the Government and the whites feel sore over trade
more than anything else. If we were not to engage in trade, we would
provoke much less envy. Trade is our very life here. One should
always remember that our sufferings will diminish in the measure in
which we command increased respect. We hope, therefore, that the
business community will utilize this excellent opportunity which will
cost them so little. We need hardly say that even one single Indian in a
town can put up such a fight. If there is any such hero, he should send
us his name before going to gaol. Those who get arrested by crossing
the border must bear in mind that they will not thereby acquire any

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

307

rights for themselves. Satyagraha is not meant for acquiring rights for
oneself. Selfishness and satyagraha can never go together.
HOW TO HELP IN OTHER WAYS

We have seen above that it is only by going to gaol that we can
best help the struggle. But we know that all Indians do not have the
pluck for this. We need them to consider what such Indians should do.
We give below the ideas that occur to us.
l.
One may look after the business of those who go to gaol and
care for their families or see to the maintenance of their dependants.
2.
This time we are not going to ask for money from India. At the
same time, we are left at present with very little money; it is up to
everyone to send contributions to the satyagraha fund.
3.

Those who cannot afford to give money, may send foodgrains.

4.
In every town of every province, meetings should be held and
resolutions passed approving of Mr. Cachalia’s letter 1 and these
resolutions should be dispatched, by telegram or post, both to the
local and the Imperial Governments.
5.
Telegrams welcoming the fight should be sent to the [British
Indian] Association.
6.
Wherever meetings cannot be held, telegrams and letters should
be sent to the Government on behalf of public bodies.
7.
The matter should be discussed with the whites of one’s town
and they should be kept well-informed through issues of Indian
Opinion having a bearing on the struggle.
8.
Shaking off lethargy, every Indian must acquaint himself with
the aims of the campaign and the nature of the issues involved.
9.
Issues of Indian Opinion pertaining to the struggle should be
procured and sent to different places in India and England.
10. One should help in the collection of funds for the London
Committee.
11. Every Indian should set apart some time for the fight and
engage himself during that period in some work or other connected
1

308

Vide “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 12-9-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with it.
Most of these things may be done by every Indian and by every
organization. Every individual and every association must undertake
as many of them as possible. What can be done right now is to hold
meetings at every place, pass resolutions and send them to both
Governments.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 20-9-1913

198. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
VOLKSRUST,

[September 20, 1913] 1
MY DEAR CHHAGANLAL2 ,

You will be free on Sunday and Monday. If you are you should
canvass Volksrust for 1.0. sub[scribers]. See the Editor of the
Reporter newspaper there or Mr. Kallenbach may see him. We must
educate the Europeans. See leading article in the current issue. You
may forward the copy to Miss Schlesin. 3 This information she may
give the Press but not show this very copy.
M. K. GANDHI
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence, Vol. II, p. 502
Courtesy: National Archives of India

1
The letter was written at the bottom of another to the Chief Immigration
Offi-cer, which carries the date September 20, 1913 in Herman Kallenbach’s hand.
For the text of the letter signed by the addressee who was at this time the spokesman
for the passive resisters in Volksrust, vide “The Resisters at Volksrust”, 24-9-1913.
2
Cousin of Gandhiji and a founder-member of the Phoenix Settlement; editor
of Gujarati section of India Opinion after 1908.
3
Sonja Schlesin, Secretary, Transvaal Indian Women’s Association

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

309

199. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Saturday [September 20, 1913] 1
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I have wired saying I was sending instructions. Here is the draft
letter. 2 This will be in your hands on Sunday. Please let Chhaganlal
copy it and sign and deliver immediately. I have kept a copy for
Indian Opinion, which will be printed for the Wednesday issue. Please
send me full information by wire, so that I may give it in Indian
Opinion. If they do not reply or reply evasively, you may board the
train without taking any tickets. If they detain you next morning
strong men should walk out of Sandfontein only seven miles I think
and the ladies unless they wish to walk should be in a trolly to be
hired with Mr. Rustomjee in charge. You may there entrain. If they
arrest there, splendid. Then they must keep all in custody. If they do
not, simply pass the night out on the Veld. You will have sufficient
provisions and proceed early morning on your wagon journey. It will
be simply splendid and romantic. You, I know, will love it. But the
others too will fall in with it. So you will continue until you reach
Johannesburg, always trying the train whenever you can.
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
Am sending this Box 8, Care Badat so that you may get it even
on Sunday.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1
2

310

This appears to be the “Saturday letter” written to the addressee
Vide “The Resisters at Volksrust”, 24-9-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

200. LETTER TO “THE NATAL MERCURY”1
[DURBAN,]

September 21, 1913
SIR,

There is evidence in the special article from Pretoria on the
Indian position which you published in your issue of Saturday last
that its writer has been in the know. It will, therefore, be accepted by
the public as a weighty pronouncement on behalf of the Government.
You will, therefore, perhaps permit me to correct some of its most
glaring errors. The writer contends that two of the four things in
dispute were granted by the Government. This is only partly true. The
Free State difficulty is that of the legal racial bar. The last telegram
from Mr. Smuts lends colour to the suggestion that the difficulty is
removed. But in reality it is not. What is required is an admission in
the same way in which it was made about the point raised regarding
the right of ex-indentured Indians, that the new Act does not in law
require any declaration not required from any other immigrant, from
an Indian who may, under the Act, enter the Free State. This is quite
different from saying that such declaration will only be taken upon an
Indian entering the Union. The point is that, so far as immigration
only is concerned, an Indian should be able to enter on the same
terms as a European. Administrative differentialism there undoubtedly
will be. But that will regulate the number of entrants, not the legal
mode of entry. The point is somewhat technical from the nature of the
case. The struggle has been directed hitherto towards guarding against
a fundamental change in the British Constitution which is based upon
the theory of equality. The letter of the Indian contention was granted
in 1910 after four years’ continuous suffering on the part of my
countrymen. But the spirit of it is missed even now in the new Act by
reason of the ambiguous Free State clause.
The second difficulty not solved is the marriage question. Your
1

Evidently, Gandhiji had simultaneously sent a copy of this letter to Indian
Opinion, which published it in its issue of September 24.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

311

correspondent asserts that I have asked for legal recognition of
polygamy, and therefore, a subversion of the marriage law of the
country, which is based on the Christian doctrine. A glance at the
correspondence1 between the Government and myself, published in
Indian Opinion, September 13, will show that I have not asked for any
such thing. I have asked that the legality of marriages of Indians
celebrated in South Africa should be recognized in the same way as
those celebrated in India will be, under the new Act. I directed
alteration to the flaw in the wording of the marriage clause in the new
Act, and showed two ways of dealing with it, i.e., either by slightly
amending the new Act or by similarly amending the marriage laws of
the Union without in any way interfering with the monogamous
nature of marriages. The writer at Pretoria has raised the question of
the meaning of “monogamous marriage”. The point will be soon
decided by the Supreme Court. If the phrase does not mean what it
was meant to mean when the marriage clause was passed, the blame
will be that of the Government. They have raised the issue, not the
Indian community. Millions of Indian unions in which the husband
has married only one wife are, to the lay mind, monogamous
marriages. If the phrase means anything else, the Government have
misled the Senate, the Imperial and Indian Governments, and the
Indian community. It will not be denied that this marriage question is
one of the highest importance to us. I am sure the Europeans of South
Africa will permit us to cherish the honour of our womanhood as
much as they cherish that of theirs.
As to the £3 poll-tax, I note that your correspondent does not
seriously contend that it is a new point. He has only to look at the
reservation clause in the correspondence of 1911 to see that it cannot
be treated as a new point. It is new in the sense that it was not included
in the recent negotiations. It could not well be as the discussion turned
only upon the new Act. Had there been a settlement on the basis of
the negotiations, the community would have continued to urge the
removal by way of petitioning, etc., but the negotiations having failed,
1

This, inter alia, included letters addressed to the Private Secretary to the
Minister of the Interior dated June 28, to the Secretary for the Interior dated July 2 and
August 24, and to the Assistant Secretary for the Interior dated September 3. These
have been given in their chronological order.

312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the way was open for the community to include this matter of simple
humanity in the struggle. Lord Ampthill has declared that the Union
Government gave Mr. Gokhale a definite promise that the tax would
be removed. If the Government intend to keep the promise, they have
but to say so, and there will be no struggle on that point. If they do
not intend to keep it, Indians would have no right to exist side by side
with a free and self-respecting community if they have no decency,
and moral strength, to suffer imprisonment, or worse, in order that a
promise given to their distinguished countryman may be fulfilled, and
their poor, helpless countrymen freed from a burden which ought
never to have been imposed on them, and for which the sin must, I
fear, be shared by the free Indian population of South Africa almost
equally with the Europeans.
Lastly, your correspondent’s advice that we should accept
thankfully what has been granted, and what has been denied as being
of little importance, and then press forward the redress of the balance
of grievances by way of petitions, etc., and his suggestion that, then,
we may be blessed with a special law such as the Natives’ Land Act,
whereby we may have a reserve set apart for us where we can buy
land, etc., remind me, if he will forgive me for the analogy, of Æsop’s
justice-loving wolf. We have petitioned in vain all these years. Right
after right has been taken away from us. And an Indian reserve means
that the substantial right at present enjoyed of owning and buying
land in Natal, and the Cape, and a modified right of possessing land in
the Transvaal should be surrendered, and we must allow ourselves to
be penned in an enclosure, and then bless the Government for this
grace as a reward for not offering passive resistance, which involves
suffering for nobody but ourselves, but which, if it ensures nothing
else, at least saves us from a surrender of our manhood.
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI

The Natal Mercury, 25-9-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

313

201. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[DURBAN,]

September 22, 1913
DEAR MR. GORGES,

I am much obliged to you for your letter 1 of the 19th instant
regarding the marriage question. I have not widened the original
scope of my request. But I shall endeavour as clearly as possible to
re-state the position.
It is submitted that authority should be taken from Parliament
during its next session to legalize monogamous marriages already
solemnized or hereafter to be solemnized by Indian priests among
Indians belonging to non-Christian denominations. Legislation has
become necessary only because the marriage clause in the new Act
was hastily worded without considering the full position. Unless the
relief now sought is granted soon, the status of Indian women married
in South Africa is that of concubines and their children not lawful
heirs of their parents. Such is, as I take it, the effect of the Searle
judgment combined with the action of the Natal Master of the
Supreme Court and the Gardiner judgment2 . I have asked for a
promise of amelioration during the next session because I submit that
the matter is one of urgency. With regard to polygamy, I have not
asked for legal recognition but the admission, under the powers vested
in the Minister, of plural wives without the Government in any way
recognizing their legal status. The admission is to be restricted only to
plural wives already married to Indians who may be found to be
unquestionably domiciled in the Union. This at once restricts the
scope of the Government’s generosity and enables them to know now
how many such wives will have to be admitted. I have already
submitted a plan as to how this can be brought about.
In my humble opinion, the letter of the 10th August, 1911,
referred to in your communication, bears the interpretation I have
1
2

314

Vide 2nd footnote to “Telegram to Secretary for Interior”, 10-9-1913.
Vide “Important Judgment about Marriage”, 30-8-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

placed upon it. The British Indian Association raised the question
of polygamy and the above-mentioned letter containing the assurance
was the reply. I suppose you know that plural wives have actually been
admitted by the Immigration Officers and that polygamous unions are
even registered on the Transvaal registration certificates.
As doubts have arisen as to the meaning of the term
“monogamous marriage”, I beg to record that the meaning that the
community has placed upon it is that a marriage is monogamous if a
man is married to only one woman, no matter under what religion and
no matter whether such religion under given circumstances sanctions
polygamy or not.
I observe that paragraph 2 of your letter seems to suggest that
my reply to your last wire did not [cover], though it might have
covered, the other points referred to therein. I purposely refrained
from touching the other points as I felt that no scope was left open for
me to do so. But if General Smuts is still prepared to consider the
other points, I shall be certainly prepared to make a further
submission. I cannot help feeling that the unfortunate rupture has
taken place on points very vital to the Indian community but of little
consequence to the Government or the dominant population of the
Union.
Pray, always consider me to be one the least desirous to obstruct the
Government and most anxious to serve it in so far as I can do so
consistently with my duty to my countrymen.1
[I have, etc.,]

M. K. GANDHI

Indian Opinion, 29-10-1913

1

Acknowledging this on September 27, Gorges wrote: “I have submitted your
communication to the Minister, who, after full consideration of the matter, requests
me to say that it will not be possible for him to give any assurance that legislation
on the lines indicated in Section 4 of my personal letter of the 19th ultimo to you will
be introduced at the next session of Parliament.”
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

315

202. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

[September 22, 1913] 1
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I have your letters. I still expect a wire from you. As we are
issuing on Wednesday, I must not wait to write at length. I only hope
that your expectation will be realized. You do not seem to have
received my letter on Sunday. Anyway I expect a wire from you at
noon. More, therefore, then. No time to write separately to the others
just now.
I wrote to Miss Schlesin saying she need not worry about
replying to the papers. As it so happens the Leader’s is an inspired
article and reproduced in the Mercury2 .
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

From the contents; vide the following item.
The Natal Mercury; vide also:Letter to the Natal Mercury”, 21-9-1913 and
“What Appeal Boards Stand For”, 24-9-1913.
2

316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

203. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[PHOENIX]

Monday afternoon [September 22, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I have been most regular in my correspondence. I cannot
understand how 3 letters were delivered to you at the same time. In
several cases I sent train letters. However, you got my Saturday letter1
in time. I have your 3 wires. I am delighted that they are at last
deported and that they have recrossed. I hope now to hear from you
next as to sentences. If they are [sentenced] it would be well for you
to stay there two days and arrange for special foods for Mrs. Gandhi
and others who may need it. You may have a heart-to-heart chat with
the doctor who is a nice man and tell him of Maganbhai’s disease too.
If they are gaoled, I shall leave here on Thursday. That gives you
[time] there till Friday. If I bring a large contingent, you should stay
over and see them through. If on the other [hand] I have only Budrea
with me, you will not stay but join me, i.e., if I am not also stopped.
Wednesday will just give me time to wind up for the next issue here.
You and I have our work cut out in Johannesburg and if all goes
well, we may settle the matter in a month’s time. There are indications
in the newspapers themselves.
The resisters tell me you have been a tower of strength to them.
Mrs. Gandhi says most pathetically that you are all attention to her. I
simply pass these sentiments on to you.
Have not yet had a wire from Polak.
Will you please arrange with Badat and others that they look
after those who may follow?
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
1

Vide “Letter to Jamnadas Gandhi”, 19-7-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

317

204. THE RESISTERS AT VOLKSRUST
We reported last week that the passive resisters were told they
would be deported on receipt of warrants from Pretoria. Fuller details
that have come to hand show that the spokesman1 was summoned
before the Immigration Officer on Thursday2 last and told that he had
received instructions from Pretoria to submit to the party for filling in
forms prescribed under the Act. The spokesman regretted that the
party could not comply with the request. Would they submit to the
test? The spokesman said they could not do that either.
“Then,” said the officer, “you are all prohibited immigrants.”
And, so saying, he handed the usual notices for all, informing them of
his decision and saying that they could appeal against his decision to
the Appeal Board within 3 days. The spokesman said the party did not
want to appeal at all. The officer then said that, in that event, he would
deport them all upon receipt of warrants. Thereupon, the spokesman
urged that they should all be taken in custody, as they did not wish to
remain free and not proceed with their journey. But the officer said he
could not take them in custody. The next day the party informed the
officer that, unless they were kept under custody, they would proceed
to Johannesburg.
“Then,” said the officer, “I shall have to stop you, but I will
not imprison you.” Thereupon, the following letter was addressed to
the officer, signed by the spokesman:
My fellow-passive resisters and I have been stopped by you from continuing
our journey to Johannesburg since Tuesday last, the 16th instant. I told you then that,
if you wished to detain or arrest us, you could do so only by keeping us in prison, as
we did not desire to remain in Volksrust with friends, however insistent they might be
to accommodate us. But you told us that you had not sufficient room at the Police
Station for such a large company as ours and that, therefore, you would rather that we
remained out, pending receipt of instructions from the Government. We have waited,
it would be admitted, long enough to enable you to receive your instructions.

1
2

318

Chhaganlal Gandhi
September 18
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

On my telling you on Friday that, if you could not keep us under custody, the
party would consider itself free to proceed to Johannesburg, you informed me that you
would prevent it from so doing and that yet you could not keep us in custody until you
had heard from the Government.
I beg, therefore, now to inform you that unless you take charge of the party,
we shall entrain for Johannesburg on Monday, by the Kaffir Mail, and if you offer
physical resistance at the time, as passive resisters, we can only yield to it for the
time being. But, if you set us free afterwards and do not hold us bodily, we shall seek
some other means of continuing our forward journey.

Later wires received from Volksrust show that the delivery of the
notice acted like a charm. The whole party was deported on Monday,
at 10 a.m., to the Natal border. Deportation merely consists in pushing
the deportees beyond a line midway in a shallow stream. As soon as
the party was deported and the back of the deporting officer was
hardly turned, they re-crossed and were arrested. They were straightaway taken to the Charge Office.
Indian Opinion, 24-9-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

319

205. THE LATE MR. HOOSEN DAWAD
We regret to announce that young Hoosen Dawad, who was
ailing for a long time and who had the benefit of the most skilled
medical attendance and the unceasing and devoted nursing of a loving
father, passed away on Monday night. We consider that Mr. Hoosen
gave promise of being one of the greatest Indians of South Africa. We
extend our sympathy to the bereaved family. We hope to give a
special memoir1 and portrait of the deceased in our next issue. This
issue being specially published for giving news of the passive
resistance struggle, it is impossible for us to cope with the memoir.
Indian Opinion, 24-9-1913

206. THE £3 TAX
For many reasons we consider that the central point of the
struggle is this blood tax, as we have not hesitated to call it. It ought
never to have been imposed. The history of the imposition does not
reflect any credit on Natal. It would never have been imposed if we,
the free Indian settlers of Natal, had, at the time, done our duty
completely. It would never have been imposed if the otherwise fine
statesmen of Natal, who were then in power, had not truckled to the
planter and the farming communities. We may here recall the fact that
the original intention of the then Government was to impose an
annual tax of £25 on ex-indentured Indians and to make its nonpayment a criminal offence. This was too much for the Government
of India, though it was soft and accommodating enough. The figure
was, therefore, brought down to £3 and the Government of India
would not listen to the proposal to make its non-payment a criminal
offence. So a Bill was passed in 1895 imposing the tax, the condition
being that, if the ex-indentured Indian left for India on the
1

320

Vide “The Late Mr. Haji Hoosen Dawad Mahomed”, 1-10-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

termination of his indenture or entered into further indenture, he was
exempt but, if he did not do either and wished to settle in Natal as a
free man, he and his were bound to pay the tax which could be
collected by a civil summary process. The first collections started in
1900, and since then men, women and children have been harassed,
more or less inexorably, to pay this wretched penalty for their
freedom. We call it a penalty because it is admittedly not a revenueproducing impost. It is avowedly for the purpose of compelling the
helpless people to re-indenture or to return to India from whence they
came to avoid starvation, and on the strength of unscrupulous
allurements of touts. The law-officers then set about working to find
out how they could send these men to gaol although it was a compact
between the Natal and the Indian Governments that it was not to be
deemed a criminal offence if the tax was not paid. They found out
that it was possible to use effectively the small debts clause of the
Magistrates’ Courts Act in order to override the compact and send
these people to gaol if they did not pay the tax. Disobedience of an
order of Court is contempt of Court for which the defaulter is
sentenced to imprisonment. There is an exception to the clause to the
effect that, if a debtor shows that he has been unable, through want of
means, to discharge a debt which he is ordered to pay, he may not be
imprisoned. But we know that, in most cases, the Magistrates, after all
human beings living in the midst of the all-powerful planting
community, have disbelieved the evidence as to poverty and sentenced
the men to be imprisoned for non-payment. The latest case in point is
that of Sarjoo1 . He has not paid for the last three years. He paid what
he could and then pleaded inability. But the plea was not accepted and
he had to serve imprisonment with hard labour for 30 days. And even
this imprisonment does not free him from payment. If he is believed
by a police officer to have means, he can be re-arrested and re-sentenced unless he pays the tax. Thus we hold that the local Government
have broken faith with the Government of India by resorting to the
Magistrates’ Courts Act to thrust the poor men and women into gaols
for non-payment.
1

An ex-indentured Indian who had not paid his tax arrears; Maganlal Gandhi
was summoned for employing him.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

321

But one would have thought that, with the stoppage of the
system of indenture, the tax would be abolished. Nothing of the kind
has happened. The relentless employers, who want indentured labour,
having tasted the sweets of it, are not satisfied with anything less,
certainly not with free labour. And so the tax has continued.
Then came the climax. Prominent people of Natal assured
Mr. Gokhale that the tax would go, that they did not want it. The
Union Government made a definite promise to our distinguished
countryman that they would remove the tax. And yet, during the last
session of Parliament, they broke the promise.
Who can say that the local Indian community have decided a
second too soon upon passive resistance? It would have been proper at
any moment. It is doubly so at this moment. If our readers only knew,
as we know, how this breach of faith, this failure to remove the tax, has
shaken Mr. Gokhale and how, in spite of strong medical advice, he
decided to return to India to rouse the Government and the people to
action, and what extraordinary pressure was brought to bear upon him
to induce him to postpone his departure from England, every Indian
would let every consideration of self go and fight for the removal of
this tax even unto death. It is a simple, primary duty every Indian in
South Africa owes to his country, to Mr. Gokhale and to the poor men
who are the victims of gold hunger on the part of the employers of
indentured Indian labour.
Indian Opinion, 24-9-1913

322

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

207. WHAT APPEAL BOARDS STAND FOR
The Natal Mercury, in a leaderette, offers the opinion that the
Appeal Boards are a distinct advantage to the Indians because one or
two men have been successful in their appeals. This would be true if
the Appeal Boards had taken the place of something worse. But the
facts are that they are dealing with a situation that did not exist before.
That is to say, before the Act was passed, men who were undisputed
possessors of their domicile certificates re-entered as a matter of right.
Now the Act has nullified the effect of these certificates and created
work for the Boards which reject the majority of cases, which formerly
were quite safe and then grant one or two. Thus the law, having
deprived the community of all its rights, allows Appeal Boards to
restore some. If, for this mercy, one has to be thankful, one ought also
to thank a thief who restores part of stolen property. Of course, we
have nothing to say against the Boards as such. Indeed, the
appointment of Mr. Binns and Mr. Maurice Evans is unexceptionable.
But the best judge is of no use, if he is appointed merely to act as an
anaesthetic acts when a patient has to undergo a severe operation
resulting in the loss of a limb. And the analogy is somewhat too
flattering for the Government. In the latter case, the patient submits to
the operation willingly and for his own good. In the former case, he is
the unwilling victim.
Indian Opinion, 24-9-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

323

208. THE £3 TAX
It is, I think, our good fortune that the £3 tax has been included
among the issues for satyagraha. The previous history of this problem
is worth recalling. The proposal for the £3 tax first came up in 1894.
The Natal Government sent a deputation to India. At that time the
Indians protested violently against it.1 The Government’s original
intention was to levy a tax of £25 and, if any Indian could not pay that
tax, the Government wanted to be empowered to effect hiscompulsory
repatriation. Thanks to our agitation, the Indian Government rejected
both the proposals and passed a resolution that an Indian who, after
completing his indenture, did not re-indenture himself should either
return to his country or pay an amount of £3 tax each for himself, his
wife and his children. If anyone did not pay the tax, it could be
recovered by auctioning his property, if he had any, but that the
Government would have no power to imprison him. The Indian
community made a strong representation against this too. In 1896,
meetings were also held in India in this connection.2 Nevertheless the
tax remained. For some time, thereafter, the Government collected the
tax from those who paid it. Meanwhile, though there was no provision
for imprisonment [in case of default], the Government found an
indirect way of sending defaulters to gaol. According to a section in
the law relating to magistrates’ courts, anyone failing to comply with a
magistrate’s judgment is guilty of contempt of court for which the
court could sentence him to imprisonment. Under this section, first a
decree would be issued on an Indian to pay his tax. Then, if he did
not pay the tax, he would be brought before the court for contempt of
court. If he is able to prove his poverty, the court must discharge him.
Why should the court believe the evidence of such a miserable wretch?
The result was violation of the agreement made with the Indian
Government. This was breach of trust. And hundreds of Indians
found themselves in prison. Several women and young men were also
1
Vide “Open Letter”, before 19-12-1894, and “Petition to Lord Ripon”, before
5-5-1895.
2
Vide “Speech at Meeting, Madras”, 26-10-1896.

324

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

imprisoned. Are we not to blame for all this? Had we taken more
pains than we did, these poor people would have been free from the
yoke which they had borne for 15 years. Would not thousands of
pounds of the poor have been saved? It must sear our hearts to hear
all these questions. We did not hear the cry for help at our own doors !
Who can tell how much of such burden [of guilt] we have to bear? It
is enjoined by all religions that we should share in the suffering that
we see around us. We have failed to do so. An opportunity has offered
itself today.
We are sure that, if many from the community fight against it,
the tax will be repealed forthwith. If only a few do so, there is likely to
be delay. But the repeal of the tax is certain. The campaign that is now
coming is such that it should be easy for all Indians to join it with zest.
So far we could ask nothing of the thousands of ex-indentured
Indians. Now, they too can join the fight with all their heart. We are
convinced that, if every Indian who is not able to court imprisonment
or give money for this cause, just spares one hour of his time to
acquaint the poor and the illiterate people with the issue of the tax,
there will be a real fight indeed. No one, moreover, should remain
complacent in the belief that the tax is bound to be repealed. On the
contrary, everyone must do his best. The community will find a great
deal to learn from this struggle and will be able to raise itself very
high. A wise man does not avert his face or go to wash it when
Lakshmi1 comes to him, in his own house, to put a tilak 2 on his
forehead.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 24-9-1913

1
2

Hindu goddess of prosperity
Auspicious vermilion mark

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

325

209. LETTER TO CLEMENT DOKE
P HOENIX,
NATAL ,

September 24, 1913
MY DEAR CLEMENT,

I have your letter but not the list. I am now sending you 25
copies 1 for distribution among father’s friends and congregation. You
can have more. It never was the intention to charge European friends
for the memoir. The idea was to get Indians to buy copies for wide
circulation in India.
Thanks for inquiring about Mrs. Gandhi. She is now in gaol at
Volksrust as a passive resister together with 3 other ladies from
Phoenix.
The Secret City 2 is enchanting. I have been reading it in my
spare moments. I have nearly finished it.
I am leaving tomorrow for Johannesburg.
I hope you are getting and reading your copy of Indian
Opinion regularly.
With regards to you all.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: G. N. 743

1
These were copies of a memoir of Rev. J. J.Doke, addressee’s father; vide
“The Late Mr. Joseph J. Doke”, 23-8-1913.
2
A book by Rev. Doke; vide “The Late Mr. Joseph J. Doke”, 23-8-1913.

326

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

210. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
IN THE TRAIN ,

[After September 25, 1913] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I find myself in an awful state today. I ran for the train. I gave
no end of trouble to the boys. Everyone was delayed because of me.
Unmindful of that, I committed a further mistake and sent Purshotam2
again. Thinking of this, I felt extremely miserable. Even those of my
actions which I believed to be for a spiritual purpose have a big flaw
in them. I am too full of moha and lobha 3 . It is never the mark of a
spiritual aspirant to be in too great a hurry and make himself a
nuisance to others. He may, of course, not overtax himself–ought not
to. What an ignoble state to be in ! All this is the consequence of initial
mistakes. I also realized that if I had skipped the meal, I could have
worked with an unruffled mind, with plenty of time on hand, and
would have been no cause of trouble to any of you. A spiritual
aspirant should not accept exacting services for himself. To make you
give up the school and to send the boys running argue an abject state
of mind. I always knew this, but realized it vividly today. I felt
ashamed within myself even as I was on the way—I reproached
myself. I, who used to believe that I had perhaps something in, find
myself today in a humiliating state. I tell you all this because you
attribute so many excellences to me. You should see the faults in me
in order that you may save yourself from like faults. Plunged as I
have been in the affairs of South Africa, I think I can be entirely free
only in India. But please warn me whenever I take upon myself too
heavy a burden. You will be with me, no doubt, even in India. If I am
imprisoned, it will be all peace and nothing but peace for me. If not, I
1

This appears to have been written by Gandhiji on his way to the Transvaal.
He left Durban on September 25 and reached Johannesburg on September 27.
2
Purshotam Desai, a satyagrahi, in charge of the Phoenix School for some
time
3
Greed
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

327

may even return there. Please warn me if ever in future, even in South
Africa, you find today’s story being repeated. We could have done
without bread for Mr. Kallenbach and without groundnut jam for me.
We need not have been particular about feeding the children. Or
rather, we might have pleased ourselves in all these ways and yet
things would have been all right if I had not insisted on having my
meal. But I would ride all the horses and that is why God ordained my
fall. Surely this is not the first occasion when such a thing has
happened to me. This time, however, the lesson has been brought
home to me. I will now change myself a little.
Please arrange the household things, or have them arranged
properly. There are old cotton beddings near where the tools are
stored. Ask Baku to wash them. Have them stitched by Mrs. Sam1 and
put them back well arranged.
For the present, let the children learn to write the addresses
carefully. It will be good to lighten this burden on Devibehn2 by
half—and to remove it entirely by and by. If Chhotam and Navin
worry her, draw them away to yourself. The matter about Lord
Ampthill will now have to be attended to by you, unaided.
While in Durban, I heard that the men will be removed from
Volksrust to Maritzburg.3 If they are, it is just as well. That will be
some experience indeed and, with Rustomjee Sheth there, they will be
better able to face the situation.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
If the children cannot manage to write 300 addresses this time,
you should try and help them to complete them on Sunday or
Monday. You will find there a jacket made by me for Budrea4 ; this is
to be sent on to Polak.
Two powers [of attorney] on behalf of Rustomjee Sheth have
1
2
3
4

328

Wife of Govindsamy
Indian name given to Miss Ada West by Gandhiji
The prisoners were removed to the Maritzburg Gaol on September 28.
An old client of Gandhiji
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

been left there. They should be attested by you and Devibehn
under the date of Monday, Phoenix, and preserved there. Fill [in the
details], if you can.1 Otherwise I shall do that when I am there.
From the Gujarati original in pencil in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 5649 Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri

211. LETTER TO SOUTH AFRICAN RAILWAYS
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

September 27, 1913
TO

THE GENERAL MANAGER
S OUTH AFRICAN R AILWAYS
[SIR,]

With two other Indians I was travelling by the Kaffir Mail that
left Durban on Thursday to the Transvaal. We were all travelling
third-class. We occupied one of the corridor third-class compartments
which are usually attached to the Natal trains. My companions and I
were put in the compartment we occupied by one of the conductors.
At Ladysmith, however, the new conductor came and told me that we
would have to shift from the compartment we were occupying to
another. On enquiring for the reason I was told that the compartment
we were occupying was meant for Europeans only. I drew the
conductor’s attention to a compartment which was so labelled, also to
the fact that our compartment was not labelled at all, and that I had
travelled in such compartments several times on the Natal line. I
informed him also that the conductor at Durban had placed me in that
compartment, but the new conductor said that I was to obey instructions or to get permission from the Station Master to remain where I
was. Thereupon, I saw the Station Master, but I must say that, in rather
a rude manner, he told me that I was to do as the conductor asked me,
and that I ought to know that the conductors could ask passengers to
1

The original is not clear at this point.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

329

shift as many times as they chose without giving any reason whatsoever. I did not argue the matter with the Station Master but simply
went and occupied the compartment I was in and awaited developments there. Meantime, unknown to me, a friend who happened to be
on the platform, and who knew me, disclosed my identity to the conductor who subsequently spoke to me and told me that, in asking me as
he had done to remove, he was only carrying out instructions. I told
the conductor then that, after having known who I was, it was his duty
to have me arrested for disobeying instructions, but that he would not
do. I was told by the Indians who were on the platform at the time,
and who were watching the proceedings, that such difficulties happened to Indian passengers very often. I do not know what truth there
is in what the conductor told me. I can only hope that he has misread
the instructions of the administration, because, in my humble opinion, it would be preposterous if even third-class Indian passengers
may not travel without being disturbed, and without being told that the
nicest compartments were always reserved for Europeans.
I hope that you will be good enough to investigate this matter
and do whatever you consider is necessary. I feel that high officials,
such as Station Masters, ought to be told to realize their responsibility
and behave courteously towards passengers even though they may not
belong to the European race. I hardly think that it was necessary for
me to disclose my identity before I could claim courteous treatment
from the Station Master.
[I have, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI]

Indian Opinion, 8-10-1913

330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

212. ON POINT OF BEING ARRESTED
[September 27, 1913] 1
On Thursday2 last, Mr. Gandhi went to the Transvaal with some
satyagrahis. He and his companions were in a third-class compartment. Among the third-class carriages, there are some which are clean
and comfortable. The railway official had put Mr. Gandhi and his
companions in one of these. When the train reached Ladysmith, the
conductor ordered them to vacate the compartment and occupy the
next one. Mr. Gandhi said: “We are not going to, and we will reach
the Transvaal in this very compartment.”
The conductor said, “I order you to go.”
Mr. Gandhi said, “It was the conductor at Durban who placed
us here.” The conductor retorted, “Don’t argue with me. I tell you to
get out. This compartment is for the Europeans. This train is under
my charge.”
Without entering into an argument, Mr. Gandhi decided to
remain in the same compartment with his companions and hoped to
be arrested for disobeying the conductor’s order. He thought that this
was a good opportunity that had offered itself for him to go to gaol.
Some Indians who were present there saw what was happening and
were glad to think the incident would have a good result. But Mr.
Windon, who was on the spot, spoiled the game. The conductor did
not recognize Mr. Gandhi. Mr. Windon went to him and told him the
name. That made the conductor hold his peace. Afterwards he had a
long conversation with Mr. Gandhi in the presence of other conductors and told him that he was only doing his duty. In his ignorance,
however, the friend, with the best of intentions, behaved like an
enemy. Had Mr. Gandhi been arrested at Ladysmith, some of the
problems concerning railways would have been solved and,
incidentally, the struggle would have gained strength. All the Indians
on the platform were disappointed and, later on, Mr. Windon realized
1
2

Vide reference to preceding item in the last paragraph.
September 25

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

331

that it would have been far better if he had not interfered.
Mr. Gandhi has sent a written complaint about this to the General Manager, telling him that he was informed by the Indians who
were on the station that such hardships were a common experience.
He has also pointed out in the letter that the Station Master, instead of
attending to the complaint, behaved rather rudely.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 1-10-1913

213. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

September 28, 1913
DEAR MR. GORGES,

I do not know that I am justified in writing this letter to you, but,
as you have been personally solicitous about the non-revival of
passive resistance, and as, in the course of my conversations with you,
I have so often told you that I have nothing to withhold from the
Government, I may as well inform you of what is now going on.
I wrote to you1 from Phoenix in reply to your last letter, and if
you have not yet replied to my communication but intend to do so, I
would suggest your sending your reply to my Johannesburg address,
as I shall be here for some time at least.
The campaign has started in earnest. As you know, sixteen
passive resisters, including four women, are already serving three
months’ imprisonment with hard labour.2 The resisters here were
awaiting my arrival and the activity here will commence almost
immediately.
I cannot help saying that the points on which the struggle has
re-started are such that the Government might gracefully grant them
1
Vide “Letter to Secretary for Interior”. The Secretary’s reply dated September
27 had evidently not reached Gandhiji by this time.
2
Vide “Letter to Harilal Gandhi”, 18-9-1913.

332

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to the community. But what I would like to impress upon the Government is the gravity of the step we are about to take. I know that it is
fraught with danger. I know also that, once taken, it may be difficult
to control the spread of the movement beyond the limits one may set.
I know also what responsibility lies on my shoulders in advising such
a momentous step, but I feel that it is not possible for me to refrain
from advising a step which I consider to be necessary, to be of
educational value and, in the end, to be valuable both to the Indian
community and to the State. This step consists in actively, persistently
and continuously asking those who are liable to pay the £3 tax to
decline to do so and to suffer the penalties for non-payment and, what
is more important, in asking those who are now serving indenture and
who will, therefore, be liable to pay the £3 tax on completion of their
indenture to strike work until the tax is withdrawn. I feel that, in view
of Lord Ampthill’s declaration in the House of Lords,1 evidently with
the approval of Mr. Gokhale, as to the definite promise made by the
Government and repeated to Lord Gladstone, this advice to indentured
Indians would be fully justified. That the tax has weighed most
heavily upon the men I know from personal experience, that the men
resent it bitterly I also know from personal knowledge. But they have
submitted to it more or less with quiet resignation, and I am loth to
disturb their minds by any step that I might take or advise. Can I not
even now, whilst in the midst of the struggle, appeal to General Smuts
and ask him to reconsider his decision on the points already submitted
and on the question of the £3 tax and, whether this letter is favourably
considered or not, may I anticipate the assurance that it will in no wise
be taken to be a threat?
[I have, etc.,]

M. K. GANDHI

Indian Opinion, 29-10-1913

1

Vide “The Debate in the Lords”, 6-9-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

333

214. SPEECH AT VREDEDORP MEETING1
[JOHANNESBURG ,

September 28, 1913]
Mr. Gandhi at the outset stated that he had already addressed two meetings that
afternoon, one of which consisted of some fifty Indian women who were mostly
affected by the Immigration Act. All of them had decided to throw in their lot with
their sisters who were serving three months’ hard labour at Vereeniging (Applause.)
They had decided, some of them with babies in arms, to undergo all the hardships that
gaol life meant. They were going to suffer for their own honour, and though he had
warned them, and had even exaggerated the factor of the hardships of gaol life, they
would be gratified and surprised, possibly, to hear that the women were staunch. In a
few days’ time they would be in His Majesty’s gaol. (Applause.)
Mr. Gandhi touched upon the requests of the Indian community and the reasons
for resuming the campaign of passive resistance.

Our demands are, in my opinion, incredibly simple. The
first in point of importance is that the poll-tax of £3 be abolished.
This is payable by all the ex-indentured Indians, their wives and
grown-up children, so that in the case of a family of six the tax is £18
per year. This tax, as Lord Ampthill stated in the House of Lords, was
on promise of repeal during the last session of Parliament. This was a
promise made to Gokhale when he came to South Africa. The second
thing is the marriage difficulty. I see wild statements made to the
effect that we are trying to alter the whole basis of the marriage law of
South Africa and to legalize polygamy. Nothing can be further from
our thought than that. All we ask for is the restoration of the status
that existed before the Searle judgment, and that is, legal recognition
of monogamous marriages according to our own religious rites.
Surely, this does not mean any alteration of the basis of the marriage
law of South Africa. We have certainly asked for the admission of the
existing plural wives of the Indians who are domiciled here, but for no
legal recognition of their status. This has been done before, and we
1

Gandhiji addressed a well-attended mass meeting of Indians at the Hamidia
Hall. A. M. Cachalia presided.

334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

simply ask for its continuation. It affects a very small number of
Indian women. You will be surprised to know that the law of South
Africa has actually, in the interests of the planting community, even
legally recognized polygamy in the case of the indentured Indians.
But we are asking for no such legal recognition for plural wives of
free Indian settlers. The third point is the retention of the right of
South Africa-born Indians to enter the Cape by reason of their birth.
The fourth point is the Free State difficulty. This is almost settled. We
claim that the new Act does not mean that an Indian who may
possibly enter the Free State is required to make as an immigrant the
Free State declaration as to prohibition of holding landed property, to
farm and to trade. If such is the interpretation placed upon the law by
the Government also, there is no dispute. If the Government make that
admission, the whole difficulty is solved. (Applause.) [Resolution]1
That this meeting held under the auspices of the British Indian
Association endorses the action taken by Mr. Cachalia in his letter to
the Government, and congratulates the pioneers from Natal who are
waiting in His Majesty’s gaol at Vereeniging. This meeting further
resolves upon the immediate taking up of passive resistance and to
continue it until the requests contained in Mr. Cachalia’s letter are
granted. The meeting respectfully urges the Union Government to
grant that request in fairness to the community and also asks the
Imperial and Indian Governments to help the community and trusts
that the leaders of thought, both in England and India, will support the
community in the endeavour to conserve national honour.
Rand Daily Mail, 29-9-1913

1
After Kallenbach, L. W. Ritch and Joseph Royeppen had spoken, the
meeting adopted the resolution, presumably drafted by Gandhiji. The resolution, with
some verbal variations, was also published in Indian Opinion, 1-10-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

335

215. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

Monday [September 29, 1913] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

Your letter. You need not have made yourself unhappy. Even if
you had not gone on to finish your meal, all the things could not have
been completed and the confusion2 could not have been avoided. How
can my defects be removed by your disciplining yourself? The
remedy lies with me alone.
Manilal, Medh and Pragji have dressed themselves as hawkers
and gone out for rounds. I am awaiting news of their arrest.
There will be a good number of women coming forward here.
They will start in a day or so. I hear that even women have been removed from Volksrust to Maritzburg. I find that it will also be necessary
to start a Satyagraha Fund. On their own, men are coming forward
with contributions. Acknowledge the following amounts, therefore:
Mrs. Noor Mahomed Babul 1-1-0
Jogi Fakir of Bejalpur 1-0-0
You will see dehydrated bananas everywhere on that side. For
quick dehydration, you may put them into the fire. It seems that Ba
has been removed to Maritzburg. Nobody can say when, if ever, we
shall be permitted to send food there. You will not need a mortar and
pestle. You may make minute pieces with a nut-cracker and grind
them in a stonemill. I am sending on a letter from Chhaganlal received here.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5868

1
The acknowledgment of the amounts referred to in the letter appeared in
Indian Opinion, 8-10-1913.
2
The reference is to the situation described in “Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”.

336

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

216. INTERVIEW TO “THE TRANSVAAL LEADER”
[JOHANNESBURG ,

September 29, 1913]
Mr. Gandhi... discussed the situation fully and frankly. He considers that the
people of the Transvaal are all with the Indians in their demand for fuller rights.
Everyone he spoke to, he said, was sympathetic.
[REPORTER:] Then you do not consider that Parliament truly reflects the
feeling of the country?

[ GANDHIJI:] No, there you have professional men.
Mr. Gandhi said that the Indians were as steadfast and loyal to the cause as
ever. Numerically they would not be so strong, but they were quite as earnest as
before. The trouble, he said, had arisen to purify them. Asked why the number of
resisters would be smaller, he stated that many who had experienced the discomforts
of Transvaal prisons had no wish to return.
Some merchants too are not joining your ranks?

They may not go to prison, but they will help us with money.
Are you as well-off in a financial way as on the occasion of the last campaign?

No, we are not.
He went on to say that it was not a question of 3,000 convictions this time. A
different procedure will be followed. Instead of a large number of men being in prison
for short periods, a hundred or so would bear the brunt of the attack, and, as the
Government seemed disposed to inflict the maximum penalty, they would spend a
long period in gaol, even if they were only arrested three or four times. They would be
assisted by their compatriots in the other Provinces. In the Free State they were only
fighting for a theoretical right.
“The thin end of the wedge,” suggested the interviewer.

Hardly that, though perhaps in some respects it is.1
The Transvaal Leader, 30-9-1913

1
Gandhiji then explained that the people in the Orange Free State must
first be educated on the question. The report added that a number of Indian merchants
were opposed to passive resistance, which Gandhiji refuted; vide the following item.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

337

217. LETTER TO “THE TRANSVAAL LEADER”1
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

September 30, 1913
TO

THE EDITOR

THE TRANSVAAL LEADER
SIR,

I trust that you will allow me to correct the many misrepresentations made by your reporter with reference to the passive resistance
movement. No doubt they are not all consciously made, but he
certainly has been the instrument through which they have been
made. “The Indian Passive resistance campaign”, you have reported,
“is threatened with collapse.” This statement will prove to be untrue
even if there is one passive resister earnest enough to carry it on, and I
prophesy that, so long as there is one-passive resister left to fight, the
points we are now fighting for will be granted, not because of the
strength of such solitary passive resister, but because of the invincible
strength of the truth for which he may be fighting. That our demands
are just you have admitted in your leading article, only you have
asked us not to revive passive resistance, but to be patient and to
petition. Which course is the better is a matter of opinion. I hold that
the points at issue are to the community of such vital importance that
passive resistance is the only remedy, petitions having failed.
Now for facts. Your report states: “The Indian merchants
throughout the Transvaal have dissociated themselves from the
movement, and have withdrawn from Mr. Gandhi sources of revenue
without which the campaign must fail:” The fact is that the great mass
1

This is a rejoinder to an allegation in The Transvaal Leader, in a report of
the interview with Gandhiji on September 29, that a number of influential Indian
merchants were opposed to passive resistance. Similar letters were written by L. W.
Ritch and H. Kallenbach and were reproduced along with this in Indian Opinion,
15-10-1913.

338

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

meeting of Sunday 1 was attended by almost all the Indian merchants
of Johannesburg, and telegrams in support of the objects of the
meeting were received from all the principal towns of the Transvaal,
sent by the Indian merchants of those places, anddelegates attended
from the towns which could send them upon hardly 24 hours’ notice.
If there is a split in the community, I assure you that it will not be
because passive resisters are asking too much, but because they will be
asking too little, for I admit that there are men amongst us who
undoubtedly want passive resisters to go to the full length. They
cannot be held blameworthy, but they certainly will not represent the
moderate wing. I do not know who the influential Mahomedan merchants are who gave your reporter the information that there is very
little ground for complaint, and that those who attended the Gold Law
Conference were against passive resistance. Your reporter is free to see
the names in my possession of the principal merchants in the Transvaal who have expressed themselves heart and soul with the movement. It is true that they have not all offered to go to gaol, but they
have certainly offered to help with their purses. But I need not carry
any further the refutation of the misrepresentations contained in your
report, for the proof of the pudding is in the eating, and time will
show whether the movement collapses either for want of men or of
money. This, however, I will add, that the movement does not necessarily depend upon financial help, as I endeavoured to make clear to
your reporter yesterday. Indeed, my view of passive resistance is that it
is impure so long as it has to depend upon any pecuniary assistance
whatsoever. It is essentially a religious force, but I do not claim for the
movement, in which I am a humble participator, that it has reached the
purest stage. When it does, it will be independent of any public
demonstration in the shape of public meetings, resolutions or appeals
to even England and India. Our ideal is that truth, in order to assert
itself, needs no such props. We are striving to reach it, and we can but
die in the attempt.
Lastly, permit me to say that the statement that passive resisters
“demand payment for their penance, there must be compensation for
enforced confinement, martyrdom is on a money basis,” is an atroci1

September 28

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

339

ous libel, and a cruel wrong to the men and women who have suffered
during the last campaign, and who will suffer now. A statement of
disbursements was published some time ago, and details are open to
inspection by any person who may care to go through them. There
never has been any payment to passive resisters for their services as
such. There has been maintenance given to the dependants of those
who were in gaol, and the payments were made for barest necessities
of life. Your reporter should challenge his informants for facts in
support of the statements made by him. Indeed, fairness should have
dictated this course to him before he undertook to publish them in the
confident and emphatic manner in which he has. Nothing could have
been easier for him than to have at least come to me and asked me to
refute or corroborate them. He admits that there was no want of
candour on my part in replying to any questions he put to me.
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI

The Transvaal Leader, 1-10-1913

340

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

218. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
September 30, 1913
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I have your letter. Send a copy of the paper to Mrs. Blair.
I have left behind a watch there in the [jacket] I wear at home.
Please look for it and find it.
Manilal, Medh and Pragji tried hard yesterday to get arrested,
but did not succeed. They have gone out [hawking] again today. The
women will set out in a day or two.
Let me know under what strain you have to work. Does Shanti
give trouble?
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
If you find any letter of Raojibhai’s in the jacket or anywhere
else, please send it. There is something about Gordhanbhai 1 in it. I
have received Bhayat’s papers. I am sending herewith Rustomjee
Sheth’s power [of attorney] for attestation. Sign it as witness and keep
it safe. I also send some matter for the press. Send on to Omar Sheth
the power [of attorney] in his favour. Ask him to affix a five[-shilling]
stamp on it. Medh, Pragji and Manilal have been arrested.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 5653 Courtesy: Radhabehn Choudhri

1

Raojibhai’s uncle

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

341

219. THE LATE MR. HAJI HOOSEN
DAWAD MAHOMED 1
The rose has withered in its bloom. Young Hoosen has died in
the prime of life, leaving a nation in mourning. He was but
twenty-two, but he carried on his shoulders a head that would sit well
on a wise man of forty-two. Truly do the gods take away those they
love best. Had Mr. Hoosen Dawad lived to see the winter of life, I feel
sure that he would have left a mark on the history of the Indian
community in South Africa. Not that he has not, by the purity of his
life, influenced it even now. But what he was able to do was merely the
shadow of what was to come. He was a young man of truth for which
alone he lived. He was impatient of cant, hypocrisy and humbug even
in those who were his elders. He stood up for truth against all odds.
From his early age, he wanted his word to be as good as a bond. He
was innocence personified. No evil company could influence him. He
influenced his companions, no matter how depraved they might be.
Once Mr. Dawad Mahomed wrote to him, asking him to beware of
snares that lured young men in London and of bad companions. He
was indignant and wrote almost in these words: “Father, you do not
know your boy. Snares cannot affect Hoosen. Bad companions
mislead those who do not know where they are. Your son knows
where he is. He lives for truth and will die for it.” To this sterling
character, he added a burning enthusiasm for his country, India, which
then existed only in his imagination. He had never seen it. But it was
enough that it was the land of his forefathers. He had read about it
and he had learnt to love it with a passion that could not be stifled.
“O, Mr. Rustomjee,” young Hoosen said to him when he went
forward on the 16th ultimo as a passive resister, “if I rise from this
sick bed, you will find me in gaol. What a glorious death it would be,
to die in gaol for the sake of Truth and Justice!” He clung to life
desperately. But his desire was unalloyed with selfishness. He wanted
to live in order to serve his country and humanity.
When quite young, he began to hate trade, though Mr. Dawad,
1

342

This was published as a “Special Memoir”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

his father, was and is a merchant prince. He scorned possession of
wealth. He wanted to study. He was placed with me at Phoenix by Mr.
Dawad Mahomed and the whole settlement began to value the golden
worth of the boy. He became a loved member of my family. But
Phoenix was not enough for him. He liked the life but he wanted
scope for his literary and political tastes. He wanted to fight his
country’s battles. He felt a call. He thought (I think erroneously) that
it was necessary for him to go to London and become a barrister, if he
was to do any good. He was the idol of his father. He went to London
amid the good wishes of all. In London he soon made himself loved
wherever he went. He applied himself to study. And I know that he
used to go to Hampstead Heath, sit on the damp grass, read his favourite poets and lose himself in dreams. He used even to compose
poems which, those who can judge tell me, were promising.
But it was ordained that Hoosen was not to live. The dread
disease that destroyed his body began its operations upon it in
London. He tried many cures. He was under the treatment of
specialists. He rallied for a time, but was never cured. He returned to
Durban and felt better. Dr. Adams, who loved Hoosen, treated him
with rare attention. He was better, but only better. He was longing to
go to England and study. He went to India and saw it with the eye of
reverence. He said, in one of his many letters to me, that he wanted not
to see the stone work of India; he wanted to see its heart. He went with
his father and a distinguished company to the Holy Shrine in Arabia.
The pilgrimage made a lasting impression on him. In one of his
letters, he broke into raptures over the powers of the Prophet who
could summon millions, year after year, to pay their homage to the
Creator in this special manner. Thence the party proceeded to
Constantinople whilst the war with Italy was going on. Young Hoosen
was really his father’s guide and friend. The whole company leant on
him during this visit. The highest in Turkey were seen by them. There,
too, in that strange land, Hoosen became the favourite of those who
came in contact with him. He parted company with his father there.
His second Mecca was London. He must go there to finish his studies.
But the fiend never let go the grip of him. He was suddenly taken ill.
Mr. Dawad Mahomed received a cable, saying that Hoosen was
returning. It told its own tale. The father knew that the son was
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

343

returning to die in his lap, and so he died, conscious to the last
moment, in the lap of a father whose love was rare. (I had almost said,
supernatural.) Mr. Dawad Mahomed became Hoosen’s exclusive
nurse. For five long months and more, this loving father never left the
side of Hoosen’s bed. It was a privilege to me to make a pilgrimage to
Mr. Dawad’s house to see the young patient whenever I was in
Durban and it was a treat to see how Mr. Dawad nursed the son and
how the latter relied entirely upon his nursing and no other. Dr.
MacKenzie, assisted by Dr. Adams, treated him. But Hoosen never left
the bed that he occupied on his return from Turkey.
The funeral procession was enormous. Thousands followed the
hearse. Hindus from all provinces of India vied with the Mahomedans
in paying their respects to the memory of this good youth.
Colonial-born Indians mustered in strong force to pay their respects
to the memory of one who, like themselves, was born in South Africa.
Special trams emptied themselves at Congella, during practically the
whole of the Tuesday on which the funeral took place. All Indian
shops in Durban were closed for two hours and so was the Indian
Market, by consent of the Corporation. No Indian has ever received
the spontaneous tribute to his memory that this young man of brilliant
promise received. His death made us all forget, for the moment, that
we were Hindus, Mahomedans, Parsees or Christians. He, even in his
death, makes us realize that we are sons of India after all—we are kith
and kin, owning the same mother. I have loved to linger on Mr.
Hoosen’s character. I knew him as few did. And it has not been my
good fortune to meet many young men—aye, even old men—with a
spotless character that Hoosen possessed. To me Hoosen is not dead.
He lives in his character. May this humble tribute be accepted by
Indian youths throughout South Africa in the spirit in which it has
been offered, and may we all copy the example set to us by Mr. Hajee
Hoosen Dawad Mahomed.
Indian Opinion, 1-10-1913

344

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

220. THE MARRIAGE QUESTION
The struggle, this time, involves so many matters of highest
importance that it is well to devote particular attention to each. We
dwelt, last week, on the £3 tax question. This week we propose to
examine the marriage question which, in so far as it has drawn our
women into the struggle, is of even greater importance than that of the
annual exaction from ex-indentured men, women and children.
The marriage difficulty dates from the Searle judgment. It is,
therefore, necessary to understand the position that existed before that
now historic judgment. Little did Justice Searle know what effect his
judgment was likely to produce among the Indians of this
sub-continent.
Before the judgment, Indian wives were recognized as lawful
married wives of their husbands. The masters of the Supreme Courts
of the different Provinces recognized the claims of such wives and
their issue in intestate estates. Never did an Indian have cause to
suspect that the legality of marriage might be questioned by the
Courts of South Africa on the ground of the want of its Christian
character or the want of registration in South Africa. But the Union
Government, in pursuance of their policy of greater repression of the
Asiatic than before and not being satisfied with their attack on the
male members of the community, wanted to extend their hostile
operations to our womenfolk. Some zealous law officer discovered
that it was possible to prevent the entry of wives of domiciled Indians
by declaring their marriage to be illegal in terms of the South African
law. They, therefore, challenged the entry of such a woman at the
Cape, and Justice Searle was called upon to decide the issue now raised
for the first time by the Government. The learned Judge pronounced
marriages performed according to the rites of a religion that allows
polygamy to be illegal, and, as the person, claiming before him to be
the wife of a domiciled Indian, was a Mahomedan, her marriage could
not be recognized by the Courts of the Union. This ruling was
followed by the Master of the Natal Provincial Division of the
Supreme Court. The Master rejected the claim of the only wife of a
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

345

deceased Indian for exemption from succession duty by reason of her
marriage not being in accordance with the laws of the Union. The
doctrine was carried to its furthest limit by Justice Gardiner when he
declined to recognize the marriage of an Indian wife when she
claimed exemption from liability to give evidence against her husband
in a trial against him upon a charge of murder. Thus, suddenly,
non-Christian Indians found that, in South Africa, their wives
occupied merely the position of concubines and their children were
considered illegitimate. The reader must remember that, not only does
this discovery of their awful position hurt the susceptibilities of a
proud race, but it also effectually prevents the entry of almost every
Indian wife and every Indian child. If the Government had dared to
follow out the consequences of the Searle judgment which they
deliberately invited, not an Indian wife or her children could have
entered the country. That would have been an injustice which even the
humanity of the Europeans of South Africa would not have tolerated.
Therefore, after having us at their mercy, the Government were
graciously pleased to declare that the judgment would not interfere
with the practice of the administration to admit the wife of a domiciled
Asiatic so long she was the only wife of his in South Africa. This
so-called forbearance, it must be remembered, would not have saved
the wives and children thus admitted on sufference from the other
consequences already adverted to of the Searle judgment. Indians
were not to be satisfied with exchanging the legal status of their wives
for a position of total uncertainty in law, notwithstanding their
admission. They were not prepared to put up with the implied slur on
their womenfolk. The Government, therefore, reluctantly, in a most
niggardly spirit, and in instalments, accepted, first Mr. Alexander’s
and then Senator Schreiner’s amendments to the Immigration Bill that
was under consideration by the Union Parliament. But the amendments, being hastily drawn, gave (if they did at all) partial relief only.
For they legalized Indian monogamous marriages celebrated outside
South Africa, no matter under what religious rites they were
solemnized. These amendments, therefore, left undefined the status of
women married or to be married in South Africa. Indians now contend that Indian marriages celebrated in South Africa should be
placed upon the same footing as those celebrated in India. And this, as
346

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

has been 1 pointed out to the Government, can be done with but a
slight alteration in the Immigration Act or by an amendment of the
marriage laws of the Union.
We have used the expression “if they did at all” with reference
to the relief granted by the amendments. This qualification has
become necessary owing to the attitude of the Government in the case
of Kulsumbibi now pending before the Supreme Court. The
Immigration Officer at Durban, no doubt upon instructions from the
Government, has raised the question whether a marriage celebrated
under the rites of a religion which permits polygamy can be called
monogamous, although the woman so married may be the only wife
of her husband. This issue the Government need not have raised. But
they evidently intend to show that the amendments made were not
made in good faith. They were made ostensibly to meet the Indian
demand for legalization2 of Indian marriages. Mr. Alexander’s amendments fell short of that. Mr. Schreiner’s was, therefore, accepted. The
Government knew that the most popular religions of India, viz.,
Hinduism and Islam, did not prohibit polygamy. If, therefore, they
accepted the amendment with the mental reservation that the adjective
“monogamous” would by law still exclude the women married
according to the rites of these two great religions, they certainly
misled Parliament and the Indian community. We think that the
Supreme Court will reject the Government interpretation, but, should
its decision be otherwise, it certainly will be necessary to alter the
Immigration Act in order to clothe all Indian marriages with legality.
Even at this eleventh hour, the Government could withdraw the case
and not challenge a decision.
Then, there remained the question of the admission of plural
wives as distinguished from their legal status after admission. The
practice has been always to admit such wives of domiciled Indians. In
the Transvaal such unions are even noted on the registration
certificates. The first shock of disturbance in this practice was felt in
1911 by a decision of Justice Wessels,3 which, too, was invited by the
1
2
3

The original has “even”.
The original has “legislation”.
Vide “Indian Wives”, 8-7-1911 & “Johannesburg”, 8-7-1911.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

347

Government. As a result of the decision, the British Indian Association
carried on correspondence with the Government and an assurance was
given by them that all cases of hardship would be considered by them.
This correspondence seemed to settle the question, for the Indian
demand as to plural wives is not for legal recognition but for
admission into the Union of the existing plural wives of domiciled
Indians. But the disposition of the Government seems to be now to
recede from the assurance contained in their communication. We shall
reproduce this correspondence in our next issue so that the reader
may judge for himself whether the correspondence can bear any other
interpretation than that put upon it by the community.
To sum up, then, the demands of the community are simple and
three-fold:
(1) Legalization of monogamous marriages already celebrated
and to be celebrated in South Africa; (2) The term “monogamous”
to include marriages celebrated according to the rites of religions that
may not prohibit polygamy, so long as the woman whose union is to
be recognized is the only wife of her husband; (3) the admission of
existing plural wives of domiciled Indians without granting such wives
a legal status apart from full residential rights.
Indian Opinion, 1-10-1913

348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

221. THE MARRIAGE QUESTION
Just as we considered last week the obnoxious £3 tax, we must
now consider the marriage question. Not one, but many important
issues, unrelated to one another, are involved in this struggle. The
community must have a clear understanding of all these issues. The
marriage question itself has three aspects.
First, that marriages celebrated according to Hindu, Muslim or
Parsi religious rites are not recognized as legally valid. Before the
Searle judgment, there simply was no problem about Indian
marriages. All marriages were recognized in courts. But the Searle
judgment changed all that. The Government acted deliberately in
seeking that verdict. After the formation of the Union, there came to
be greater strictness than before. The desire entered the Government’s
mind to root out Indians from South Africa, be the means what they
might. Till now the Government did not lay hands on women. But
now it has cast its evil eyes on them. The Government seems to have
had the wicked idea that, by preventing the entry of women, their
children can also be stopped. Its officers, accordingly, looked up the
various laws and found that it might be possible to hold that Indian
marriages were not valid according to the laws of this country and
that, if this was proved right, the Government’s object would more or
less be fulfilled. And so the Government challenged the right of one
woman, and the case went up to Mr. Justice Searle. He held that a
marriage solemnized under a religion which permitted polygamy,
even if it was in fact monogamous, could not be recognized in South
African law. Following upon this judgment, the Master of a Natal
Court decided that a widow and her children could not be exempted
from payment of succession duty after the decease of her husband if
her marriage with the deceased husband had been celebrated
otherwise than under Christian rites.1 In Ladysmith, again, Mr. Justice
Gardiner ruled that a woman so married could not claim the privilege
of exemption from giving evidence against her husband.2 The result
1
2

Vide also “Janubie Case”, 12-4-1913.
Kulsumbibi’s case

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

349

of these three decisions is that Indian women and their children
cannot come to this country. The women who are already here
become mere concubines and their children will not be accepted as
the legal heirs of their parents. Having established this as the legal
position, the Government declared, in its graciousness, that despite the
new law it will permit one wife to come in with every individual. This
only means that the women will be granted right of domicile but that
they will be looked upon as concubines. Consequently, neither they
nor their heirs will have any rights in a court. Indians cannot accept
such a position. Strong letters [of protest] were addressed to the
Government. It introduced in the new Bill amendments suggested by
Mr. Alexander, and later by Mr. Schreiner. But it did so rather
unwillingly, without applying its mind to them, and only because it
was left with no choice in the matter; the amendments, therefore,
remained defective, and the result was that the validity of marriages
celebrated in India was recognized, but not that of marriages which
have been or which may be celebrated in this country under our
religions. Hence, we have asked the Government to treat marriages
celebrated in South Africa, or those that may be celebrated in future,
on the same footing as marriages celebrated in India. We have also
pointed out how this may be effected.
The second point is that the amendment made in the Bill has the
effect of recognizing the validity of monogamous marriages. In
Kulsumbibi’s case, the Government purposely raised the objection
that the new law does not recognize a marriage solemnized under a
religion which permits polygamy. If this interpretation is correct, the
difficulty created by the Searle judgment has not been removed and
the Government can be accused of a bit of sharp practice. It knew well
enough that our demand related to marriages solemnized under the
Hindu and Muslim faiths. If it was the Government’s intention not to
recognize such marriages, it has deceived us, and also deceived the
Parliament, the Imperial Government and the Indian Government.
Kulsumbibi’s case was not brought up by us. It was the Government
that did so. The decision is not likely to be what the Government
wants it to be. But in case it is, the Government will have to hide its
face in shame and amend the law again so as to include within its
scope marriages celebrated under our faiths.
350

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The third point refers to cases of polygamy. The issue was
raised in 1911. If an Indian had more than one wife, all the wives were
[previously] allowed to come in. But the Government brought up the
issue and Mr. Justice Wessels ruled that under the law here only one
wife could come in. Mr. Cachalia thereupon addressed a letter to
the Government and the latter replied that it would consider such
cases. We acquiesced in the position. We did not ask for recognition
of polygamous marriages but for permission for all one’s wives to
enter this country. The Government now says that its letter of 1911 is
not to be interpreted as we have done. We are, however, convinced that
it can bear no other interpretation.
We have thus made three demands of the Government. One, that
marriages celebrated in this country, and those to be celebrated in
future, according to our religious rites should be recognized as valid.
Two, that the term “monogamous” marriage should include a marriage celebrated according to our religions. Three, that in case an
Indian is already married to more than one woman, all his wives
should be permitted to come in.
We will not sit down for a moment’s rest till the Government
concedes these demands. Since women have been attacked, they too
have had to join the struggle. In so far as this marriage question
involves an insult to our religions and an attack upon our national
honour, it is far more serious than that of the obnoxious tax. A nation
that cannot protect its women’s honour and the interests of its
children does not deserve to be called by that name. Such people are
not a nation but mere brutes. Even animals use their horns to defend
their young ones. Will men, then, if they are men, hang back, clinging
to their wretched finery and their pleasures?
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 1-10-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

351

222. CRIPPLED WITHOUT WEAPONS
Much has been written by correspondents in the columns of this
paper about the Indians not getting licences for weapons. We
sympathize with them. Our view, of course, is that a man does not
need any weapons. But this rule can apply only to those who have no
interest in wealth. Those who carry on business and wish to
protect themselves from attack need weapons, no doubt. But it is
also certain that writing letters to newspapers will bring no redress.
Something may be done if leaders exert themselves hard
enough. Meanwhile, we suggest to our correspondents that they
should send us all the letters that were exchanged between them
and the Government. Names of places where robberies have occurred
with positive evidence, the strength of population in the neighbourhood, —if all this information is supplied to us in clear handwriting,
we are ready to take suitable steps. The time, we feel, is also very
opportune. In the present satyagraha campaign, we can take up many
new issues whenever we think it right. If prompt steps are taken, there
will be no difficulty in securing arms.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 1-10-1913

352

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

223. HAJI HUSSAIN DAWAD MAHOMED
It is with full deliberation that I say that the untimely death of
Bhai Hussain has widowed the Indian community here. People may
wonder whether it is not something of an exaggeration to say that a
young man of 22, of whom most Indians had not even heard, whom
not many had seen, who never made any big speeches and never
sought to teach wisdom to people, has widowed the people by his
death, but my answer will still be the same. The character which Bhai
Hussain possessed I have seen in few youths or grown-up men. In
South Africa, I can think of no grown-up man who can equal him,
and I doubt if there is any among the many youths whom I know. If
there is anyone who can surpass him, such a one is not known to me.
Bhai Hussain had based his way of life on truth. He lived for truth.
Bhai Hussain detested lying, deceit, cunning and hypocrisy. He felt
extremely uncomfortable in the presence of deceit. Whenever he saw
people lying, his head would ache and he felt like flying away from
there, if only he had wings. The lies that go on in ordinary
company were so disgusting to this youth that, many a time, he felt
disinclined to stay on in Durban. Whenever he heard and believed that
a man was good, he was all admiration for him. So guileless was he.
His heart was meek like a cow’s. I never observed the slightest taint of
sin in him. His innocence and his frankness were all his own. A
budding rose has withered. But its fragrance remains. We can still
enjoy deep draughts of it. He has left that fragrance with everyone
who came in contact with him. Evil company had no effect on him.
Once Mr. Dawad Mahomed wrote to Hussain, “My son, guard
yourself against the temptations of life in England. Beware of evil
company.” I remember what Mr. Hussain wrote back in reply:
“Father, you do not know your son. Evil company cannot taint
Hussain. Your son is not likely to succumb to the temptations in
England.” That was the gist of his reply. It takes a Hussain to write
with such assurance. He was a parasmani1 . Base metal—like iron—
1

A precious jewel, famed to have the virtue of transmuting base metals into

gold.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

353

would turn into gold in contact with it. I request the readers not to
think that I have exaggerated anything in what I have said. Along with
these other virtues, the fire of patriotism always kept burning in his
heart. Having never seen India, he had drawn a picture of her in his
dreams. This youth was prepared to die for India and Indians. How
Indians may prosper, how the sons of India may shine out was his
constant concern. I believe he was a zealous Muslim, but he had not
the slightest hatred of other religions. To him all Indians, Hindus,
Muslims, Christians and Parsees, were the same. That they should be
good was all that he wanted. Indians, for the simple reason that they
were Indians, were like brothers to him. Who can think it an
exaggeration to say that we have been widowed by the passing away
of one so richly endowed?
Though Bhai Hussain was born in the house of a merchant
prince like Mr. Dawad Mahomed, he had a distaste for business right
from his childhood. A desire for education came upon him. His father
put him under my charge in Phoenix. Forthwith, all the inmates of
Phoenix fell in love with him. With his guileless nature, he soon spread
the aroma of his presence all around. He became entirely one with my
family, and I felt I had gained a fifth son. After he had stayed for a
few months, he wrote to me: “I like Phoenix. I wish to spend my life
here. But just now I wish to go to England. I have satisfied you that I
am not likely to get corrupted there. It is my desire not to. Kindly
give me your permission and secure my father’s permission.” He was
not content with Phoenix. He desired to acquire a good education in
letters. He wanted to utilize his gift for poetry. He copied the poem
“A garden in spring, this world” and sent it to me. He had taught it to
everyone in Phoenix. In copying the last verse, he changed, “Let
Nazir 1 remember this” to “Let Hussain remember this”. I asked him
why. He told me that though the poem was not his, the
thoughts it expressed were his too. His desire was to be a Nazir. The
boy then went to England. He wanted to be a barrister. I did not
fancy the idea. I reasoned with him. He told me, “That may be so
for you, but not for me. For myself, let me be a barrister.”
1

Nazir Akbarabadi (1735-1830); Urdu poet and saint who showed catholicity
and breadth of mind in his choice and handling of religious themes.

354

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

“What will you do after that, my friend?” “You will see.” “Do you
want to practise and earn money?” His vehement answer “Certainly
not, Sir”, still rings in my ears. “My only desire is to serve my
country. Having made myself a lawyer and a well-informed man, I
will stay in Phoenix and share the sufferings of my
fellow-countrymen.” Dawad Sheth sent Bhai Hussain to England. The
moment he reached there, he started work on his studies. He worked
on and on. There’s a beautiful ground near London, where he would
go and sit all alone and fall into a reverie. This is a state similar to
samadhi1 . He would be engrossed in his favourite poems. He often
showed me the poems he wrote sitting there. One or two of these I
showed to persons2 who were good judges of English poetry, and they
told me that Hussain, indeed, showed promise of developing a gift for
poetry. In a place like England, he preferred solitude. I do not
remember that he ever fell a prey to a single one of the innumerable
temptations in England.
But fell Time was stalking Bhai Hussain. Just when I was in
England, he manifested symptoms of tuberculosis. I was alarmed. He
was sent for a change of air. The best doctors there and a doctor in
Paris too were consulted. But the disease had gone deep. Periods of
progress were followed by relapses. Hussain’s lustre began to fade.
His spirit was gone. He felt miserable. The hope for life was strong in
him. Not, however, for the sake of pleasures. He wanted to live on
only because he wanted to serve the country. He returned to South
Africa. There were again signs of improvement. He toured in India, as
on a pilgrimage. Writing from there, he said, “I have not come to see
the places in India. I am looking into India’s heart, which I came to
see.” Then he went on to holy Mecca. There he poured out his pure
heart to God. The pilgrimage had a deep effect on his mind. In a
letter that he wrote from there, he said, ‘How great must be the power
of the Prophet for whose sake millions of people every year gather in
this holy place? Who can doubt his being a Prophet? I feel extremely
happy at heart that I came here.” There, the Bulgarian war was on.
Bhai Hussain soon became the adviser, guide and friend of his father
1

Yogic trance
This was some time in July-November 1909, when Gandhiji was in England
on a deputation,
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

355

and other companions. He won the hearts of the big officers there and
created a fine impression about India and Indian Muslims.
What must have made the people adore this child? I will say that
it was the light of his truthfulness. The father and son then separated.
Dawad Sheth returned to Durban. Bhai Hussain, however, wanted to
complete his education in England. But God had willed otherwise.
Suddenly Bhai Hussain started spitting blood. His health went down
badly. Dawad Sheth received a cable. He resigned himself to his fate.
He knew that Hussain would not come back unless he was seriously ill.
That relapse proved to be the last. In Durban he was put to bed, where
he remained, never to leave it. He was treated by the best of doctors.
The father turned into a nurse. I have seen very few fathers attending
on their sons as this one did. Hussain was to Dawad Sheth as the very
pupil of his eye. He watched him day and night. Never did he leave
his side even for an hour. But human effort is unavailing before fate.
Fate always walks two paces ahead, 1 and strides on so fast, that one can
never overtake it.
Whenever I went to Durban, Congella became a place of
pilgrimage to me. Once I saw tears in Hussain’s eyes. I asked: “Is
death so difficult to face, brother?” With a smile, Hussain replied, “I
am not afraid of death.” Then, crying, “But I have as yet done
nothing whatever, I want ever so much to serve the country.” I tried to
console him, saying, “Bhai, you have done much indeed for the
country. If India was to produce young men like you, her condition
would change for the better this very day. Even if you die, to me you
will always be alive. The body will perish, it has ceased to be of
service. But the soul is immortal. Personally, I believe that you will
come to possess a more splendid body and will be able to render
better service to India.” But this was no consolation to him. He could
be sure, so to speak, of that alone which was already in his hand. He
wanted to achieve more in this very life. Had he yet done anything to
show the miraculous power of truth in him? How much could he do
now? Hussain’s funeral was attended as no other funeral in South
Africa has ever been. In an instant, there were thousands of Indians on
the spot. Muslims, Hindus, Christians, all attended in large numbers.
1

356

A Gujarati saying for: “Who can control his fate?”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

No one had gone to persuade them. They went of their own accord on
hearing of the death. Hussain proved in the hour of his death that the
children of India, Hindus, Muslims and Christians, are all one people.
On Tuesday, there were no distinctions. People big and small,
Madrasis, Bombayites, Colonial-born Indians, all turned up to pay
homage to the memory of a jewel of an Indian. Special trams emptied
themselves in front of Mr. Dawad’s bungalow. Indian shops remained
closed for two hours, and the Indian Market, too, with the permission
of the Corporation.
Thus, Bhai Hussain, following truth, showed the invincible power
of truth in this cruel Iron Age. Hussain Mian is not dead; he will live
in the fragrance of his character. My pen will never tire of writing
praises of Hussain’s virtues. Numerous examples of his purity keep
haunting my mind. I hope the readers will understand my purpose in
this article. Let everyone be an Indian of the same stamp as Hussain.
Let us all, young and old, emulate Bhai Hussain’s conduct, no matter
whether we are Hindus or Muslims. If we cherish his memory and
follow in his footsteps, we shall cease to make distinctions among us.
Let us hold on to truth and dedicate our all to the country’s cause.
Though Bhai Hussain was on his death-bed, when Rustomjee Sheth
went to visit him before starting again on the 16th on a pilgrimage to
gaol, he said, “Yes, uncle, you are going. If I could leave this bed, I
too would go to gaol with you. How happy I would be to die in gaol
for the sake of the country!” May India beget thousands of Hussains!
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 1-10-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

357

224. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Thursday night [October 2, 1913] 1
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I certainly did not like to part with you. But the parting was
inevitable. Remember the resolutions of the Yom Kippur day 2 . You
must constantly check yourself.
Did you feel any the worse for the turning of the wheel?
You will see to Chaplin, Hosken, the London Times letter. You
should keep in touch with the reporters. Ask Cachalia to see you daily
and inquire when he is going to jail. P.K. Naidoo and others may
cross to the Cape border at Fourteen Streams. Will you open
correspondence with Merriman, Schreiner and others? I should even
send them a copy of the London Times letter and ask for their
authority to sign. But of course I am just now suggesting your writing
about the Committee. Please tell Manilal if he is free that I did not
write as I expected him to be in gaol regarding the Asiatic Act charge.
My interview with Dada Osman was a study. But otherwise it was
not of any use.
Hope you had a fairly comfortable journey.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1
From the reference to the addressee’s departure; vide “Letter to Maganlal
Gandhi”, 2-10-1913.
2
Day of Atonement among Jews

358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

225. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
THE TENTS,
“MOUNTAIN VIEW ”,
P. O. BOX 2493,
JOHANNESBURG ,

Aso Sud 3 [October 2, 1913]
CHI. MAGANLAL,

If you receive any report or news about the Johannesburg
school, do not print it. Habib Motan must be kept out. When the
English matter is in excess, the advertisements, etc., on the last page
should be omitted and the number of pages for English should be
increased to seven.
It appears from the telegram in yesterday’s Star that the women
too had gone on fast. [They] are having a good taste of suffering.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
Thursday Morning
I have your letter. Twelve women have left today 1 for Maritzburg to court arrest. They are accompanied by Mr. Kallenbach. Two
others2 have been arrested today for hawking. The letter from Jamnadas is full of despair. Orders have been issued for the restoration of
the sacred thread and shirt3 and the suspension of vaccination.
I propose to wire Jamnadas asking him to come alone. I shall
send the telegram 4 today or tomorrow. I have sent some material.
Some of it is of a kind that may be used whenever needed.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5901
1

October 2
Rajoo and Willie Murgan
3
Parsee Rustomjee was deprived of his Zoroastrian sacred shirt and thread in
Maritzburg Gaol. Vide also “Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”, 5-10-1913.
4
This is not available.
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1919 - 25 DECEMBER, 1920

359

226. LETTER TO OLIVE DOKE
JOHANNESBURG ,

October 3, 1913
MY DEAR OLIVE1 ,

Miss Schlesin was the first to remind me yesterday that it was the
day on which one year more was written off against me. Yours is the
second reminder. Many thanks for the trouble you take to think of
my birthday.
Please remember me to mother and tell her that the fact that I
have not come to see her does not mean that the family is absent from
my thoughts. Indeed just now there are special reasons for recalling
father’s memory and with that for thinking of you all. But mother
knows that I am not formal. Whenever I am wanted there or I can do
anything, you can all command me.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5698 Courtesy: C.
M. Doke

1

360

Daughter of Rev. J. J. Doke
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

227. RESOLUTION AT PATIDAR ASSOCIATION MEETING1
JOHANNESBURG ,

October 5, 1913
This meeting of the Patidar Association resolves that, in its
opinion, The Transvaal Leader report, to the effect that the mercantile
section of the Indian community is against passive resistance and that
only some of the poorest in the community are likely to take part in
the struggle is unjust and false; the meeting is heart and soul with the
movement, approves of Mr. Cachalia’s letter to the Government, and
will undertake to support the movement with men and money,
and requests the Government to end the sufferings of those already
incarcerated by conceding the just demands of the community.
Indian Opinion, 15-10-1913

1

The meeting was addressed by Gandhiji at some length and, thereafter, a
number of Indians announced their intention to go to gaol immediately. No report of
Gandhiji’s speech, however, is available. The resolution adopted at the meeting was
presumably drafted by Gandhiji.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

361

228. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

Sunday [October 5, 1913] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

This is rather excessive matter which I am sending today.
But all of it has got to be printed. Today’s meeting was excellent.
Acknowledge receipt of £22-7-6 only in the Satyagraha Fund. Say
“From Patidar Mandal (Johannesburg)”. 2 All the names must be
included in the report3 . I have promised that they will be. It seems now
that the Jaffar from whom we had a telegram is none else but Gajjar;
for the latter has again sent a tele-gram here. About your zeal, all I
can say is that you should be mindful of your health. I also feel that
the report about Rustomjee Sheth having been deprived of his sacred
thread, etc., must be taken from there.
Sodha’s batch will honour its pledge.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 4365

1

The meeting of the United Patidar Society, to which the letter refers, was
held on October 5; vide the preceding item.
2
This was acknowledged in Indian Opinion, 15-10-1913.
3
This was published in Indian Opinion, 8-10-1913.

362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

229. IMPORTANCE OF VOWS
If we resolve to do a thing, and are ready even to sacrifice our
lives in the process? we are said to have taken a vow. It is essential for
every person to train himself to keep such vows; one can strengthen
one’s power of will by doing so and fit oneself for greater tasks. One
may take easy and simple vows to start with and follow them with
more difficult ones. It seems the negroes of the Congo have taken
such a [simple] vow. For the past three years, the whites have been
trying hard to get the negroes over there to extract rubber, but they
answer that their forefathers had pledged themselves not to do so.
They are, therefore, unable to go against their plighted word. We shall
find several examples in history of men undergoing great suffering
for the sake of a pledge. To embrace satyagraha amounts to taking a
great vow. Having taken it, one must die rather than forsake it. Such is
the profound import of satyagraha, and it is for this reason that
satyagraha may be said to know no defeat.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 8-10-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

363

230. LETTER TO DIRECTOR OF PRISONS1
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

October 9, 1913
[SIR,]

Messrs Medh and other British Indian passive resisters, who last
week served a term of imprisonment at the Fort of Johannesburg,
complained that Dr. Visser was unnecessarily and wantonly rude and
insulting to them. 1 hey were asked to strip themselves entirely bare in
the presence of other prisoners, for medical examination. They
respectfully submitted to the doctor that it was contrary to their moral
scruples and to their notions of decency, and they added that they
were prepared to submit to the examination in a separate cell. Dr.
Visser grew angry over this request and used most insulting language.
The exact expression used by him was “the . . . coolies”. He also
charged them with disobedience, but my Committee is informed that
the charge was never pursued, and that, upon their complaining to the
Superintendent of the gaol, they were privately examined. My Committee hopes that an inquiry will be instituted into this complaint, and
necessary steps will be taken to prevent officers using language
alleged to have been used by Dr. Visser, even though it be towards
prisoners.
The discharged passive resisters also complained that there was
no ghee or any vegetable fat supplied with their meals, as used to be
the case before. Their meals, my Committee understands, consist of
rice, mealie meal, vegetables, and a little bread. My Committee
showed, it is submitted, during the last campaign of passive resistance,
that ghee or some vegetable fat was absolutely necessary for maintenance of the human frame in fair order. 2 My Committee understands
1

This was published along with a letter to the Press dated October 7,
signed by Surendra B. Medh, Pragji K. Desai and Manilal M. Gandhi, requesting the
Editor to write in protest against the brutal treatment to which they had been
subjected.
2
Vide “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 29-4-1911; “Petition to Secretary of State for
Colonies”, 1-5-1911 and “Memorial to Secretary of State for Colonies”, 15-5-1911.

364

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that animal fat for one of the meals still forms part of the diet given to
the Native prisoners. It is therefore respectfully requested that
instructions will be issued to supply one ounce of ghee per day, as was
the case formerly with British Indian prisoners, who are precluded
from taking meat or animal fat.
Yours, etc.,

Indian Opinion, 22-10-1913

231. AN OFFICIAL STATEMENT
The situation today in regard to the Indian passive resistance
movement is explained in the following statement which has been
officially communicated to Reuter’s Agency, and the Press. The
demands of the Indian community are:
(1) The removal of the annual tax of £3, which ex-indentured
Indians—men, women, and children—are liable to pay as the price of
their remaining free from re-indenture in Natal. (2) (a) An
amendment of the marriage law of the Union, so as to recognize the
legality of monogamous Indian marriages celebrated, whether in India
or South Africa, according to the rites prescribed by the Hindu and
Mahomedan religions. Although both of these religions countenance
polygamy, statistics show that only 1 per cent of Indian marriages are
polygamous.
(b) Administrative admission of existing plural wives (not more
than 100 in all) and their children, of Indians already domiciled. This
was the position at the time of the inauguration of Union. Legal
recognition of polygamy is not asked for.
(3) Restoration of the right of South Africa-born Indians to
enter the Cape Province, a right that they possessed at the time of the
introduction of the Immigration Bill, and its retention may in practice
mean the admission of hardly more than a dozen Indians annually to
the Cape from Natal and the Transvaal.
(4) The Government say that there is no racial bar in the
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

365

Immigration Act. Therefore, an admission from them is necessary that
no declaration will in law be required from an Indian at the Free State
border that will not be equally necessary from a European. In
practice, this does not mean that any Indian will necessarily enter the
Free State, but, if he does, he will still remain liable to the prohibition
to own land, to farm and to trade.
(5) A declaration that existing laws, such as the Transvaal Gold
Law and Townships Act, the Licensing Laws of the Cape and Natal,
and the Immigration Act, shall be administered in a liberal spirit, and
with due regard to vested rights. The policy of the Government is, for
example, to prevent Indians with bona-fide proof of previous
residence from re-entering their respective Provinces, if they have
been absent for a long period. This situation is intolerable.
The first point was the subject of a definite promise to the Hon.
Mr. Gokhale. The others arise out of the provisional settlement of
1911.
WHAT INDIANS DO NOT WANT

Indians do not fight for equal political rights. They recognize
that, in view of the existing prejudice, fresh immigration from India
should be strictly limited, provision being made for the entrance of a
sufficient number annually for reasonable wear and tear.
P ASSIVE R ESISTANCE

As no relief could be obtained by prayers, petitions, or negotiations, Indians started passive resistance on September 15 by12 men
and four women setting out from Natal to court imprisonment at
Volksrust.
The movement is spreading. There are already in gaol 35
passive resisters—a larger number than when the two previous
campaigns started or when the provisional settlement of 1911 resulted
in a suspension of passive resistance. Numbers of men and women are
coming forward daily to seek arrest. Several of the women have taken
their babies with them, as they have not yet been weaned or are
incapable of being looked after otherwise. Arrest is courted by
crossing the border or by hawking without licences or by refusing to
366

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

show licences or permits, or by breaking other civil laws which do not
involve a breach of the moral law. The Free State border is left
untouched, as there is no desire to inflame public opinion so far as it
can be avoided, and there is every desire to show that Indians wish to
respect the Free State prejudice. The movement will also consist in
advising indentured Indians to suspend work until the £3 tax is
removed. The indentured Indians will not be invited to join the
general struggle. On the strength of the promise made to Mr.
Gokhale, and which promise was brought to the notice of the House
of Lords by Lord Ampthill, these men were assured by Indian leaders,
at meetings of thousands, that the tax would be repealed during the
last session of Parliament. Meetings in support of the claims of the
passive resisters have been held at Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, East
London, Woodstock, Durban, Maritzburg, Tongaat, Verulam, and
Johannesburg (representing all the principal towns in the Transvaal),
and similar meetings are being held at other centres.
THE WAY TO GRANT R ELIEF

If the Government wish to grant relief, fresh legislation will be
necessary only on the marriage and the £3 tax questions. All other
points are capable of easy adjustment without legislation. The
marriage difficulty can be solved by a brief amendment of the
Immigration Act without in any way interfering with the general
marriage law of the Union.
Indian Opinion, 15-10-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

367

232. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[DURBAN,]

Aso Vad 2 [October 17, 1913] 1
CHI. HARILAL,

It hurts me to have no letters from you. Your lethargy in this
matter makes you doubly guilty. The first guilt is that you neglect the
duty which you owe to your father, and the second that you break
your promise to me that you would write regularly. There have been
three mails [from India] and no letter from you. Mr. Sorabji 2 and
Ratanshi 3 left after you did, but I have had more letters from them
than from you. Chanchi writes more often than you do. Ba, too, is
unhappy because there are no letters from you.
Both of you may come over here and get arrested. Chanchi may
come while the fight is on only if she has the courage to go to gaol. I
have already written to you to say that you should not wait for the
examination. If you yourself wish otherwise, I do not want to come in
your way. Ask for money from Doctor Saheb4 . It is likely that I shall
be in gaol when you arrive. I think I shall succeed in getting myself
arrested somehow or other.5 I have been making efforts to this end. If,
before this letter reaches you, you hear that there has been a
settlement, there will be no need for you to come over.
I want you to be fit and at peace with yourself.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 9537

1

From the reference to gaol-going in the letter, it appears to have been
written in 1913.
2
Sorabji Shapurji Adajania.
3
Sodha.
4
Dr. Pranjivan Mehta
5
Gandhiji was arrested on November 7.

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

233. INTERVIEW TO “EVENING CHRONICLE”
[JOHANNESBURG ,

After October 17, 1913]
Interviewed by the Evening Chronicle (Johannesburg) on Mr. Fischer’s recent
statement, 1 Mr. Gandhi said that during the last session of Parliament, all the time the
Hon. A. Fischer said he would grant nothing, so long as there was talk of passive
resistance, he continued to grant. He even withdrew his own threat of removing the
slight amendment in the marriage clause, if Indians did not withdraw their demand for
a better amendment. In spite of that threat in the Senate, Mr. Fischer accepted the
very amendment that was suggested by the Indians, so that he could not help saying
that Mr. Fischer was not to be taken seriously.

Indian Opinion, 29-10-1913

1

In an interview to Reuter’s Agency in London on October 17, Fischer
had said: “My own department deals with the Indians, and it is impossible to alter the
law on any material point. Indeed the spirit in South Africa is to make the
law more strict. The Government will be content to let the law stand. To meet the
views of the Indians we will make administrative arrangements where we can, but the
popular sentiment and needs of South Africa must be considered. Therefore the
Indians in their own interest must be cautious and moderate. If the Indians abandon
theoretical questions and adopt a practical standpoint, then a modus vivendi is
possible”
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

369

234. KULSUMBIBI’S CASE
A move is afoot in Durban to take this case to the Appeal Court.
A bioscope show was also arranged to collect money for the purpose.
There is no harm in taking the case to a higher court, but the
community need not imagine that this is bound to bring some gain.
The case might just as well go against us as in our favour. Even if the
result should be so happy, it should be remembered that, where a
marriage is solemnized in South Africa, the wife will continue to be
treated as a concubine. Hence those who know what the struggle
means must not become lukewarm. The fight must be carried on in
right earnest. We see on all sides that everyone concedes our demands
to be reasonable, the latest instance being that of Mr. Orr, a member
of Parliament, who said in a speech in Maritzburg that the £3 tax must
be repealed and that we must get full justice on the marriage question.
Whatever the interpretation of the court, [he said] it was clearly
understood by Parliament that a man with only one wife would have
no difficulty in bringing her in.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 22-10-1913

370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

235. CABLE TO G. K. GOKHALE
JOHANNESBURG ,

October 22, 19131
GOKHALE
P OONA
NEARLY

HUNDRED

[IN]

LABOURERS

FAMILIES

COLLIERIES

ON

WHEN

STRIKE.

GOVERNMENT

TAX.

THEY

NEARLY
THEIR

NOT

USED

ASSAULT.

EUROPEAN

PARTY
[IN]

DESPITE

SPREAD

INCREASINGLY
PASS

SPREADING.

DURBAN

POLAK

STRUGGLE.
WOMEN

DUE

LARGELY

BEEN

ARRESTED

AMONG
NO

LABOURERS
FORCE

OFTEN
OTHER

FAVOURS
OFFICIAL

POUND

BRAVEST

PROVOCATION

LIKELY

LIKELY

MOVEMENT

WILL BE

MOVING

WORK

THREE

STRIKE

POSITION.

NATAL

RESUME

HAVING

BEEN

THOUSAND
IN

GENERAL

SOME

NOT

THEM

STRIKE

OPINION

UNIONIST
EFFECT

HAVE

WILL

JOIN

ARREST.

THEY

TWO
FREE

REPEAL

INVITED

INFORMING

RETALIATION
ING

STRIKERS

COURTING

BORDER

QUIETLY

AND

INCLUDING

INFLUENCE.

CROSSING

NEARLY

PROMISES

HUNDRED

DESPERATELY

HE

GAOL.

INDENTURED

OR

AMOUNTCOLLIERIES.

REPEAL

TAX.

RESOLUTION

THAT

[IN]

NEWCASTLE.

THURSDAY.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the original as delivered: C. W. 4845

1

It appears this cable was drafted on October 21, but actually sent the next
day; vide the following item.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

371

236. CABLE TO G. K. GOKHALE
JOHANNESBURG ,

October 22, 1913
GOKHALE
P OONA
ELEVEN

WOMEN 1
CABLE2

DAY’S

VAGRANTS

WITH

SIX

SENTENCED

WHILST

BABIES
THREE

SPEAKING

REFERRED
MONTHS

STRIKERS

TO
HARD

[IN]

YESTER-

LABOUR

AS

NEWCASTLE.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the original as delivered: C. W. 4846

237. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Wednesday night [October 22, 1913] 3
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I am sorry that I was impatient with you regarding Baker and
the walk to Chaplin’s. Baker’s business simply shakes me. I feel it
deeply that one whom [I] so love has such a base commercial side to
his character. And how could I put on speed when I hardly walk? It
was torture to be told to walk fast in my present physical state.
I am surrounded by men. I have recess as Mr. Lazarus is talking
in Tamil to some men. Went to Dannhauser today. It was a grand
meeting4 . The strike5 is a real thing. It is now making itself felt. Had
1

These were: Mrs. Bhavani Dayal, Mrs. Thambi Naidoo, Mrs. N. Pillay, Mrs.
K. M. Pillay, Mrs. A. P. Naidoo, Mrs. P. K. Naidoo, Mrs. K. C. Pillay, Mrs. N.
S.Pillay, Mrs. Ramalingam, Miss M. Pillay and Miss M. B. Pillay.
2
Vide the preceding item.
3
From the reference to Manilal’s arrest which took place on October 23,
1913, and also from the reference to Gandhiji’s presence at Dannhauser on this day.
4
At which over a thousand Indians decided to strike work
5
In Natal collieries, vide “Cable to G. K. Gokhale”, 22-10-1913 and
“Telegram to the Press”, 23-10-1913 .

372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

an interview (unofficial and private) with Deputy Protector. Nothing
in it. Had a long discussion with some other Europeans too. We are
not without sympathy. All the youngsters who went with me got
arrested but Manilal. He will go in tomorrow.
The Press is undoubtedly boycotting us. You should ask Pollock
why. You may see Micel-Dunn too. The reporters are powerless to
help. I think the Editors have received a hint from the Government. If
Cachalia came here it would be splendid. Try. You should try also to
collect rice or cash. We shall now want it quickly. It might be cheaper
for Johannesburg to give cash. But if they give rice, let them give rice
and you may sell it. You should get circulars sent everywhere.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

373

238. INTERVIEW TO “RAND DAILY MAIL”
[JOHANNESBURG ,

October 22, 1913]
In connection with the mass meeting of Indians held at Durban on Sunday 1 ,
Mr. M. K. Gandhi told a Mail representative yesterday that the report published in a
contemporary was only half the version and was incorrect. There certainly was a
disturbance at the meeting, said Mr. Gandhi, and one of the secretaries, at the time of
tendering his resignation, made a long statement consisting of an attack upon Mr.
Gandhi and upon his work during the past 20 years which he characterised as being
not only worthless but highly injurious to the Indian community. So much so that, in
his opinion, Mr. Gandhi was instrumental in having enticed the Indian community
into slavery.

[ GANDHIJI: ] Personally, I don’t think that any but very few
people at the meeting took him seriously, but I saw that there were
elements of discord and that passions were rising on either side, and I
felt that the best thing under the circumstances would be to have the
meeting closed. I, therefore, suggested to the chairman that he should
dissolve the meeting, which he promptly did. It was really an attempt
to bring about a schism in the Indian community and was not on the
question of passive resistance by any means, because I don’t think
there was any difference of opinion as to passive resistance. A great
many side issues were brought forward having no bearing on the
present trouble.
Upon the dissolution of this meeting, those who disapproved of
the action of the secretary immediately formed themselves into a
procession and a meeting was held at Mr. Rustomjee’s premises and a
new body was formed, with Mr. Dawad Mohamed as president and
Mr. Omar Haji Amod Jhaveri as secretary, two of the most respected
Mohammedans in the community. At this meeting a resolution was
passed in support of the movement, and a collection was taken for
defraying the expenses in connection with the fares, etc., of the passive
resisters who accompanied me to court imprisonment. The utmost
1

374

October 19
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

enthusiasm prevailed, and it was considered that the most reasonable
and peaceful Indians would join this body. Personally, I feel that if
this new Association is worked along strict passive resistance lines,
then those who may be considered hostile to this body and even to the
movement will ultimately throw in their lot with the body. That the
movement has a strong hold in Natal is demonstrated by the fact that
Natal has supplied the largest number of gaol-goers. There are at
present nearly 100 Indians in the gaols at Maritzburg and Newcastle,
and of these by far the largest number are from Natal and include all
sections of the Indian community.
A strike, too, which promises to become very formidable, is
going on in Natal. Up to now six collieries are affected and 2,000
Indians are on strike. I may say that, though I had hoped that the
strike would come about, I had never expected that the response
would be so spontaneous, sudden and large.
The ladies who tried to get arrested at Vereeniging, as the public
knows, failed, and they have further crossed over into Natal, where
they were left untouched. When they went into Natal, they were joined
by eight men, none of whom was arrested on the Natal border. It was
proposed that they should go to Newcastle and there place the
position before the men serving on the collieries and ask them to
strike work pending the promise of removal of the annual tax of £3
which ex-indentured Indians and their wives and children have to pay.
The presence of these brave women who had never suffered
hardship and had never spoken at public meetings acted like
electricity, and the men left their work.
The strike is being conducted on purely passive resistance lines,
and the men have instructions on no account to use physical force, to
retaliate or to defend themselves physically. I saw a man who was
severely assaulted at Dannhauser yesterday, and the assault was cruel.
He states that he had gone to fetch water and was assaulted by one of
the compound managers. The man himself is able-bodied and well
able to defend himself, but on account of the above order having been
issued, he did not defend himself, and suffered the severe injury
without a word. He is now being looked after in Newcastle, and he will
certainly make a deposition in this by no means isolated case.We are
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

375

at present putting up with physical injury, insults and everything. The
reason why we ask the men to strike is that by means of such
demonstration we may bring about the repeal of the £3 tax. It was
stated during the last session of Parliament that the majority of
employers of labour in Natal were adverse to the removal of the tax. I
feel that the only way in which such employers can be brought to see
the humanity of removing it is for the men to strike work. The strikers
will immediately resume work as soon as the Government see their
way to make a promise that the tax will be repealed during the coming
session of Parliament. If they make that promise, they will simply be
fulfilling their obligation to Mr. Gokhale which, Lord Ampthill says,
they incurred during the interview that took place between Mr.
Gokhale and the ministers.
I may also add that the Government were not without notice that
the strike was also on our programme. I addressed a letter1 on the 28th
September to that effect to the Government.2
Rand Daily Mail, 23-10-1913

1

Vide “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 28-9-1913. The official assessment of
the strike situation was summed up in a confidential despatch from the GovernorGeneral to the Colonial Office, dated October 23, 1913; vide Appendix “Extract from
Governor-General’s Despatch to Colonial Office”, 23-10-1913.
2
The report concluded with the observation by Rand Daily Mail: “ . . .
the women mentioned above have been arrested at Newcastle and the strike
is assuming larger proportions. It is no longer confined to the coal fields,
but is extending to the sugar and tea plantations and to the railways in Natal,”

376

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

239. TELEGRAM TO GENERAL BOTHA
[NEWCASTLE ,

Before October 23, 1913]
WE

HEAR

THAT

THE

YOU

GENERAL

STRUGGLE,

DECEIVED

FOR

WAS,

AND

HAS

BEEN

AND
TO
TO

THE

NOT

I

PURELY

HON.

MR.
A

MADE

STATE

OF

BY

STRIKE
£3

TAX

NECESSARY
THE

THAT

THE

OWING

PROMISE
IT

DEMONSTRATION

SESSION THAT THE

NEVER

THE

THE

AGAINST
OF

MADE

WOULD

NATAL

BE,
THE

GOVERNMENT

MAJORITY

A

SIMPLY

SUCH

INTENTION.

BECOME

FOR

WERE

THAT

REGARDING

GOKHALE

MANAGERS

STRIKE

STRIKERS

TO

THE

HAS

TO

THE

BEG

NOW,

STEP

AS
LAST

THAT

ENDS.

COLLIERIES’

ADVISED

NONFULFILMENT

THE

STATEMENT

AND

ADVISED

THE

THE

WERE

SELFISH
IS

THE

AND

TOLD

INDIANS

DURING
EMPLOYERS

ARE AVERSE TO THE REPEAL OF THE TAX. IF GOVERNMENT WILL SEE
THEIR WAY TO PROMISE TO
WILL

BE

ADVISED

TO

REPEAL IT

RETURN

TO

NEXT

SESSION, THE

STRIKERS

WORK.

Indian Opinion, 29-10-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

377

240. TELEGRAM TO THE PRESS1
[NEWCASTLE ,

October 23, 1913]
WE

ARE

MINES
MARCH
LIVE
THE

ADVISING

THE

COURT

ARREST,

AND
TO
ON

VOLKSRUST.
MINE

MOVEMENT

MAY

STRIKERS

WE

RATIONS
START

AND

TO

CONSIDER
WHEN

LEAVE

FAILING
IT
WE

ARREST,
IMPROPER
DON’T

THE
TO
TO
WORK.

INSTANTLY.

Indian Opinion, 29-10-1913

241. LETTER TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR2
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

October 23, 1913
THE HON ’BLE THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR
P RETORIA
SIR,

I am directed by my Association respectfully to invite your
attention to the following. My Association has been informed that:
1.
On or about the 27th September, a British Indian named Abdool
Fazula Khan was arrested at Johannesburg under Section 4(Ia) of the
Immigration Law of 1913, which reads:
Any such person as is described in any paragraph of this sub-section who
enters or is found within the Union, or who, though lawfully resident in one
Province, enters or is found in another Province in which he is not lawfully
resident, shall be a prohibited immigrant in respect of the Union or of that
other Province (as the case may be), that is to say—any person or class of
1

This was part of a Reuter message from Johannesburg according to which
Gandhiji stated that Indians had struck work on more mines and that many had been
arrested. For the circumstances which prepared the ground for the march.
2
This was sent on behalf of the Chairman, British Indian Association.

378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

persons deemed by the Minister on economic grounds or on account of
standard or habits of life to be unsuited to the requirements of the Union or any
particular Province thereof.

2.
The said Khan appealed against the decision of the local
Immigration Officer, and on the 13th October the said appeal was
duly heard by the Board sitting at Pretoria and dismissed.
3.
The evidence led at the hearing of the appeal, and which was not
disproved or rebutted, shows:
(a) That the said Khan first came to the Transvaal in 1900 as a
private of the Indian Transport Corps No. 2 Division.
(b) That he received a good discharge in November 1902 and,
thereafter, remained in this Province for nearly another year— till
towards the end of 1903.
(c) That he then went to Cape Town where he filled several
situations, among others, working for Messrs Jagger & Co., Ohlson &
Co., and Petersen & Co. He remained in Cape Town about eight or
nine years with the exception of a few months of service in German
South West Africa.
(d) The said Khan then returned to the Transvaal by rail from
the Cape and entered this Province without let or hindrance. (e)
(e) While in German South West Africa, Khan lost his discharge and several other papers of a similar character.
4.
On the day the said Khan’s appeal was dismissed, as stated in
Paragraph 2 and immediately after, he was removed to Pretoria Gaol
for deportation, but before removal, his Attorney, Mr. Ritch, saw the
Principal Immigration Officer and represented to him the claims of
the said Khan to be sent to the Cape Province. Mr. Ritch gave the
names of the principal employers for whom the said Khan claims to
have worked.
5.
On the following evening, the said Khan was deported to Natal
without his having had an opportunity to collect his clothes or other
belongings and without any further communication having been
made to his Attorney, and, thereafter, was immediately transported to
India.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

379

6.
I am desired to point out that no effort would appear to have
been made to investigate the said Khan’s claims to be sent to the Cape,
where he had resided for so many years, and to add that, in the
respectful opinion of my Association, this should have been done
even though it might have meant a few weeks’ longer detention in the
Transvaal of the said Khan.
7.
My Association also desires me to call attention to the serious
hardships which must necessarily follow such sudden deportation as
this, in which case the deportee would appear to have been sent away
without any means and with no more clothing than he stood in. Had
Khan’s Attorney been notified a few hours beforehand, his friends
would have passed over to him his clothing and blankets and also
money to assist him on his journey.
8.
My Association trusts that the facts in this case will be fully
investigated by you; and that steps will be taken to prevent a repetition
of the unfortunate incident.
I have, etc.,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5904

380

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

242. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
NEWCASTLE ,

October 23, 1913
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Just now it seems to me that a solution has been found for the
building proposal. The strikers must leave the mines. Otherwise the
strike is bound to collapse. I am therefore inviting them to come out.
If they do, one of us will march with them to the Transvaal border to
court arrest. We should be arrested on the way. This avoids the
difficulty of lodgings, etc., and keeps the men going. The situation is
certainly difficult and serious. The strike is now having its effect. But
unless some such thing like the above is done, the movement is bound
to collapse. You should carefully watch the Press. You should
constantly make it clear that we do not wish to break the Provincial
barrier. Our only purpose is by intense suffering to make a striking
demonstration against the £3 tax. Not a minute to spare. I hate writing.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

381

243. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[NEWCASTLE ,]

Aso Vad 9 [October 24, 1913] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

No, I have not forgotten about Jamnadas, but I have not had a
moment to myself. I send the letter2 herewith. You have Tyob Sakur’s
address. Please dispose of the letter. And also write to Thakkar
Damodar Anandji and Khetsi in my name. I am not sure of their
correct names. You have them. Also say that Jamnadas should see
them. They will take it ill if we do not write to him. Inquire when
Pundua will reach Beira, and also consider when these letters will get
there. If you find that they are not likely to reach there in time, send a
telegram to Beira through the Company. Such telegrams are delivered
“inland” and cost less. Wire to Tyob Sakur that he should put up
Jamnadas, buy him a ticket for Bulawayo and give him the necessary
money for the voyage, debiting the amounts against me.
Great things are happening in Newcastle. There is a move to
lead a march of 2,000 men into the Transvaal. Let us see what
happens. I do not know whether I shall be able to send any matter.
The telegrams and letters from here the Secretary will continue to
send. Medh is here. Pragji is at Volksrust. Manilal has been arrested.
Write to me at the following address:
37, Murehesion Street,
Newcastle.
Send a copy of Indian Opinion to Mr. Lazarus at the foregoing
address. The ladies’ block should appear this time. Speak to Muttu
about this. About the block itself, speak to West. I have no time to
1

The date is assigned on the basis of the reference in the letter to the picture
of the women satyagrahis, which appeared as a supplement to Indian Opinion,
29-10-1913.
2
This is not available.

382

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

write to him.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5906

244. CABLE TO G. A. NATESAN1
DURBAN,

[Before October 25, 1913]
THE

REPORT

THROUGHOUT
THE

MOVEMENT,

WOMEN
ARE

IS

ENTIRELY

THE

COUNTRY
AND

REPRESENTING

ALREADY

IN

FALSE;
ARE

NEARLY
ALL

A

SECTIONS

MEETINGS

STRONGLY
HUNDRED
OF

THE

HELD

SUPPORTING
MEN

AND

COMMUNITY

GAOL.

The Times of India, 25-10-1913

245. STATEMENT AT CHAMBER OF COMMERCE2
[DURBAN,]

October 25, 1913
At joint meeting of representatives of coal, sugar, and agriculture industries
held this morning, Mr. Gandhi stated that present strike of coal mines was
specifically due to failure of Union Government to carry out definite promise given
by them repeatedly that the annual tax of £3 would be repealed. He states that a
promise or assurance was given definitely to Mr. Gokhale, and that this is confirmed
1

This was in refutation of a cable from Reuter which was published in The
Times of India, 21-10-1913: “There appears to be a decided split among the local
Indian community, but it is believed that the majority will support the passive
resistance movement.”
2
A meeting of leading employers of Indian labour was held at the Chamber of
Commerce on October 25. Gandhiji made a statement on the position of the strike.
This is an extract from a telegram sent by the Coal-owners’ Association to the
Minister of the Interior on October 25. No separate report of Gandhiji’s statement is
available. For an account of Gandhiji’s discussion with the mine-owners.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

383

by a statement made by Lord Ampthill in the House of Lords, and reported in
Blue-book, without reservation as to men, women and children. Mr. Gandhi states
that Indians will be immediately advised to resume work, regardless of any other
grievances, as soon as Government give assurance that they will carry out their
promise. 1

Indian Opinion, 5-11-1913

246. INTERVIEW TO “THE NATAL MERCURY”
DURBAN,

October 25, 1913
. . . After the conference2 , Mr. Gandhi was asked by a Mercury representative
whether there was any truth in the suggestion that the strike was at an end.

[ GANDHIJI:] No, the strike is still continuing. I have telegrams
from Dannhauser district to say that that is so, and from Dundee and
Newcastle also. The position is that the men were to be withdrawn
from the collieries in order to court arrest and imprisonment in Natal,
or, failing that, to cross the border to the Transvaal, and be arrested
there. As this conference was coming, this movement was
suspended. So the position is that they are on strike, but have not left
the mines.
The idea behind this proposed movement from the mines was
that it was not a proper thing to draw rations from the mine-owners,
and yet not to work. I personally felt that the strike was weak so long
as the men did not actually leave the mines. What will happen now will
depend on the result of the conference, and that I am unable to
1

The telegram went on to state: “After hearing Mr. Gandhi, the
meeting resolved that the Union Government be asked to say whether they
gave assurance regarding £3 tax mentioned by him, and as confirmed by Lord
Ampthill in the House of Lords; whether said assurance applied to men, women
and children, and, if not, what were the reservations, if any? The meeting
would be glad to know, also, what the present intentions of the Government are in
regard to tax of £3. In view of the extension of the strike daily, they would be
indebted for immediate information for guidance of further joint meeting to be
convened immediately such reply is received.”
2
This was held at the Chamber of Commerce; vide the preceding item.

384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

foreshadow. The strike, however, will continue. According to my
estimate there are nearly 3,000 on strike. The effect of this is not
entirely to stop work as they have a certain amount of Kaffir labour,
and with this Kaffir labour and the Europeans they are able to do
some work, though the bulk of it is certainly at a standstill.
I saw it reported that we might even ask the Kaffirs to strike. But
such is not our intention at all. We do not believe in such methods. We
have nothing against the employers as such, but as the employers are
supposed—at least some of them—to have opposed the repeal of this
tax, this demonstration has become necessary. As soon as the
Government make a promise to the effect that the tax will be repealed
during the next session of Parliament, the strikers will be advised to
resume work.
It is not the intention to ask them to join the general struggle at
all; because, apart from the £3 tax, there are other grievances also for
which the passive resistance by the general body of the people will
continue. The other grievances are the marriage question; the question
of domiciliary rights; the harsh administration of existing laws, as the
Gold Law in the Transvaal; the right of S[outh] A[frica] born Indians
to enter the Cape by reason of their birth; and the theoretical
question of the social bar. For these things, even if the promise to
repeal the £3 tax is given, passive resistance, without the strike, will
continue.
I may state also, that no intimidation of any sort was used
against non-strikers, and the strike is absolutely a voluntary act, and in
so far as I have been able to see, quite spontaneous. The men only
needed the position to be placed before them to strike.
For the relief of the strikers, whom we have to support,
subscriptions are being collected everywhere. In Durban, 110 bags of
rice, dholl, and other articles were promised, and the bulk of this is
already upon rail. More collections are still going on.1
If the Conference ends in a fiasco, we shall certainly endeavour
to widen the area of the strike, but I am totally unable to say what
response we shall have. Wherever indentured Indians or ex-indentured
1

The situation which Gandhiji and his co-workers had to tackle is vividly
described in Satyagraha in South Africa, Chs. XLII & XLIII.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

385

Indians are working as labourers, we shall advise that they should
strike.
The Natal Mercury, 27-10-1913

247. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[October 26, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

This will be given to you by Medh. I have been on the move all
the time. My deal times have been changed. Soon after ablutions I
take my meal. And the ablutions take place early enough. If I did not
do that I should get no time to eat.
The coal miners’ Conference was all right. 1 They have sent a
cable to General Smuts which they await a reply to. I am now on the
veld and surrounded by people at Hatting Spruit.
With love,
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India.

1

The Conference was held at the Chamber of Commerce, Durban, on October
25; vide also “Statement at Chamber of Commerce”, 25-10-1913.

386

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

248. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
NEWCASTLE ,

October 27, 1913
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I arrived here this morning to find your welcome letters and
your interview with the Times. I see you are going strong. It would be
splendid if the women came. Yes, they may have their tickets for
Newcastle. I want Mr. Cachalia, Imam Saheb and all the
Mohammedans here just now. Anglia and Dada Osman are making
much mischief. I have written Cachalia to that effect. He and the
others are required to counteract the mischief.
The Conference was good. They threatened, they flattered, they
tried everything to wean us from the strike. But it could not be done.
Now they are in communication with the Government. We may know
the result any day. All the largest mines are now out but the one at
Elandslaagte. We are trying for it. To bring out the men proved easy.
To keep them is most difficult. But fortune has favoured us up to now
and may continue to do so. Thambi, of course, is by far the best
worker. And another Naidoo almost bids fair to rival him in energy.
You will observe that under the new plan we do not need a
camp. We simply march out the men. Women and children will have
to be looked after.
I shall be continuously on the move but you may treat
Newcastle as my headquarters.
With love,
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
I take it that these letters are shown to Miss Schlesin too.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

387

249. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[NEWCASTLE ,

Before October 28, 1913]
HAVE

READ

GOVERNMENT

SASSOCIATION.1

BEG

PROMISE

MR.

TO

LETTER,
NOW

MY

THEN

MADE

MADE.

MR.

FACT

CACHALIA’S

SEPTEMBER

REPEAL

PASSIVE

COLLIERIE

ATTENTION

MENTIONED

LETTER

MATTER

NATAL

MINISTER’S

GOKHALE

ALSO

REPUDIATION

REPLY

DRAW

28TH.

TAX

NO

THOUGH

RESISTANCE

ONLY

CERTAINLY

NOT

AFTER-THOUGHT AS COULD BE PROVED FROM DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE IN
POSSESSION
STATED

GOVERNMENT.
INDIAN

BROUGHT

OUT

STANCE.
ON

TO

ENTER

SEEING

SPECTFULLY
BUT

ASK

EMPHATIC

TAX.
UNFELT

INFINITELY

TO

WAS

OF

UPON

OF

POOR
OR

NOT

GRIEVANCES

THEORY.

CONSIDER

TAX

I

OTHER

OF

STRIKE

CASE

STRIKE

AS

FEELING
AND

LISTEN
SERIOUS
THEREFORE
QUESTION

ACT

THAN

ANY

INTENSE

FIGHTING

LICENSING

COMPLAIN

HELPLESS

WILL

ACT,

RESI-

AFRICA-BORN

MORE

TREAT

BEING

PASSIVE

CERTAINLY

GIVEN.

NOT

EXPRESSION

GRIEVANCES

MINISTER

IMMIGRATION
CANNOT

NOT

SOUTH

NATAL

MINISTERS

PEOPLE

BASED

INDIANS

CAPE,

NOTICE

HUNDREDS

IGNORANT

OF

MARRIAGE,

GOVERNMENT
AMPLE

REPEATEDLY

INDENTURE

POINTS

NATAL

GROUNDS.

AFFECT

PROVINCES.

UNDER

OTHER

INDEPENDENT

QUESTIONS

BUT

FOR

GENERAL

INDIANS

HAVE

EMPLOYEES

RE-

THREAT,
AGAINST

COMPARATIVELY
TO
IN

FANCIED
THEMSELVES,

APPEAL
UPON

TO
MERITS

ONLY.

Indian Opinion, 5-11-1913

1
The Government said, in the course of the reply: “With regard to your
telegram, Government never gave such promise as Mr. Gandhi alleges, either to Mr.
Gokhale or anybody elsewhere. . . .”

388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

250. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
NEWCASTLE ,

October 29, 1913
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

Polak keeps you informed of the progress of the struggle. I am
marching out presently with the strikers in order to court arrest for
ourselves. But this I write to ask you kindly to facilitate Polak’s
residence in London. He can then do public work and manage the
London Committee. After my withdrawal which will take place as
soon as the settlement comes, he thinks that he would not be able to
work efficiently in South Africa. I agree with him in this view. Mr.
Dube has invited him to settle in London. This he can only do if he
receives the support of some of the Pleaders in India who handle Privy
Council cases. Polak as you know intends to practise as Privy Council
Agent in London.
I remain, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From the original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 931

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

389

251. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[CHARLESTOWN ,

October 30, 1913]
TO

MINISTER OF INTERIOR
P RETORIA
NEWCASTLE
GAOL

INDIAN

DOCTOR

FEMALE
ARM.

PRISONERS
LADIES

GATION,

PROMPT

COMMITTEE

FORCIBLY
NOT

BY

HAVE

VACCINATED
REMOVING

SUPPLIED

WITH

LEARNT
PASSIVE

BLOUSE
GHEE,

THAT

RESISTANCE

AND
REQUEST

HOLDING
INVESTI-

RELIEF.1

GANDHI

Indian Opinion, 5-11-1913

252. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
ON THE WAY TO VOLKSRUST,

October 30, 1913
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I sent you a full message from Ingogo which I hope you
received. Mr. Mahomed Meer is at Waschbank. He has the ‘phone. It
was he who gave the information about the Ramsay Collieries assault.
Please inquire further. You know that I telegraphed to the Protector at
Durban and the Interior.2 You may now inquire further through Meer
and if there [be] any workers, send one to make local investigation.
1

To this the Director of Prisons replied that instructions had since been
issued to the Newcastle Magistrate that the Minister of Justice would not insist on the
Gaol Regulations in regard to vaccination being enforced where religious objections
were raised by passive resisters.
2
Vide “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 28-10-1913.

390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The women need not march to Volksrust. If they would, they
may as far as Ingogo and entrain there. But there should be someone
to join them from Newcastle. Mr. Seedat at Ingogo seems to be a
decent man. He gave biscuits, tea, bread, etc., to the men without
stinting. He gave me cigarettes too for them. I have asked him to pay
the express fares for the women and some men who could not and
would not walk. There must be quite 40. If the women who want to go
to gaol wish to entrain, they may do so. As much as possible, please
discourage movement to Phoenix. If you have sufficient
accommodation there, the women should be kept and fed there so
long as possible as you have plenty of rations there and fine workers
in Mrs. Lazarus and Miss Thomas.1
If I am arrested, you should immediately transfer the Johannesburg balance in your name and open a separate account called
Agency Account. I may be fined. I shall make a statement to the
effect that I have nothing I can call my own, that I have given up
everything and that even in those things which are in my name I have
no interest of my own. You and others should likewise say and return
nulla bona. In order to avoid technicalities the accounts may be
transferred. The account at Durban should be withdrawn and it should
be redeposited in the names of West and Maganlal, either having the
power to operate upon it severally. The paper too should be
transferred in the names of West and Maganlal and the trustees may
transfer it and the Press to them at pepper-cornrent.
All the men, as soon as they are there, must be marched out.
They must take two days’ rations with them. Some stupidly did not
fill their pots.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

Vide “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 28-10-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

391

253. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[October 30, 1913] 1
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

We reached in excellent condition at 5 p.m. The men have done
extremely well. The store-keeper here is supplying tea. It is big thing
because of the labour involved.
I have just telephoned asking that Mr. Badat should go to
Pardekop. We shall march out early in the morning so that some
distance at least may be cut before daybreak. I am sending back Mr.
Vallibhai’s2 cart but am trying to procure other transport.
I am almost inclined, if the men can be somewhat disciplined, to
march through Johannesburg and hold a meeting there. The
merchants may give a feast to the men. You may discuss with Cachalia
through the ‘phone. Hosken and others may be invited. Please tell
Miss Schlesin that my proposed letter should be deferred till the
march is over.
There, as I have said, Chergan is the most reliable man for the
strikers’ residence . But if all are not accommodated there, the one
next man is Sivpal who is above Chergan. It is at these two places that
you should concentrate the majority of the people. Then comes
Ramkhelawan who can take many people, but you must not establish a
kitchen there. There are men also at Rughbir’s, towards Newcastle way
and beyond the corner Indian store. If you succeed in getting two
kitchens established it would save your much work and you will be
able to move about. Men who may come should be served only with
bread or porridge. Rice is a great bother. No tea to be provided but
only sugar. This will simplify matters. But you will use your own
judgment. You will examine and list the jewellery the men have sold
and deposited. Polak should be furnished with the itinerary. I will say
no more just now. I hope you had a nice luncheon and that Miss
Schlesin had something to eat. So long as she is there, you should
1
2

392

From the contents; vide also the preceding item.
Valli Peerbhai
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

look after her food.
I suggest your seeing Mrs. Anton, the baker’s wife. She is ill. I
have recommended Kuhne’s bath and our bread. You may offer to
explain.
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
Please remove from the jacket lent by Mr. Vallibhai a packet of
stamps I left.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

254. GIST OF LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR JUSTICE1
[CHARLESTOWN ,

October 31, 1913]
Mr. Gandhi wrote to the Secretary for Justice from Charlestown on the 31st
ultimo pointing out that a large number of Indians had surrendered themselves for
arrest and, as the Government had no accommodation for them nor facility for feeding
them, they were being fed and housed by the Indian Committee there at Government
expense. Mr. Gandhi suggested that all the people should be arrested, but, if not, he
stated that they would proceed with their march into the Transvaal—an event which
he was anxious to avoid. He also warned the Government against allowing Indians to
remain free on the border and stated that it was the desire of the passive resisters to
guard in every way they could against the surreptitious entry of a single Indian.2

Indian Opinion, 12-11-1913

1

The original letter is not available.
Official policy in regard to the handling of the strike situation is clarified in
a confidential despatch, dated November 6, from the Governor-General to the
Colonial Office; vide Appendix “Extract from Governor-General’s Despatch to
Colonial Office”, 6-11-1913.
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

393

255. GIST OF LETTER TO IMMIGRATION OFFICER1
[CHARLESTOWN ,

October 31, 1913]
A letter was addressed on the same day by Mr. Gandhi to the Immigration
Officer, Pretoria, pointing out that all passive resisters receive at the Transvaal
border three days’ notice of appeal, although they declare they do not wish to appeal,
and that they are allowed to roam about as they please. In Mr. Gandhi’s opinion the
Act does not require the warning to be given in all circumstances.

Indian Opinion, 12-11-1913

256. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
C HARLESTOWN ,

November 3, 1913
The enclosed letter was written on the way.2 It is unfinished. I
have seen the quotations for tents, and it seems to me that, after all,
bell-tents would be the cheapest and the easiest to fix up. One bell-tent
takes in twelve men. At that rate in order to accommodate 1,200 men,
we should want 100. The figures then amount to £75. That would be,
in my opinion, prohibitive. The alternative is to buy tarpaulin and
make our own tents and poles. It seems to me that this could be easily
fixed. If we could sew them on to the tarpaulin, the thing would be
quite substantial, but it may be too long. In that event we shall have to
use handles. I am now writing without any experience whatsoever, but
I am giving you all these suggestions for what they are worth. At the
time of the Zulu Rebellion3 we had tents which when erected simply
looked like the wings of a roof without any wall. There were pegs
which were to be driven in. They could easily be rigged up and two
1
2
3

394

The original letter is not available.
Vide “General Knowledge about Health [-XXXI], 2-8-1913.
Of 1906
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

slender poles kept them erect. They were V-shape inverted, and if
these tents could be bought probably they would be the cheapest. Six
could at a pinch be put into these tents. I would like to carry these
tents myself on the march, failing that tarpaulin. Having known all
these things, you may do what you like, but what I want is sufficient
cover for my journey. The same cover I shall use in Charlestown until
I have commenced the march. 1 As soon as you can supply me with
sufficient tents, you may send me all the men there, so that we could
concentrate all the women and children at Charlestown. All the men
must march, the women may get trains. Whilst you are in
Johannesburg, you must see Mr. Cachalia and others, and get them to
send vegetables, oil, rice, mealiemeal and even coal- whatever they can
beg. Not a single consignment has yet arrived from Johannesburg,
and it is certainly discreditable that the merchants have not yet sent
anything.
Yours sincerely,

M.K. GANDHI
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

The March commenced on November 6; vide also “Interview to “the Natal
Mercury”, 5-11-1913 & Cable to G.k. Gokhale”, before 6-11-1913.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

395

257. INTERVIEW TO REUTER1
[CHARLESTOWN ,

November 3,1913]
Mr. Gandhi, interviewed, stated that he contemplated moving 1,500 men to
the Transvaal to court arrest, and if not arrested they would proceed further, and would
probably settle down on Mr. Kallenbach’s farm at Tolstoy, near Lawley.

Indian Opinion, 12-11-1913

258. CABLE TO G. K. GOKHALE
[CHARLESTOWN

Before November 4, 1913]
FIVE

THOUSAND

HAVE

TO

SIX

TWO

TEEN

HUNDRED

REST

CROSSING

IN

REDRESS OF

OF

MORE

HAVE

ENTHUSIASM

BEEN
AT

AT

TO

COURT
AMONG

MANY

PLACES

OUR

GRIEVANCES.

FOUR

HUNDRED

HUNDRED

ARE

GATHERING
BORDER

WHOM

THREE

THREE

STRIKERS

ARE
THE

GROWING

CLERGY

STRIKE,
INCLUDING

CHILDREN.

HUNDRED

THE

THE

ON
FED,

HUNDRED

AND

A

BE

ARE

THOUSAND

WOMEN

ARE

AND

IN

JAIL

ARRESTED.

FIF-

CHARLESTOWN

AND

NEWCASTLE

PRIOR

TO

ARREST.

THERE

IS

THE
MOVING

STRIKERS.
TO

THE
SECURE

The Times of India, 5-11-1913

1
Gandhiji had camped at Charlestown along with other marchers. He
had an interview with a Reuter correspondent of which only this brief report is
available.

396

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

259. INTERVIEW TO “THE NATAL MERCURY”
[CHARLESTOWN ,

November 5, 1913]
Mr. Gandhi readily granted an interview, but had nothing to say, except that
he and his followers were still quite determined, and would march into the Transvaal
on the following day, courting arrest, and if they were unmolested, would march right
on until they reached Tolstoy Farm. They would then remain quietly there until
satisfactory terms had been made with the Government. All arrangements had been
made along the route, and food depots established at eight different points along the
way. Their object was to court arrest, but they wished to do everything quite openly,
and had acquainted the Government with their intentions.1

Indian Opinion, 12-11-1913

1

Before zero hour was reached, Gandhiji made a final bid to avert the march.
This is what he has himself recorded:
“When all the preparations for the march were completed, I made one more
effort to achieve a settlement. I had already sent letters and telegrams. I now decided
to ‘phone even at the risk of my overtures being answered by an insult. From
Charlestown I ‘phoned to General Smuts in Pretoria. I called his secretary and said:
‘Tell General Smuts that I am fully prepared for the march. The Europeans in Volksrust
are excited and perhaps likely to violate even the safety of our lives. They have
certainly held out such a threat. I am sure that even the General would not wish any
such untoward event to happen. If he promises to abolish the £3 tax, I will stop the
march, as I will not break the law merely for the sake of breaking it, but I am driven to
it by inexorable necessity. Will not the General accede to such a small request?’ I
received this reply within half a minute: ‘General Smuts will have nothing to do with
you. You may do just as you please.’ With this the message closed.
“I had fully expected this result, though I was not prepared for the curtness of
the reply. I hoped for a civil answer, as my political relations with the General since
the organization of Satyagraha had now subsisted for six years. But as I would not be
elated by this courtesy, I did not weaken in the face of his incivility. The strait and
narrow path I had to tread was clear before me. The next day (November 6, 1913) at
the appointed stroke of the hour (6.30) we offered prayers and commenced the march
in the name of God. The pilgrim band was composed of 2,037 men, 127 women and
57 children.” Satyagraha in South Africa, Ch. XLIII.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

397

260. CABLE TO G. K GOKHALE
[CHARLESTOWN ,

Before November 6, 1913]
THE
STRIKE
IS
CONTINUING.
THE
GOVERNMENT
IS
ARRESTING
PASSIVE
RESISTERS.
MONTHLY
EXPENSES
CEED
£7,000 .
LOCAL
CONTRIBUTIONS
ARE
EXPECTED

NOT
EXTO

COME
UP
TO
£ 1000
EVERY
MONTH
IN
PROVISIONS
AND
CASH.
I
AM
MARCHING
ON
THURSDAY 1
TO
TRANSVAAL
WITH
FOUR
THOUSAND
MEN.
ENDURANCE
AND
DISTRESS
ARE
GREAT.
SEVERAL
BIRTHS
HAVE
OCCURRED
IN
THE
CONCENTRATION
CAMPS
WHICH
HAVE
BEEN
FORMED.
TWO
DEATHS
OF
BABIES
OCCURRED
DURING
THE MARCH.

The Times of India, 7-11-1913

261. NEWS OF STRUGGLE2
[CHARLESTOWN ,

Before November 6, 1913]
During the Transvaal march, Mr. N. C. Desai was diligent in
attending to the indentured labourers. He offered tea to people and
shelter to the women who were tired. The Indian community in
Standerton supplied one thousand tins of jam and entertained the
marchers generously. At Vaal station, Mr. Patel was in attendance and
he took persons who had fallen sick to stay with him. During two
stages in the march, Mr. Badaat proceeded ahead of the marchers by
train and had bread ready for them. Mr. Valli Peerbhai offered his
carriage for transport of stores during the first stage. Dr. Briscoe gave
four pounds worth of medicine free of charge for the pilgrims. Mr.
Sidaat of Ingogo supplied tea and biscuits to those who had started on
1
2

398

November 6
This was published as “From Mr. Gandhi”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the march from Newcastle. In this way, at every place the marchers
were cared for by Indians. The Indian community in Charlestown was,
and still is, very diligent. Mr. Sheikh Mukadam devotes all his time to
this work.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 19-11-1913

262. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR1
[PALMFORD,

November 7, 1913]
WHILST

I

HAVING

AT

RESISTANCE
POINT

APPRECIATE
LAST
STRUGGLE,
HUMANITY

GOVERNMENT

PROBABLY

WOMEN,

FACT

FIFTY

OF

PRIME

CANNOT

VIEW

122

THE

ARRESTED

HELP

MOMENT
KNOW

IN

REMARKING

CHOSEN

PASSIVE

THAT

MOST

THAT

TENDER

GOVERNMENT

MOVER

MARCHERS

CHILDREN,

FROM

UNFORTUNATE.

ALL

INCLUDE

VOLUNTARILY

MARCHING ON STARVATION RATIONS WITHOUT PROVISION FOR SHELTER
DURING

STAGES.

CIRCUMSTANCES
JUSTICE.

ASK

NUE

MARCH

THEM

BY

ING

WITH

I

RECOIL.

IF

PROGRESS

FOR

HOPE

THEM
ON

NIGHT

MIGHT

OR

I
OR

THAT
AND

IN

INCIDENTS
IF

DEATHS

CONSIDERATIONS
MEN

MY

OCCUR,

I,

CONTI-

GOVERNMENT

SEND

FULL

RATIONS

IN

WHOM

ONE

GOVERNMENT

OPINION
HAPPEN

WITHOUT

ALLOWED

PROVIDE

WITHOUT

SUCH

INFURIATED.

BE

WITHOUT

AND
IS

ALL

BECOME
MAY

FARM

UNDER

LEFT

RECONSIDERATION

UNTOWARD

MARCH

VIOLATION

THEM

CONFIDENCE

PROVISION

WHICH

IS

MEN

TOLSTOY

AWAY

LAST
THAT

LEAVING

HAVE

ME

THEY
EITHER

RAIL

THEM.

THEY

THEM

ARRESTED

THEM.

THEREFORE,

FOR

FROM

WHEN

INFORMING

TEARING

AN

MAK-

ACT

GOVERNMENT

FROM
WILL

DURING

FURTHER

ESPECIALLY

AMONG

1

Gandhiji was arrested near Palmford and charged with having brought
unauth-orized persons into the Transvaal. He was produced before the magistrate at
Volksrust and released on bail. The telegram was evidently dispatched after this. He
was, however, re-arrested the next day at Standerton. For an account of the arrest at
Palmford and the court proceedings, vide Satyagraha in South Africa, Ch. XLIV.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

399

WOMEN

WITH

BABIES

IN

ARMS,

RESPONSIBILITY

WILL

BE

GOVERNMENT’S.

Indian Opinion, 12-11-1913

263. APPLICATION FOR BAIL1
S TANDERTON,

November 8, 1913
Before pleading, accused stated he was already on bail, and asked to be
admitted on bail. Accused stated his object in asking for bail was to enable him to
take the men to their destination. The Prosecutor opposed bail unless the accused
would refrain from taking further part in the demonstration. The accused said he was
not prepared to give this assurance.2

The Star, 8-11-1913

1
Gandhiji arrived at Standerton with about 2,000 passive resisters. 85
Indians who had left Hattingh Spruit Colliery were arrested. Gandhiji was charged
with “aiding or abetting prohibited persons to enter the Transvaal”.
2
According to a report in The Transvaal Leader, when the Prosecutor
protested against Gandhiji’s plea for bail, “the Magistrate pointed out that every
prisoner not charged with a capital sentence was in law entitled to be allowed to give
bail for his appearance, and said that Mr. Gandhi could not be deprived of that right.”
Gandhiji was then released on his own recognizance of £50, and the case was
remanded till the 21st. As soon as Gandhiji was released, the column continued its
march. For a detailed first-hand report of the next part of the march, vide “The Great
March”, 8-11-1913; also Satyagraha in South Africa, Ch. XLIV.

400

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

264. INTERVIEW TO REUTER1
S TANDERTON,

November 8, 1913
Mr. Gandhi . . . replied that he felt sure the Government would repeal the tax.
He was positive that the Government had told Mr. Gokhale it was its intention to
repeal the tax.

[ GANDHIJI:] If, the Government can show a justifiable reason why
the tax should be paid, the Indians would pay it, but no good reason
for paying has yet been given. The crowd is very orderly and under
perfect control.
The Star, 8-11-1913

265. LETTER TO INDIANS2
[Before November 11, 1913]
The like of this struggle will not come again. We have reached
the limit now. The courage that the indentured labourers have shown
and the suffering they have gone through have been boundless. How
many men will be ready to foot 24 miles a day on one and a half
pounds of bread and a little sugar? This is what our poor brethren
have done. They have suffered horses’ kicks. They have silently
endured kicks and blows by whites. Women have walked in the heat of
the noon, two-month-old babies in arms and bundles on head.
Everyone has braved the rigours of weather, heat and cold and rain.
1

After Gandhiji was released on bail, a representative of Reuter who interviewed Gandhiji asked him “what he thought would be the outcome of the demonstration”.
2
Gandhiji was arrested for the third time, on November 9, at Teakworth. He
was taken to Heidelberg and produced before the magistrate on the following day.
Gandhiji applied for remand of the case. He was to be tried at Dundee; vide Satyagraha
in South Africa, Ch. XLV. This is Gandhiji’s message issued before he was taken to
Dundee Gaol on November 11.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

401

To what end? For India. Such sacrifice will no doubt result in repeal
of the £3 tax but what is more, it will enhance India’s prestige.
I consider the Transvaal march to have been perfectly
successful. The object was to get arrested and all have been arrested.
It is only now, however, that the struggle will grow really
exciting. Hundreds of men, who are not ready for gaol, can play their
part. They have only to resolve that they themselves will go without
meals but feed the strikers. Whether or not any money arrives from
India, we must supply the food from here. We should put courage in
the strikers’ hearts and advise them not to retaliate even if mercilessly
kicked. All Indians can do this. An opportunity like this will not come
again. Every Indian may take a pledge. He can cut out a meal every
day, and with the money so saved provide food to the hungry.
Decency requires that traders in every place should give food and
shelter to any striker who might find his way to that place and then
send him on to where facilities exist for feeding large numbers. If any
Indian fails to play his part in this great venture, I for one will
consider him an unfortunate man indeed.
India’s servant
Satyagrahi

MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI

[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 19-11-1913

402

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

266. TRIAL AT DUNDEE
[DUNDEE ,

November 11, 1913]
Mr. Gandhi was on the 11th instant charged on three counts, before the
Resident Magistrate, Mr. J. W. Cross of Dundee, with inducing indentured immigrants
to leave the Province. The court was crowded with Indians and Europeans. Mr. W.
Dalzell-Turnbull was specially instructed by the Attorney-General to appear for the
prosecution, and Mr. Advocate J. W. Godfrey appeared for Mr. Gandhi. Mr. Gandhi
pleaded guilty to the charges.
Mr. Turnbull read the section and left the matter in the hands of the Magistrate.
Mr. Godfrey stated that he was under an obligation to the defendant not to
plead in mitigation in any way whatsoever. The circumstances which had brought Mr.
Gandhi before the Magistrate were well known to all persons, and he was only
expressing the desire of the defendant when he stated that the Magistrate had a duty to
perform, and that he was expected to perform that duty fearlessly, and should therefore
not hesitate to impose the highest sentence upon the prisoner if he felt that the
circumstances in the case justified it.
Mr. Gandhi obtained the permission of the Court, and made the following
statement:
As a member of the profession, and being an old resident of Natal, he thought
that, in justice to himself and the public, he should state that the counts against him
were of such a nature that he took the responsibility imposed upon him, for he
believed that the demonstration for which these people were taken out of the Colony
was one for a worthy object. He felt that he should say that he had nothing against the
employers, and regretted that in this campaign, serious losses were being caused to
them. He appealed to the employers also, and he felt that the tax was one which was
heavily weighing down his countrymen, and should be removed. He also felt that he
was in honour bound, in view of the position of things between Mr. Smuts and
Professor Gokhale, to produce a striking demonstration. 1 He was aware of the
miscries caused to the women and babes in arms. On the whole, he felt he had not
gone beyond the principles and honour of the profession of which he was a member.
1

The difference of opinion was over the abolition of the £3 tax, regarding
which the Union Government insisted it had given Gokhale, in 1912, no assurance;
vide “Extract from General Botha’s Speech”, 1-11-1913 for General Botha’s
categorical denial.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

403

He felt that he had only done his duty in advising his countrymen, and it was his duty
to advise them again, that until the tax were removed, to leave work and subsist upon
rations obtained by charity. He was certain that without suffering it was not possible
for them to get their grievance remedied.
The Magistrate then addressed as follows: In this case the accused had pleaded
guilty to the three counts, and the section of law under which the accused was charged
made him liable to a fine of £20 for each immigrant he attempted to induce, or
induced, to leave the Province. Mr. Gandhi was an educated gentleman, and had the
distinction of being a member of the legal profession, and whatever he had done, he
had done with a full knowledge of the consequences of his act. The Magistrate then
referred to the conditions under which Indians were brought into this Province, and
the terms they had agreed upon for remaining here after the expiry of their indentures.
He also referred to the contention of the Indians regarding Mr. Smuts’ alleged promise
to the Indians. The Natal members of Parliament had consented to the tax being
removed so far as it affected the women and children, but not the men. The
Government had, therefore, not broken faith with the Indians and he believed this was
the ground upon which Mr. Gandhi had advised the Indians to strike. To strike was to
defy the law, and the Government’s position was that, so long as the Indians were out
on strike, it was impossible for them to consider any legislation regarding repeal.
The defendant was, by his threatening conduct, only bringing ruination to the men
and harshness upon themselves. He therefore advised the Indians to stop the passive
resistance, and make representations to the Government. He also believed that the
Indians were alienating the sympathy of the Europeans who were at one with the
Indians in requesting the Government for the repeal of the tax. It was a painful duty to
pass sentence upon the conduct of a gentleman like Mr. Gandhi, upon the deliberate
contravention of the law, but he had a duty to perform, and Mr. Godfrey, his counsel,
had asked him fearlessly to perform that duty. The accused having pleaded guilty, he
(the Magistrate) accepted that plea, and passed the following sentences: Count 1:
£20, or three months’ imprisonment, with hard labour; Count 2: £20, or three months’ imprisonment, with hard labour, to take effect upon the expiration of the sentence in respect to Count 1; Count 3: £20, or three months’ imprisonment, with hard
labour, this to take effect upon the expiration of the sentence imposed in Count 2.
Mr. Gandhi, in a clear and calm voice, said:

I elect to go to gaol.1
Indian Opinion, 19-11-1913
1

A large crowd of friends waited outside to see Gandhiji come out, but the
police took him away secretly and no one knew how he was taken away.

404

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

267. MESSAGE TO STRIKERS1
[DUNDEE ,

November 11, 1913]
No cessation of the strike without the repeal of the £3 tax. The
Government, having imprisoned2 me, can gracefully make a declaration regarding the repeal.
Indian Opinion, 19-11-1913

268. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
DUNDEE GAOL ,

Tuesday [November 11, 1913] 3
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I have got nine months and if I get six months each at the other
two places, that will make 21 months; I shall be most lucky in that
case. That I could get into gaol without having to disguise myself was
so much the less bother. Today, for the first time after the
commencement of the strike, I have some leisure. You must certainly
have received some news of Jamnadas. Lest the Government cast its
eye on the money in my name, I have written 4 to Mr. Kallenbach to
get it transferred to your name and West’s. This arrangement is also to
be followed in respect of the sums Mr. Gokhale may send hereafter.
You must watch what cheques are issued. Miss Schlesin or whoever
else is outside will give you the account. Omar Sheth 5 and Cachalia
Sheth should have supervision over the money. Expenses will be
heavy only for the duration of the strike. If people remain firm even
1
After the trial J. W. Godfrey visited Gandhiji who said “he was cheerful and
confident” and sent this message through him.
2
The original has “imprisonment”, which, evidently, is a misprint.
3
This letter was written on the day Gandhiji was sentenced and sent to Dundee
Gaol.
4
This letter is not available.
5
Omar Haji Amod Zaveri; vide”Omar Haji Amod Zaveri”, 11-5-1907

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

405

in my absence, the £3[tax], at any rate, will go.
It looks as though your responsibilities had increased and I was
enjoying myself. Going to gaol has become holidaying for us. Even
so, I felt I should not hold back any longer from going to gaol. The
case today was full of technical loopholes. But how could I take
advantage of them? That would have been moha. I remained firm, for
fear that it would be sheer conceit on my part to believe that I could
work better by staying outside. James Godfrey was keen on appearing
on my behalf and so I allowed him. He said that he would send the
whole report. They will take me to Volksrust from Dundee on
Thursday for the case there.1 If you wish to write to me, send the letter
to Badat; it will probably reach me.
Right from today the doctor has ordered fruits, etc., for my diet.
I shall have no difficulty, therefore. If I can write down an account of
the march, I shall send it on. It was a wonderful experience. And so I
took a pledge yesterday that I would live on one meal a day till a
repeal of the tax was promised. Four months have passed even
according to the English calendar. The pledge this time will permit
my taking lemon or orange squash. I can write no more.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
MAGANLAL K. G ANDHI
P HOENIX, N ATAL
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 2538

1

On Friday, November 14, Gandhiji was sentenced at Volksrust to a further 3
months’ imprisonment.

406

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

269. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
DUNDEE ,

Wednesday [November 12, 1913] 1
MY DEAR MILLIE,

You are brave. So I know you will consider yourself a proud
and happy wife in having a husband who has dared to go to gaol for a
cause he believes in. The £3 tax cause is the cause of the helpless and
the dumb. And I ask you to work away in the shape of begging,
advising and doing all you can. Do not wait for their call but call the
workers. Seek them out even though they should insult you. Miss S.
knows the struggle almost like Henry. Assist her. I have asked her to
move forward and backward and assume full control. Draw upon West
and Maganlal for your needs. May you have strength of mind and
body to go through the fire.
With love,
Yours,

BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

The addressee’s husband H.S.L. Polak, along with Hermann Kallenbach, had
courted arrest on November 10, 1913. Gandhiji was sentenced on November 4 and
sent to Dundee. He was removed to Volksrust on November 13. This letter was
evidently written on November 12, 1913, which was a Wednesday.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

407

270. TRIAL AT VOLKSRUST
[VOLKSRUST,

November 14, 1913]
Mr. Gandhi appeared in Court before Mr. Jooste, Assistant Magistrate, charged under Section 20 of the Immigration Regulation Act. He pleaded guilty, but the
formal evidence of a resister named Poldat was called.
Witness stated he belonged to Ballengeich Mine, and remembered during the
current month proceeding with a number of Indians into the Transvaal. Poldat said
Mr. Gandhi was leading them from Charlestown to Johannesburg. Poldat recognized
Mr. Gandhi as the leader. Poldat knew he had no right in this Province, because he
was a prohibited immigrant.
Mr. Gandhi said he would like to ask witness two questions.

Why did Poldat enter the Transvaal?
Poldat said he entered the Transvaal as a protest against the £3 tax.

Would Poldat have gone back to the mines if that £3 tax had
been repealed?
Poldat said yes; if the Government had agreed to repeal the £3 tax, he would
have gone back.
Mr. Gandhi was asked if he wished to make a statement.
Mr. Gandhi then addressed the Court.1

I admit that I advised not only the last witness but hundreds of
other Indians, whom I knew to be prohibited immigrants, to cross the
border from Natal into the Transvaal. Of my intention to do so I gave
the Minister of the Interior due notice and I specially interviewed the
Immigration Officer at Volksrust, and informed him even of the date
on which I proposed to cross the border. I told both the Government
and the Immigration Officer that in doing so my only object was to
make a demonstration against the £3 tax which was weighing heavily
upon those who were affected by it, and to court for myself and the
party who crossed with me imprisonment. I assured them that nothing
1

The statement as reported in Indian Opinion is in the third person. The
original statement given here is extracted from the Transvaal Court Records.

408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

could be further from my wish than to desire that a single one of
those men who crossed the border should remain in the Transvaal and
settle there. I said also that, with such a large number crossing with me,
I might be totally unable to prevent them for all time from roving
about the country and that, therefore, I hoped that the Government
would take charge of the men. Throughout the march into the
Transvaal, I endeavoured to keep the men under control and to
prevent them from dispersing, and I claim that not a single Indian left
the column if it may be so called. I heard something at Heidelberg
about the formation of a Vigilants Committee at Volksrust, whose aim
I understand was to make the Government enforce the Immigration
Act. There is, therefore, common cause between the Committee and
my co-workers and myself. Through the Court I beg to make the
assurance that the present movement has nothing whatsoever to
do with the unlawful entry for purposes of residence in the Transvaal
of a single Indian. I think I may fairly claim that my whole career in
the Transvaal has been actuated with the motive of assisting Government in preventing surreptitious entry and unlawful settlement, but I
have pleaded guilty as I know that I have committed a technical
breach, on a vast scale, of the section under which I am charged. I am
aware too that the steps I have taken are fraught with the greatest risks
and intense personal suffering by those who have accepted my advice,
but after very mature consideration, based upon 20 years’ experience
of South Africa, I have come to the conclusion that nothing short of
such suffering will move the conscience of the Government as also of
the inhabitants of the Union of which, in spite of the so-called breach
of the Statutory Laws of the Union, I claim to be a sane and
law-abiding citizen.
The Court then adjourned for a quarter of an hour for the Magistrate to consider
his decision.
On resuming, Mr. Jooste passed sentence of three months’ imprisonment.

Indian Opinion, 26-11-1913; also Transvaal Court Records

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

409

271. EVIDENCE AT POLAK’S TRIAL1
[VOLKSRUST,

November 17, 1913]
Mr. Gandhi gave evidence that the march to the Transvaal was fixed without
consultation with Mr. Polak, who intended leaving for India on November 14th, and
he knew all arrangements had been made for Mr. Polak’s departure from Durban. Had it
not been for witness’s arrest before reaching Greylingstad, Mr. Polak would certainly
have left at that station. Under the circumstances, Mr. Gandhi thought Mr. Polak
should lead the column to its destination, so that the men would not disperse. In Mr.
Gandhi’s opinion, if Mr. Polak was guilty of aiding and abetting, so also were the
troopers whoguided the column on its way. He considered that Mr. Polak had rendered
service to the State, and to his race, by acting as he had. The men had been handed
over to Mr. Polak because Mr. Cachalia had not then arrived on the scene.

Indian Opinion, 26-11-1913

1

Polak and Kallenbach were arrested at Charlestown on November 10. Polak
was charged before Mr. Jooste, Assistant Magistrate, under Section 20 of the
Immigration Act, but declined to plead guilty to the charge. The evidence of five
witnesses including Kallenbach and Gandhiji was called. Rifleman Joubert stated that
he had seen Polak asking Gandhiji for instructions at Balfour and thought that Polak
was one of the leaders of the movement. Constable Kneen stated that Polak had
addressed the Indians and advised them to return to Charlestown. Kallenbach said that
Polak’s intention had been to return to Durban. His purpose was to discuss certain
matters with Gandhiji regarding his departure for India. Polak was found guilty and
was awarded three months’ simple imprisonment without hard labour. Earlier, while
awaiting trial in Volksrust Gaol, Polak had addressed a communication to Lord
Ampthill, which furnished a detailed account of incidents leading to his arrest; vide
“Polak’s letter to Lord Ampthill”, 12-11-1913.

410

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

272. LETTER TO MISS DEVI WEST
BLOEMFONTEIN GAOL ,

December 14, 1913
Name of convict: M. K. G ANDHI
Number: 1739

TO WHOM SENT:

Miss Devi West
Occupation: Schoolmistress
Postal Address: International Printing Press
Nearest Town: Phoenix, Natal
Name in full:

MY DEAR DEVI,

As I do not know where everybody else is, it is the most
appropriate for me to write to you.
I am quite happy and well here. It is almost as hot here as in
Phoenix this time of the year.
Hope that you and others are keeping good health and that
Devdas, Prabhudas and the other boys are observing the discipline that
was introduced after the ladies’ withdrawal from Phoenix and that the
boys are thriving under it. Pray remind Devdas of the promises he has
made me at various times. Ask him if he can recall them all. When
you or someone else writes to me, I should like [to know] the day’s
routine for the boys. Is Shanti giving trouble? Is Navin obedient? And
are Sivparsad and Chhotam as playful as ever? I hope that Rukhi
causes no extra trouble to you or to Maganlal. Krishna, Radha and
Keshu are not out of my mind, but they are used to being with
Maganlal and, therefore, do not call for special inquiry. I hope
Rustom West is growing and that he still remains the most beautiful
baby in the world to Mrs. Pywell and Mrs. West.
Please tell Mrs. Sam that I did not forget her message to
Mr. Sam but, as she knows, I never had the time or the opportunity to
have it delivered. I have no doubt however that she will soon see
Mr. Sam and then secure his approval of the proposed match. That
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

411

reminds me that Muthu promised to help all he could and I hope he is
keeping the promise.
Miss Schlesin, if she is there, must be proving very useful.
When the ladies and the boys return, please tell Mrs. Gandhi that
she will please me immensely by not disturbing the routine established
after her withdrawal and I hope that Ramdas and the other boys will
fall in with it. Your reply to this should be sent after their return, so
that you may give me full information about them. I shall not
withdraw any other letter but the reply to this.
I hope Mrs. Gandhi’s old trouble did not revive and that she
kept good health. Please let me know too how the other ladies fared.
Jekibehn should adhere to the promises made by her to me. Please tell
that hardly a day passes when I do not give much thought to her. As
for her diet, I do not bind her to any promises or resolutions she may
have made. She may take whatever suits her constitution. But she must
keep not only good health but be robust. She must grow her hair
unless she has definitely heard otherwise from Dr. Mehta.
How I wish Kashi and Santok could join the common household
and Mrs. Gandhi could approve of it?
I hope Maganlal traced my Tamil volume that was missing;
otherwise he should inquire of Govindoo and find and keep it safe.
Most of my spare time is being devoted to Tamil study. A short time
is daily given to compiling the book on food values and the uses of
popular and comparatively harmless drugs.1
A money order should be sent to Khushalbhai (Rajkot) to cover
Jamnadas’ expenses whatever they may have been in Rajkot and for
his travelling and £10 extra. Out of the latter, he should pay the widow
of my deceased brother Rs. 20 per month. Khushalbhai should also
be asked to prevail upon my sister to cut down her allowance to the
extent of Rs. 5 or Rs. 10. Of this Rs. 5 may be added, if necessary, to
the allowance to my brother’s wife. The whole of the money that may
be sent may be debited to suspense or emergency a/c.
Mr. MacIntyre should be reminded by Miss Schlesin to start
repayment that he promised to do so long ago.
1

412

It is not known if Gandhiji actually completed this work and published it.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Jamnadas, if he is there, should follow Maganlal in his dietary
and other habits and he will keep well. I am anxious to know how he
has been keeping in body and mind.
Chhaganlal should take as much olive oil as he can and do as
much garden work as possible, and should sleep in the open in all
weathers and take deep breaths early in the morning and at the time of
retiring. He may also smear and rub his chest and his back with olive
oil every day for 15 minutes. This massage should be given gently by
some strong person. Maganlal or Ramdas should do it. He should
read Dr. Carton’s thesis on consumption. It was given by me, I think,
toMaganlal to read. I hope Maganlal received from Mr. Dowd the
books that were lent to Hassan. Out of them, I should like Food
Remedies sent to me.
I returned to the Gaoler at Volksrust the following: a roll
conta[in]ing Mr. Kallenbach’s and my blankets and my writing
leather case, Uttar Ramcharit, Addison’s Essays and Dayanand’s
commentaries on Rigved &c. The Gaoler promised to return them to
Phoenix. If you have them, Addison’s Essays should be returned to
Mrs. Polak. I hope she and the children are keeping well and that her
wants are being supplied.
The trustees under the Phoenix settlement should be kept
supplied with the monthly a/cs we prepare. Does Mr. Omar visit the
settlement. If not, remind him of his promise.
What has happened to Mr. Budree’s case? You may inquire of
Mr. Budree or Mr. F. S. Tatham, to whom Mr. Polak handed the case.
Mr. Ismail Parekh wrote to me saying that the case could be
adjourned sine die.
Please also write to Khushalbhai, saying that I shall see to my
niece Tulsi’s a/c being settled whenever I return to India. If I do not
within 18 months’ time, I shall see to its settlement otherwise.
The interest I am doubtful about. I must add that I wrote to
Dr. Mehta, asking him to advance the monthly sum to my brother’s
wife. If he has commenced to do so, £10 extra need not be sent to
Khushalbhai.
I implore Mrs. Gandhi not to be anxious about me. She will
help me to keep better by looking after her own health. And the secret
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

413

of it is in sticking to the dietary prescribed for her.
With much love to you all,
Yours very sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

[PS.]
This should be read by all and be sent to Miss Schlesin wherever
she may be. Remember me to Mr. Kotwal when you write to him. I
hope Lalchand is helping. How is he keeping and the little baby?
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5913

273. SPEECH AT JOHANNESBURG1
JOHANNESBURG ,

December 18, 1913
Speaking at a meeting at the old Gaiety Theatre, Mr. Gandhi said he was not
the least thankful for having been released, for he preferred solitude and the peace of
prison because it gave him opportunity and time for meditation; but, having been
released, he should now resume the work upon which he was engaged when he was
convicted. For himself he was not satisfied with the Indian Commission appointed by
the Government.2 He was uncertain whether it would be effectual, and whether it would
be in the interests of the Indian population that he and others should give evidence
before it. However, it had been decided that he and Messrs Polak and Kallenbach
should proceed to Durban in the morning, and when there they would decide whether
they would accept the Commission as it was at present constituted. He was not at all
satisfied, and rather than have a weighted or packed Commission which would
militate against the welfare of the Indian community in South Africa, he would prefer

1

An “Indian Inquiry Commission” was set up by the Union Government on
December 11, to inquire into the causes of the strike and the disturbances in
connection with it. On the Commission’s recommendation, Gandhiji, Polak and
Kallenbach were brought to Pretoria and released unconditionally on December 18.
They were accorded a reception on reaching Johannesburg in the evening.
2
The Commission’s personnel consisted of Sir William Solomon as Chairman, Ewald Esselen, K.C. and J.S. Wylie, K. C. For the official view of the situation
and policy in regard to the Commission, vide Governor-General’s Cable to Colonial
Office”, 1-12-1913.

414

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to go back to prison and allow the Indian cause to stand upon its own merits. He
would not positively say at the present time that he would not give evidence, but his
inclinations were that way as the Commission was loaded against them. His prison
experience, just over, had been a change from that he had undergone on a previous
occasion. He had been treated with the utmost courtesy, and he would like publicly to
record the excellent manner in which the prison officials had considered his comfort.1

Indian Opinion, 24-12-1913

274. SPEECH AT DURBAN2
DURBAN,

December 20, 1913
Mr. Gandhi intimated to the audience that they were on the eve of a most
momentous decision, and that he proposed to take a vote of their considered views at
a mass meeting to be held on the morrow. He indicated that the question that they
would be called upon to decide was whether they could in honour tender evidence to a
Commission which had been constituted without any reference to Indian wishes or
opinion, and also whether the personnel of that Commission could be regarded as fair
and impartial.

Indian Opinion, 24-12-1913

1

After Gandhiji, Polak, Kallenbach and William Hosken addressed the
meeting, it was unanimously resolved not to tender evidence before the Commission
as then constituted.
2
On reaching Durban station, Gandhiji, Polak and Kallenbach were garlanded
and taken in a procession to the office of the Natal Indian Congress where they
addressed the gathering.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

415

275. INTERVIEW TO “THE NATAL MERCURY”
[DURBAN,

December 20, 1913]
Interviewed by a Mercury representative, Mr. Gandhi said that at the meeting
which followed his arrival with Mr. Kallenbach and Mr. Polak, thanks were expressed
for the reception accorded them. His release, he added, was a surprise, and only when
he was out of the prison did he learn that his release was due to a recommendation of
the members of the Commission.

We feel that our release throws a great responsibility upon our
shoulders, and, on learning how the Commission is constituted, I feel
that the fundamental fraud is that the Indian community was not
consulted as to the nomination of the members. The spirit of the
whole passive resistance struggle since 1907 has been that, in matters
affecting the community, the Government should consult its opinion
and sentiments. This the Government, apparently, have not done
regarding the Commission, and therefore1 there is objection to its
nomination of itself.
With reference to Mr. Esselen and Col. Wylie, Mr. Gandhi said he had the
pleasantest recollections of both gentlemen, and had not the slightest doubt that they
would discharge their duties on the Commission conscientiously, but he could not
credit them with the superhuman qualities of divesting themselves of their
anti-Asiatic views, which they were known to so profoundly hold. Now that they had
been nominated members of the Commission, he would not object to their
appointment, but it was due to the Indian community, he added, that the influence
they might have on the findings should be counter-balanced by appointments from
the European nationality known to possess no anti-Asiatic bias.

Unless the Government accede to this reasonable request, it is
not possible for us to accept this Commission or assist its
deliberations. Unless the submission be accepted, we have decided not
to give any evidence before them, and we shall resume activities in
order to seek re-arrest and re-imprisonment.
The Natal Mercury, 22-12-1913
1

416

The original has “thereto”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

276. SPEECH AT MASS MEETING1
[DURBAN

December 21, 1913]
Mr. Gandhi was received with cheers on rising and a bunch of flowers was
placed in his hand by one of those near the platform. He mentioned that he would
have preferred to speak first in one of the Indian tongues, but in the presence of
Messrs Polak and Kallenbach, his fellow-convicts, feelings of gratitude compelled
him to speak first in the tongue they knew. They would notice he had changed his
dress from that he had formerly adopted for the last 20 years, and he had decided on the
change when he heard of the shooting of their fellow-countrymen. No matter whether
the shooting was found to be justified or not, the fact was that they were shot, and
those bullets shot him (Mr. Gandhi) through the heart also. He felt how glorious it
would have been if one of those bullets had struck him also, because might he not be a
murderer himself, by having participated in that event by having advised
Indians to strike? His conscience cleared him from this guilt of murder, but he felt he
should adopt mourning for those Indians as a humble example to his fellow
countrymen. He felt that he should go into mourning at least for a period, which
should be co-extensive with the end of that struggle, and that he should accept some
mourning not only inwardly, but outwardly as well, as a humble example
to his fellow-countrymen, so that he could tell them that it was necessary for them to
show by their conduct and outward appearance that they were in mourning. He was not
prepared himself to accept the European mourning dress for this purpose, and, with
some modification in deference to the feelings of his European friends, he had adopted
the dress similar to that of an indentured Indian. He asked his fellow-countrymen to
adopt some sign of mourning to show to the world that they were mourning, and
further to adopt some inward observance also. And perhaps he might tell them what
his inward mourning was—to restrict himself to one meal a day. They had been
released, he continued, not on any condition, but they knew that they were released
on the recommendation of a Commission appointed by the Government, in order that
every facility might be given not only to them, but to the Indian community, to
bring before the Commission any evidence that community might have in its
possession. He thought that a right and proper thing that the Government had
appointed a Commission, but he thought the Commission was open to the gravest
objection from the Indian standpoint; and he was there to tender his humble advice to
1
Gandhiji addressed a mass meeting held under the auspices of the Natal
Indian Association, attended by about six to seven thousand persons including some
prominent Europeans. Abdul Kadir presided.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

417

them that it was impossible to accept the Commission in a form in which the Indians
had no voice. They were fighting for so many grievances, and the underlying spirit of
the struggle was to obtain full recognition on the part of the Government of the right
of consultation in anything which appertained to Indian interests. Unless the
Government was prepared to condescend to that extent, unless they were prepared to
ascertain and respect the Indian sentiments, it was not possible for Indians, as loyal
but manly citizens of the Empire, to render obedience to their Commissions or laws
which they might have passed over their heads. This was one of the serious
fundamental objections. The other objection was that it was a partisan Commission;
therefore, the Indians wanted their own partisans on it. This they might not get, but
they at least wanted impartial men, who had not expressed opinions hostile to their
interests, but gentlemen who would be able to bring to the deliberations of the
Commission an open, just and impartial mind. (Applause.) He considered that Mr.
Esselen and Mr. Wylie, honourable gentlemen as they were, could not possibly bring
open minds to bear on the inquiry, for the simple reason that they had their own
human limitations and could not divest themselves of their anti Asiatic views which
they had expressed times without number. If the Government appointed the Indians’
nominees, and thus honoured their sentiments, and granted a release for the prisoners
now in gaol, he thought it would be possible for them to assist the Government, and
therefore, the Empire, and bring, perhaps, this crisis to an end without further
suffering.
But it might be that they might have to undergo further suffering. It might be
that their sins were so great that they might have to do still further
penance.

Therefore, I hope you will hold yourselves in readiness to respond to the call the Government may make by declining our just and
reasonable requests, and then, to again force the pace by again
undergoing still greater purifying suffering, until at last the
Government may order the military to riddle us also with their bullets.
My friends, are you prepared for this? (Voices: “Yes.”) Are you
prepared to share the fate of those of our countrymen whom the cold
stone is resting upon today? Are you prepared to do this? (Cries of
“Yes.”) Then, if the Government does not grant our request, this is
the proposition I wish to place before you this morning: That all of us,
on the first day of the New Year, should be ready again to suffer
battle, again to suffer imprisonment and march out. (Applause.) That
is the only process of purification and will be a substantial mourning
both inwardly and outwardly which will bear justification before our
418

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

God. That is the advice we give to our free and indentured
countrymen—to strike, and even though this may mean death to them,
I am sure it will be justified.
But if they accepted the quiet life, he went on, not only would the wrath of God
descend upon them, but they would incur the disgrace of the whole of that portion of
the European world forming the British Empire. (Applause.) He hoped that every man,
woman, and grown-up child would hold themselves in readiness to do this. He hoped
they would not consider self, that they would not consider their salaries, trades, or
even families, their own bodies in the struggle which was to his mind a struggle for
human liberty, and therefore, a struggle for the religion to which they might
respectively belong. It was essentially a religious struggle—(hear, hear)—as any
struggle involving assertion and freedom of their conscience must be a religious
struggle. He therefore hoped they would hold themselves in readiness to respond to
the call and not listen to the advice of those who wavered, nor listen to those who
asked them to wait or to those who might ask them to refrain from the battle. The
struggle was one involving quite a clear issue, and an incredibly simple one.

Do not listen to anyone, but obey your own conscience and go
forward without thinking. Now is the time for thinking, and having
made up your minds, stick to it, even unto death.1
THE R ESOLUTIONS 2

(1) This mass meeting of British Indians of Natal, held under the
auspices of the Natal Indian Association, hereby resolves that
the community may not, in honour, give evidence before the
Commission recently appointed by the Government because the
community has not been consulted as to the choice of the members of
the Commission, and because it does not include any members
specially representing the community, whose interests are to be vitally
affected by the finding of the Commission.
(2) This meeting respectfully urges the Government to add to the
membership the Hon. Mr. W. P. Schreiner and the Hon. Sir James
Rose-Innes, or such other eminent members of the European race
residing in South Africa whose nomination would be acceptable to the
South African Indian community.
1
The meeting was then addressed by Kallenbach, Polak, Ritch and Rev.
Bailie, Superintendent of the Indian Mission, Natal.
2
The resolutions adopted were presumably drafted by Gandhiji.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

419

(3) This mass meeting, in the event of the Government’s accepting
the Indian view that the personnel of the Commission should be added
to for the purpose of securing adequate representation of all interests
involved in its inquiry, also requests the immediate discharge of all the
passive resistance prisoners presently in gaol, and, on its part, the
Indian community undertakes to suspend passive resistance until the
publication of the findings of the Commission. In the unfortunate
event, however, of the Government’s refusal to comply with its
respectful requests, the community will be obliged at once to
prosecute the struggle with renewed vigour and determination.
The Natal Mercury, 22-12-1913

277. LETTER TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR1
[DURBAN

December 21, 1913]
SIR,

We understand from the papers that our release from imprisonment, before the natural period of the respective terms to which we
were sentenced, was due to the recommendation of the members of
the Commission which has been recently appointed to investigate the
causes that led up to the strike of indentured and other Indians in
Natal and other Indian matters. We fully appreciate the reasons which
moved the Commissioners to make the recommendation, and the
Government’s acceptance thereof, and we are desirous of helping the
Commission to investigate the causes. We beg to express our
gratefulness for the appointment of a Commission for the purpose
above indicated, but we are reluctantly obliged to inform the
Government that we shall be unable to render the assistance which it is
in our power to do, unless the objections presently to be set forth are
met by the Government. We have ascertained that the Indian
community of South Africa has not been given the opportunity of
1

420

A gist of this letter appears in Satyagraha in South Africa, Ch. XLVlI.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

making any nomination on its behalf to the membership of the
Commission. We may point out that the spirit of the passive resistance
struggle, ever since its commencement in 1907, has been to secure a
recognition from the Government of the fact that, in matters touching
the community, it is necessary to consult and respect its wishes and
sentiments before it can be expected to give willing obedience to or
acceptance of laws or matters affecting the vital interests of the
community. We feel that it was a grave omission on the part of the
Government, in selecting the Commissioners, not to have given an
opportunity to the Indian community of submitting for appointment
on the Commission two names of gentlemen of known South African
standing who, in its opinion, could have guarded and specially
represented its interests. This, in our humble opinion, is a fatal and
fundamental objection to the acceptance by the Indian community of
the Commission.
Moreover, we observe that the appointment of Mr. Ewald
Esselen, K.C., and Col. Wylie shows that the Government, for reasons
best known to itself, intended to give the commission a partisan
character, for it is within our knowledge that Mr. Esselen has
expressed anti-Asiatic views in very strong language, and that Col.
Wylie has not only done likewise, but has even recently given his
opinion that the £3 tax levied on ex-indentured Indians should be
retained. Again, the acts of the military in connection with the strike
will be before the Commission for investigation. We hold that Col.
Wylie, by reason of his prominent connection with the military, is
naturally an interested party. Against Mr. Esselen and Col. Wylie, as
South African statesmen, we can have nothing to say. The first
undersigned has pleasant recollections of his professional connection
with both Mr. Esselen and Col. Wylie; and of Col. Wylie when he
served under him during the late Zulu rebellion as sergeant-major in
charge of the Indian Volunteer Ambulance Corps, that was formed, 1
and whose services were offered during that crisis to the Government;
and we have no doubt that, in so far as they could, they would
endeavour to sit as impartial judges on the Commission, but we cannot
help fearing that they share the common human failing of not being
1

Vide “Indian Ambulance Corps in Natal”, 14-3-1900.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

421

able to divest themselves entirely of their bias. Much, however, as we
regret the appointment on the Commission of these gentlemen, we do
not propose to raise any objection to their nomination; but, in order
to counter-balance the effect that their bias may have on the finding
of the Commission, we submit that it is absolutely necessary to appoint
gentlemen of South African standing, known to possess no anti-Asiatic bias, on the Commission, and, as such, we venture to suggest the
names of the Hon. Sir James Rose-Innes and the Hon. W. P.
Schreiner.
Immediately on our release, without a moment’s delay, we
began to ascertain the feeling of the Indian community, and, to our
agreeable surprise, we found that the community had already
anticipated what would undoubtedly have been our humble advice to
it, that it had already sent strong protests to the Government against
the nominations, and had submitted to the Government the names
mentioned above. We found, too, that by way of further protest, 36
passive resisters, of whom five were women, had crossed the Volksrust
border from Natal, and had been arrested and received imprisonment.
In their statement to the Court, we understand, they informed the
presiding Magistrate that their object in courting arrest was to lodge a
respectful protest against the partisan character which had been given
to the Commission, and we found further that two other parties of
passive resisters had already left for Volksrust for the same purpose.
Our position, therefore, was easy and clear. A mass meeting was
called to-day by the Natal Indian Association. We were invited to attend that meeting, and all that we had to do was to tender our advice that
the protest that had already been sent should be ratified by that meeting, and this, we are glad to be able to say, was done. We hope and
pray that the Government will be pleased to accede to the submission
and nominate on the Commission the gentlemen whose names have
been proposed by the meeting.
If the nomination is accepted, we beg to state that, before we can
tender our evidence to the Commission and advise the community to
offer the overwhelming evidence which is in its possession, it will be
necessary to release the passive resisters who are presently undergoing
imprisonment, whether in the ordinary gaols or in mining compounds
422

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

which have been turned into gaols. We hope that the Government will
recognize the force of this prayer, for it would ill become us to remain
free whilst those who have courted imprisonment partly through our
advice are still under incarceration, and it would be hardly possible for
us to advise other passive resisters to refrain, pending the inquiry by
the Commission, from courting imprisonment whilst their brethren
and sisters are suffering the hardships of gaol life.
If the additional appointments suggested above are made, and if
our request as to the release of the passive resistance prisoners is accepted, we would advise the community to suspend passive resistance
pending the Commission’s finding. Further, if we are enabled by the
Government’s accepting our suggestions to tender evidence before
the Commission, we and other members of the community will have to
have full and free permission to enter the different estates and collieries where Indians are employed, in order to collect evidence, and for
the purpose of advising the people to continue to work under their
contracts, pending the investigation.
We take it that the Commission has sufficient powers to investigate all the grievances that have caused the revival of passive resistance
as set forth in Mr. Gokhale’s letter, and to make its recommendations
to the Government.
Finally, we beg to place on record the advice that we have tendered to the community, that, whilst the finding of the Commission—
enlarged in the manner suggested—will finally settle the dispute as to
the allegations of ill-treatment of workers and others and the acts of
the military, its recommendations on the grievances, whose redress is
being sought, will not be accepted by the community in derogation of
its demands. If, unfortunately, the Government does not see its way to
accept our prayer, there will be no course left open to us but to seek
re-imprisonment. We, as passive resisters, can never rest still, having
been discharged before the termination of our terms of imprisonment.
We beg to reiterate the declaration we have often made that, as
passive resisters, we countenance no violence, even by way of retaliation, on the part of those who take part in the movement, whether as
strikers or otherwise. We have repeatedly given effective advice, which
has been acted upon, to the effect that passive resisters must submit to
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

423

personal violence in the course of their passive resistance, even though
such violence may entail death. It becomes necessary for us to
re-declare the above view, as after our incarceration, we observe that it
has been alleged that, on some estates, strikers used violence.
The last two undersigned, as Europeans, desire to assure the
Government that, in throwing in their lot with their fellow–South
African Indian subjects, they have but rendered service to the State
and to their fellow-Europeans. They have done so after very careful
investigation, and their intimate experience of Indians of every grade
has enabled them to see that the grievances of which the Indian
community is seeking redress are grievances which are keenly felt by
it, and for whose redress it has patiently waited for an unduly long
time. It is because we firmly believe that to delay in granting the
demands of the Indian community endangers the reputation of the
Europeans of South Africa as members of a civilized race worthy of
self-government, that we have so fully identified ourselves with their
cause, and we ask the Government during this season, which for it
means, or ought to mean, peace for all living in South Africa, to give
the community an earnest of its desire to redress its legitimate
grievances by accepting this prayer.
We have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servants,

M. K. GANDHI
H. S. L. P OLAK
H. K ALLENBACH

[PS.]
May we request an early reply, as our dispositions are to be
made by New Year’s Day, in the event of an unfavourable reply.1
Indian Opinion, 24-12-1913

1

In his letter of December 24, the Minister Of the Interior rejected Gandhiji’s
terms. The Governor-General’s despatches of December 22 and 23 to the Colonial
Office furnish the Union Government’s reactions to Gandhiji’s demands. Vide
“Governor-General’s Cable to Colonial Office”, 1-12-1913.

424

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

278. SPEECH AT MARITZBURG MEETING1
MARITZBURG,

[December 22, 1913]
Mr. Gandhi rather rebuked the decorators, urging that the present was rather a
time for mourning for the blood of their fellow-countrymen which had been spilt,
rather than for receptions and rejoicings. He thanked them, however, for their
kindness. He urged the men to show their sympathy by discarding the useof tobacco,
betel-leaves, and other luxuries, and felt that the women might lay aside their fine
dresses and jewels in this time of mourning.2

The Natal Mercury, 23-12-1913

279. SPEECH ON KASTURBA GANDHI’S RELEASE
MARITZBURG,

[December 22, 1913]
This is a very sad time for us. We can have no joy in gatherings
and celebrations. All the same, I give thanks to you, on behalf of my
wife and the other ladies, for the welcome you have accorded them.
My brethren have lost their lives, killed by bullets, and I feel
extremely sad, at a time like this, in taking part in this reception even
to the extent that I have done. In gaol, I was free from all anxieties.
This crying3 is perfectly suggestive of our mourning. My Indian
brothers and sisters can at this time express their sincere sympathy
with the helpless widows and orphans by themselves observing
mourning in various ways. Men can leave off tobacco, betel-leaves
1

On the release of Kasturba Gandhi, Mrs. Chhaganlal Gandhi, Mrs. Manilal
Doctor, Mrs. Maganlal Gandhi and Solomon Royeppen from Maritzburg Gaol, a
procession was taken out which terminated in a reception meeting. Gandhiji addressed
the audience on behalf of the released passive resisters. For a report of his speech in
Gujarati, vide the following item.
2
Speeches were also made by Kallenbach, L. H. Greene and Mrs. Polak.
Shortly after, a mass meeting was held.
3
Gandhiji was referring to a weeping child in the audience.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

425

and betel-nut; women may lay aside ornaments and fine dresses.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 24-12-1913

280. SPEECH AT MARITZBURG MASS MEETING
MARITZBURG,

[December 22, 1913]
[Gandhiji] explained the resolutions passed at the Durban mass meeting on
Sunday. Passive resistance, he said, was a harmless search for truth, and he appealed
to every Indian present to be prepared to die, if need be, for the truth.1

The Natal Mercury, 23-12-1913

281. CABLE TO G. K. GOKHALE2
DURBAN,

December 22, 1913
HON ’BLE GOKHALE
S ERVINDIA
P OONA C ITY
WE

WERE

DISCHARGED

RECOMMENDATION

UNCONDITIONALLY

COMMISSION

STOP

HAVE

THURSDAY
ADDRESSED

ON
JOINT

1

P. K. Naidoo then moved the resolution endorsing the resolutions passed at
the Durban mass meeting, which was passed.
2
Gokhale had received Reuter’s summary of a report of Gandhiji’s interview
to The Natal Mercury, vide “Interview to the Natal Mercury”, 20-12-1913. The
following cable was received from Gokhale at 10 p.m. on December 21: “Reuter
cables substance your interview. After Solomon’s speech fear boycotting inquiry will
be grave mistake, alienating sympathy Government of India and many friends
England. Engage best counsel and yourself Polak assist offering evidence. Inquiry
does not concern general grievances passive resisters but it is most important,
opportunity offered producing evidence support allegations cruelties should not be
refused. I venture suggest draw up protest against Esselen and Wylie, explaining fully
objection to both and appear under protest.”

426

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

LETTER1
BY

GOVERNMENT

EVIDENCE

MATTERS

UNLESS

AFFECTING

COMMISSION

THOUSAND
MINE

SUSPEND
STOP

GAOLS

HAVE

ALSO

ALL

SETTLE

GRIEVANCES

BY
IF

IF

COMMUNITY.
PRAYER

STILL

MORE

MEETING

HAVE

REJECTED

RIGOROUS

TO-DAY

ABOVE

ADVICE

FORMED

EVENT

IN

HOLD

READINESS

DURBAN
IN

TO

BULLETS
STOP

ING

AND

CHURCH

HAVE

EN

SENTATIVE
GREAT

INDIANS

AND

DISCOVERED
SHOWN
WERE

OUR

STAGGERED

1
2

RESISTERS

DEMANDS

SET

FOR

MEETING
PEOPLE

MUST

RATIONS

FROM
TAXING

WARNED

EXPECT

READINESS

UNDER

INDIVIDUAL
COMMISSION

DURBAN

WE

STATIONS.

COMMISSION
LARGE

ENDURANCE
ABILITY

IN-

ANTICIPATE

MEETING

PEOPLE

POWERS

MASS

CONFIRMED

ACCLAMATIONS

REPLY

PRINCIPAL
PRESENT

ADVISE

STOP

STOP

REARREST.

THAT

AND

THOUSAND

STARVATION

TO

ACCEPTED

GOVERNMENT

UNANIMOUS

PRESENT

PRETORIA

UNLOOKED

BE

CAMPAIGN

INFLUENTIAL

ALL

NOT

REARREST

SIX

DECLARATIONS

RELEASE

UNEXPECTED

ON

WILL

STOP

WILL

FINDING

SEEK

SEEKING

DISAPPROVAL

MILITARY

ANY

RESOLUTIONS

REJECTION

FROM

ACTS

INFORMED

FOOT

COUNSELS,

SUPPORTED
TRAVEL

FINDING

ABOUT

ROUTE

TOOK

INCLUDE

WHILST

UNFAVOURABLE

PRETORIA

THOUSANDS

SHOULD

PROSECUTION

MARCH

ADVISE

COMMISSION

THAT

PASSIVE

CENTRES

ORDINARY

FINDING

AND

SHALL

NEARLY

IN

UNDERTAKING

THEREON.

PASSED

OTHER

UNLESS

IM-

INQUIRY

SEPTEMBER

ATTENDED

STOPTRANSVAAL

AND

AND

FURTHER
WE

SCHREINER

EQUALLY

PRISONERS

THEN

BRUTALITY

LETTER2

CHARACTER

APPOINTMENT

SCOPE

DEROGATORY

CACHALIA’S

CONSULTED

OTHERS

PENDING

CONTROVERSY

BE

PARTISAN

BY

WE

GRIEVANCES

ALLEGATIONS

FINALLY

FORTH

STATED

ALL

COMMISSION

OR

RESISTANCE

RESISTANCE

TO

AND

COMMUNITY

RELEASED.

PASSIVE

EXAMINATION
ON

BY
PASSIVE

ASSIST

RIGHT

RECOGNIZED

ROSE-INNES

APPROVED

FOUR

COMMUNITY

IT

JUDGE

PARTIAL

UNABLE

COUNTER-BALANCED

APPELLATE

AND

INFORMING

OATH

EUROPEANS
STOP

DUR-

MET

REPRE-

ENTHUSIASM

UNIVERSAL

STOP

NUMBERS

HAD

SUFFERINGS.
INDENTURED

WE

INDIANS

Vide “Letter to Minister of Interior”, 21-12-1913.
Vide “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 12-9-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

427

WITHOUT

EFFECTIVE

TION

DISCIPLINE

DIATE

VIGOROUS

LEADERSHIP

DETERMINATION

ACTING
STOP

PERFECT
ASK

INDIANS

COOPERAIMME-

CO-OPERATION. 1

GANDHI
KALLENBACH
P OLAK
Servants of India Society

282. LETTER TO “THE NATAL ADVERTISER”2
[After December 22, 1913] 3
Having known most of these passive resisters for a number of
years and come into close contact with them, I can say that they
are not the men to make baseless allegations. Mr. Rustomjee, an old
and respected resident of South Africa, was also in this batch. He took
a leading part in the previous campaigns and had experience of the
gaols in Volksrust, Heidelberg, Diepkloof and Johannesburg. This
time, on being sentenced at Volksrust, he was brought to the
Pietermaritzburg Gaol and later removed to the Durban Gaol. He had
a taste of the Maritzburg Gaol, but his experience in the Durban Gaol,
he tells me, was the worst.
Mr. Rustomjee declares, and he is supported by other passive
resisters, that the Native warders used to assault them, with no fear of
1

To this cable Gokhale replied the next day: “Since release unconditional,
most important Polak should proceed England immediately with fullest information
regarding whole position and occurrences. Absolutely essential keep Press England
well-informed. Parliament opening 2nd February. Ramsay MacDonald taking up
question specially system indenture and methods adopted suppress strike.” Vide also
“Cable to G. K. Gokhale”, 31-12-1913.
2
The Natal Advertiser did not publish this letter on the ground that a
Commission of Inquiry had been appointed. Later, it was translated into Gujarati for
the readers of Indian Opinion. The original is not available. This is an English
rendering.
3
Parsee Rustomjee and other passive resisters referred to in the letter were
released on December 22, 1913.

428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

consequences. One, Mr. P. K. Desai, was assaulted so violently that the
blow sent him reeling to the ground and from there he was dragged to
his cell. The treatment of the injuries kept him in the hospital for
eleven days. Mr. Rustomjee and his fellow-prisoners had to resort to a
fast to secure him [permission to wear] his shirt and sacred thread. A
good Parsi will not move a single step in the absence of these two
things. Mr. Rustomjee was also assaulted twice by Native warders. The
matter was brought to the notice of the superintendent, but to no
purpose. A youngster was beaten for standing out of line.
On one occasion, several passive resisters went on a fast to
register a strong protest against such treatment. At the end of four
days of complete fasting, the boy referred to above was forcibly fed
while he kept shrieking in protest all the time. Even the prison doctor
in charge is reported to have condemned this display of barbarism
and stated that he did not accept responsibility for the forcible
feeding. The fact that the prisoner was a vegetarian was ignored: the
milk which was fed to him was mixed with eggs.
The prisoners were supplied dirty clothes which could be a
menace to their health. The food was poor and was served, halfcooked, in rusted tin bowls, and the prisoners report that in
consequence many of them got dysentery. Some are troubled by it
even now in gaol. Cockroaches and insects were found in the food,
and, when the matter was reported to the officer, his reply was that a
prison was no hotel and that even in a hotel one found insects in food.
Most of the passive resisters were men of good education.
Though well used to reading, they were not given books to read from
the prison libraries nor permitted to read any of their own.
Despite protests, all the gaol officers, from the highest to the
lowest, used to address the passive resisters as “coolies”. The more
they resented this, the more obstinate the officers became. They [also]
report that the present doctor pays no attention to their health. During
these three months, the magistrate visited the gaol only once. He did
not listen to the complaints of the prisoners. Indian prisoners are
generally allowed sandals and socks. In this gaol most of them did not
get these; even women were not given any. Quite often the prisoners
were supplied only one blanket each, and that a torn one. They were
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

429

refused permission to see their lawyers and were not even allowed to
write to the Director of Prisons.
All this is but a brief summary of the tales of suffering I have
heard from my countrymen. The affidavits to be submitted to the
Government on this matter are under preparation. This is, however,
quite a serious matter and calls for public attention. There is no
exaggeration whatever in what I am reporting and you are free to
show this to the officers concerned before publishing it. Mr.
Rustomjee and his fellow-prisoners ask for nothing but a full, fearless,
independent and impartial discussion, and demand an lnquiry.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 7-1-1914

283. CABLE TO G. K. GOKHALE
DURBAN,

December 23, 1913
S ERVANTS OF INDIA S OCIETY
P OONA
BEEN

MARITZBURG

TERDAY’S
SION

UNLESS

PRISONERS
WILL
CEPT

NOT

LISTEN

EXPIRATION

SENTENCES.

RESPECTABLE

MENT

BARBAROUS,

MANY

PRISONS

430

TO

COMMISSION,

RELEASE

ACCEPTANCE

COMMISSION

THEY

DESPERATE,

ENTHUSIASTIC.

ARE

COMMISSION

GRIEVANCES.

AND

SIXTEEN

RUSTOMJEE

FOUR

RUSTOMJEE

OTHERS

CRUEL.

COMMUNITY
RUSTOMJEE

PREVIOUS

INCLUDE
LETTER

ASKS

LADIES

FOR

IT

IF

PASSIVE

DISCHARGED

WHO
STATE

EXTHO-

OUR

PIONEER

WHO

LONG

THEY

SEEMS

ANYWAY

EXAMINATION

INCORRECT.

YES-

COMMIS-

ADVICE

MEMBERS

DURING

ENDORSED
ACCEPT

EARNEST

SUCH

INCLUDING

MOST

ADDING

GOVERNMENT.

INCLUSION

MEETING

IMPOSSIBLE

PEOPLE

GENERAL

INTERPRETATION

RESISTERS

MASS

CONDITIONS.

DISTRUST

EXAMINATION

OUR

SUGGESTION

ABOVE

ROUGHLY

AT

RESOLUTIONS.

ACCEPTED.

ON

ASSUMES

WHICH

DURBAN

ARE
PRISON

HAS

AMONG
TREAT-

EXPERIENCE

IMPRISONMENTS

SAYS

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

PRESENT

TREATMENT

INCRUELTY.

DURBAN

MAGISTRATE

RECEIVE

INDIFFERENT

COMPLAINTS,

BEFORE

HUNGER

STRIKE,
DECLINE

CRUEL,

UNWARRANTABLY
IMPUNITY.

WAS

WITHOUT

FALL,

WAS

CAUSE

THEN

CONSIDERABLE
REQUIRED

BEFORE

STUDENT

SIXTEEN

YEARS

MANILAL

GANDHI

OTHERS

ROUGHLY

HANDLED,

REPEATED

PROTESTS

SOME

DEPRIVED

WASHED

TO

ASKING

ISSUED.

AND
SCHOOL

RUSTOMJEE,

YOU

COOLIES

RECEIVED

ON

CLOTHING

AGONY

PHOENIX

ASSAULTED.

CALLED

NOT

HIM

IN

ATTENTION

KNOWN

INSULTED,
MANY

KNOW,

MAKING

TREATMENT.

ROUGHLY

RESISTERS
YOU

LYING

RECEIVING

ALL

SANDALS

GAOL

CELL

HOSPITAL

WARDERS

PASSIVE

ASSAULTED

TO

STUDIOUSLY

NATIVE

WHOM

ROUGHLY

DAYS,

RUFFIANLY

THRASH

PRISON

UNAPPROACHABLE.

COMPLAINTS,

DESAI,

DRAGGED

TIME

ELEVEN

RUDE,

TAKE

PRAGJI

VISITS

ALMOST

WARDERS

THEY

UNPARALLELED

RARELY

GOVERNOR

INSULTING.

WITH

PRISON

KICKED,
IN

SPITE

SANDALS,

SOCKS.

PROTESTS

SOCKS,

DIRTY

UN-

AGAINST

SUCH

DIRTY DANGEROUSLY INSANITARY HABIT UNHEEDED ANDJEERED AT. GAOL
LIBRARY
FROM

BOOKS
TAKING

THEIR

CONTINUOUSLY

DURBAN
IN

PROTEST

THEM

EGGS.

WHICH

HOURS.

BURG

FOR

THEY
THREE

RUSTOMJEE’S

SENSATION.

1

DURING

STRIKE

HAD
DAYS

ALSO
1

OF

STILL

WAY
HUNGER

DAY
FED

ONE

WITH

TILL

.

STRIKE

RATIONING

RELIEF

ASKED

AFTER
IN

GHEE

GRIEVANCES

HAS

RESISTERS

SHOW

OF
MILK

PROMISING

PRISONERS

IN

MAGGOTS
BY

MANY

GAOLER

HUNGER

PASSIVE

CAUSING

ARE

FOURTH

SEEN

BEFORE

STATEMENT

DISCHARGED

ISSUED

REPLACED.

FORCIBLY

BY

NOT

GHEE

COCKROACHES,

DAYS.

RELIGION

PANNIKINS

QUALITY,

WHO

NOT

DISSOLVED

WAS

RUSTY

ILL-TREATMENT

FOUR

BY

CAME.

WHO

FOUR

SUED.

SUCH

STRIKE

NEVER

GOVERNOR

FOOD

PREVENTED

BEANS

LADIES

SUFFERING.

YET

LASTED

VEGETARIAN

AND

DISHES,

INFERIOR

SOME

ARE

FOOD,

FAST

RUSTY

UNDER-COOKED

WHICH

AGAINST

STRUCK.

ISSUED,

FOOD

OFTEN
FROM

GAOL

FOUND

OWN.

ISSUED.

ADULTERATED.
DYSENTERY,

NOT

SEE

TWENTY
MARITZWAS

IS-

CREATED
FIXED

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

431

DETERMINATION
SARY.

COURT

PREPARING

RE-ARREST

AFFIDAVITS

IMMEDIATELY,

SUBMISSION

IF

NECES-

GOVERNMENT.

RE-

INQUIRY.1

QUESTING

GANDHI
Servants of India Society

284. CABLE TO G. K. GOKHALE2
DURBAN,

December 23, 1913
S ERVANTS OF INDIA S OCIETY
P OONA
WE

NEVER

PROMPTEST

WENT

GOVERNMENT
HENDS

SAYS

INDIANS;
AGITATION

PURPOSE

GREAT

EFFORTS

TROLLABLE

NOT

CARRIED

BEING

PROPORTIONS.

MY

MISAPPRE-

PUBLISHED

TO-

CONCILIATE

LOCAL

GOVERNMENTS.

THAT

AT

BY
IS

VICEROY

INDIAN

DICTATION

INDIAN

MADE

WHICH

UNLESS
DEMANDS

APPOINTED
ON

EMBARRASSING

AGITATION

STOP

STOP
OUR

TELEGRAM 3

INSPIRED
IMPERIAL

FICTITIOUS

INDIA
CREDIT

ONLY

MINISTERS

SUPPORTING

UNLIKELY

STOP

COMMISSION

BUT

SEE

INDIAN

ACCEDING

SITUATION

DAY

PRETORIA

AGITATION

LOCAL
ASSUMING

FIRM

EXTREMISTS

GOVERNMENT

STOP

GOVERNMENT
ALMOST

CONVICTION

THAT

DIS-

UNCONMASS

1

An abstract of this cable was released to the Press and appeared in lndian
Opinion, 29-10-1913.
2
This was sent in reply to two cables from Gokhale: The first, received at 9
A.M., read: “Powerful attempts here separate Viceroy from us. These greatly assisted
by Reuter’s partisan cables. Cannot counteract unless you reply promptly. Cable
urgent some length your objection Esselen Wylie mentioning specific instances
anti-Indian conduct.” The second, which reached Durban two hours later, said: “Your
last evening’s cable just received. Reuter reported you had proceeded Pretoria see
Ministers. Cable what happened. Cable also what probability Government conceding
demands Sunday meeting. Viceroy feels strongly inquiry secured after great efforts.
Desirable satisfy him your reasons boycotting good. Cable therefore urgent
objections Esselen Wylie. Must issue statement today. Country anxiously waiting.”
3
Vide the following item.

432

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

PEOPLE
ASK

SO

INDIGNANT

THEM

LEADERS.
FROM

ACCEPT

STRONG

MOST

DEMANDED
REQUIRED

PROTESTS

CENTRES

NOT
WYLIE

WERE

TACT

EVEN

IF

RECOGNITION

RIGHT

WAIVED

THIS

TANCE

DIES.

PRIVATELY

RECENTLY

MEYLER

ON

IN

TICALLY

REALITY

UNION

NON-OFFICIAL
SAID

TAX

FORCE

MEMBER
OUGHT

WHOSE

ESTATE-OWNERS
NINETY-SIX,
COMMISSION,
NOT

GRANT

BE

WYLIE

SUBJECT

ADMITTEDLY

WE
IT

RELIEF

STOP

CAN

PRINT

IS

PATENT

BUT

GAIN

MAY

INQUIRY.

IS
LEGAL

ANTI-ASIATIC

PEOPLE
EVEN

SINK
IF

WE

AGITATION

COLONEL
ADVISER

MANY

BRINGING

MUST

COMMISSION

HAS

EIGHTEEN

SHIPS1

PRESENT

AS

DEFENCE

SINCE

EVIDENCE

HOODWINK

POLI-

DESCRIBED

INDIAN
TIME

HAS

ANTI-ASIATIC

RELATED

BE

DURING

REPEALED.

AND

ADVISED

INTIMATELY
HE

INDIANS.

ESSELEN

EMPHATICALLY

SO

THAT

ACTS

INDIANS

STOP

IS

MINISTRY.
NOT

WHEN

INDEPENDENT
CHARGES

HE

MINISTERS

RESIS-

ASSEMBLY

AGAINST

APPOINTMENT

PLATFORMS

MATTERS.

PASSIVE

MEMBER

OFFENSIVELY

ESSENCE

VITAL

STAGE,

IT

ACCEPT

APPOINTED.

MEYLER

PROTESTED

PUBLIC

MANY

WYLIE.

PEOPLE

CONSULTATION
CRITICAL

SPOKE

AND

ESSELEN

INDUCE

NOMINEES

KILL

GOVERNMENT

DISCHARGE

CALMNESS

MADE

WOULD

WITH

SUBSTITUTION

MOST

PUBLICLY

DECLARED
VIEWS.

ESSELEN

WERE

THEY

LODGED

OUR

IF

AT

ATTEMPT

OUR

BUT

STRUGGLE
RIGHT

IF

COMMISSION,

BEFORE

ADDITION

CONSIDERABLE

ESSELEN

THAT

PRESENT

BOYCOTT
SUPPORTING
DESIGNED

PUBLIC.

GANDHI
Servants of India Society

1
These were s.s. Courland and S. S. Naderi: for details of the anti-Indian
demonstration led, among others, by Col. Wylie, vide “Memorial to Secretary of
state for the colonies”, 15-3-1897.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

433

285. CABLE TO LORD AMPTHILL
DURBAN,

December 23, 1913
LORD AMPTHILL
INSPIRED

TELEGRAM

APPOINTED
INDIAN
ON

GOVERNMENTS

AT

DICTATION

INDIAN

TROLLABLE

THAT

AGITATION

GREAT

MADE

MASS

ADVISE

KILL

PEOPLE

PLE
TION.
VITAL
SIVE

EXPERIENCED

PRINCIPLES

STRUGGLE

MATTERS.

IF

RESISTANCE DIES

SUPPORTING
ACCEDING

OUR
RESULTING

RIGHT
STOP

CARRIED

MEMBERS

EMBARRASSING

MADE

GREATEST

ACCEPTANCE

PEO-

OF

RIGHT

WAIVED

CRITICAL

DEMANDS
UNTOLD

MISERY

LODGED

DISCHARGE.

INSTEAD

THIS

THAT

COMMISSION

PROTESTS

PROMPTEST

LOCAL
UNCON-

INDIGNANT

RECOGNITION
UNLESS

BY

PRESENT

STRONG

INDUCE

ADDITIONAL

ESSENCE

FICTITIOUS

SO

GOVERNMENT FROM MOST CENTRES BEFORE OUR
DIFFICULTY

IMPERIAL

ASSUMING

ACCEPTANCE

NOT

ONLY

PURPOSE
BEING

WHICH

LEADERS.

COMMISSION

BUT

INDIA

EFFORTS

AGITATION

PROPORTIONS.

WOULD

SAYS

INDIANS

DISCREDIT

ATTEMPT

THEY

TODAY

LOCAL
EXTREMISTS

GOVERNMENT.

GOVERNMENT
IF

PUBLISHED

CONCILIATE

SUBSTITU-

CONSULTATION
STAGE

AGITATION

UNLIKELY
HARDSHIPS

PAS-

ENGLAND

GOVERNMENT
DEATH.

GANDHI
P OLAK
R ITCH
KALLENBACH
Colonial Office Records: 551/52

434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

286. CABLE TO LORD AMPTHILL1
[DURBAN,

December 23, 1913] 2
VEREENIGING
SELVES

WITH

PASSIVE
AND

UNION

AND

INDIA

AT

ACTION

RESISTANCE

SISTERS

TRUST

INDIANS

NOW

AND

MEETING

INDIAN

WILL

IMPRISONMENT
GRANT

ASSOCIATED

ASSOCIATION

CONGRATULATED

SUFFERING

GOVERNMENT
WILL

PUBLIC

BRITISH

BRAVE
INDIA’S

RELIEF

THEM-

DETERMINED

AND

BROTHERS
HONOUR.
ENGLAND

HELP.

ASWATH
C HAIRMAN
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5902

287. LETTER TO “THE NATAL MERCURY”
110, FIELD S TREET,
DURBAN,

December 23, 1913
SIR,

I venture to suggest that, in your editorial this morning on the
resolutions passed at the mass meeting on Sunday and upon the letter
addressed to the Government by my colleagues and myself, you have
taken up an attitude that is hardly calculated to serve the Empire. You
see the mote in our eye, but you miss the beam in that of the
Government. I do not admit that the tone adopted by the speakers at
the mass meeting was aggressive or offensive, unless the mere
assertion of rights be so considered. In my humble opinion, the
1

A copy of this was sent to Immortal, Bombay.
The draft of the cable is undated. It is likely that it was drafted about the
same time as the preceding item; it is not known whether it was actually sent.
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

435

Government not only refuse to do justice, to which you consider we
are entitled, but the manner of denying it is also offensive and
contemptuous in the highest degree. Take the inspired telegram
published this morning. According to it, the Commission has been
appointed, not to conciliate us —we are beneath notice—but to
conciliate the Imperial and Indian Governments. We are accused of
being tools in the hands of the Indian extremists, and of nursing a
fictitious agitation. Do you think that, if you were in our place, you
would, under any circumstances whatever, take advantage of a
seemingly relieving measure? I submit that if we have a grain of
self-respect left in us, it is impossible for us, after learning the view of
the Government—if the telegram does represent it—to recede an inch
from the position which we have taken up. Peace for us is unattainable
until we dislodge the Government from the attitude of contemptuous
disregard of our sentiments.
In asking us to revise our prayer, you are asking us to surrender
a principle,. namely, that of the right to be consulted in matters vitally
affecting us, the very thing for which we have been fighting, and now
dying; whereas the Government, if they granted our prayer, would be
only giving what we are entitled to, and what would justify them in the
estimation of the civilized world.
You say that by its present attitude the Indian community is
alienating the sympathy of its South African friends. This warning has
been given to the community on many an occasion, and yet the truth
of its cause has each time succeeded, not only in retaining, but in
increasing it. It may be that we might, this time, have relied once too
often upon its retention. If so, I should be very sorry. I value that
sympathy, but I value the cause more, and if, in prosecuting it, we
must forfeit the former, we must be content for the time being, and
believe in the ultimate triumph of truth, which is on our side.
I am, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI

The Natal Mercury, 24-12-1913

436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

288. CABLE TO G. K. GOKHALE
DURBAN,

December 24, 1913
GOKHALE
S ERVINDIA
P OONA C ITY
UNDERSTAND
THAT

MIGHT

ROY,

HELP

IMPERIAL

DECLARATION
PEOPLE’S
IT

BE

TION

ANY

ACCEPT

MINISTERS

PERSISTS

MOST

ACCELERATE

ONE

OATH,
VICEROY

OR

HUMAN

BUT

REPUDIATION

WHETHER

MUST
STOP

HAVE

PRINCIPLE

CRISIS

NOT

RETAIN

CONTINUE

HITHERTO

STRUGGLE

REPUDIATED
STOP

AND

MAY

MAY

YOU
YOU

HAVE
FIND

WAY

ON

PERISH

RALLIED

STRENGTH
OUT

GROUND

AFTER

SPIRITUAL

UPHELD

IF
SAID

DECLARATION

HOLD

IMPERIAL

AFTERWARDS

I

GAINING

FEW

LONG

SUCCESSFULLY

DURING

ADVICE

WHETHER

THE

VERY
ADMINIS-

CONTENTION,

LOSE

NOW

BE

BEFORE

ARE

AND

THIS

CONVIC-

PEOPLE

REVISE

WE

OR

TILL

THROUGHOUT

STOP

REPEATEDLY
MINISTERS

OR

WE

FIRM

ALTERATION

FEEL

IF

WHICH

WOULD

ABANDON

INDUCE

STOP

SOLEMN
STOP

CIRCUMSTANCES,

MY

ASKED

IF
VICE

JUSTICE,

ADVISING

WOULD

US

COULD

MADE

STOP
I

ADDITION

I

URGED

ROY’S

LATER

QUESTION

WHETHER

HERE;

TEMPT

STOP

BEING

SOLEMNLY

ADVERSE

ESPECIALLY

WITHOUT

KILLED

YOU

WE

US

LIFE

POWER.

IRREVOCABLE

ATTAINMENT

SOONER

OF

MY

INDEPENDENT

TEMPORAL

ONLY

COMMISSION

STRUGGLE

ANY

STRENGTH

RENDERED

GIVE

STRUGGLE

SUNDAY

TRATION

ONCE

WOULD

THIS

NAME

JUSTIFIABLY

NO

STOP

STOP

GOD’S

WILL

MUST

FEELING 1

YOUR

VICEMASSES

IN

AT-

STRUGGLE

ABOVE

VITAL

MINISTERS

HAVE

LIKE

DURING

LOCAL
TERRIBLE

NOTWITHSTANDING

1
The reference is evidently to Gokhale’s anxiety that a boycott of the
Commission might alienate the Viceroy; vide footnote I to “Cable to G. K. Gokhale”,
23-12-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

437

OUR

INABILITY

RECEDE.1

GANDHI
Servants of India Society

289. CABLE TO G. K. GOKHALE2
DURBAN,

December 24, 1913
CONFIDENTIAL.

TO-DAY

CONFERRED

LENGTHILY

VERNMENT

OFFERING

WILL

AGITATE

DAILY

MAIL”

GOVERNMENT
SUPPORTING

SEVEN
US

REPRESENTATIVE
THREE.

THEY

INTERVENTION.

PUBLICLY
“EAST
CONCEDE.

FOR

IF

GRANTING

LONDON
HOSKEN

MINISTERS
HAVE

NOT
OUR

DESPATCH”
HAS

ISSUED

RELIGION

WIRED

ACCEPTED

GOTHEY

DEMANDS.

“RAND

STRONGLY

URGE

PUBLIC

APPEAL

DEMANDS.

GANDHI
Servants of India Society

1

Gandhiji gives the gist of a similar cable in Satyagraha in South Africa, Ch.
XLVII, and states that C. F. Andrews too concurred with it. This is obviously
incorrect as Andrews reached South Africa only on January 2, 1914.
2
This cable, with the last two sentences omitted, was also sent to Lord
Ampthill.

438

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

290. CABLE TO LORD AMPTHILL
DURBAN,

December 24, 1913
LORD AMPTHILL
SEEN1
CAPE
TONE

CABLE

RITCH2

TIMES

ADMITS

BUT

OBJECTS

HAVE

NOT

UAGE

DESPITE
NAMELY

NATIVE

WHICH
TREATED

NESBURG
DEMANDS
HOSKEN

“EAST

LETTER

AS

DEMANDS

AS

STOP

MODERATE

PROVOCATION

BUT

ALTERNATIVE

PASSIVE

RESISTANCE

THREAT

STOP

“RAND

DESPATCH”

RECOGNIZING
PUBLIC

APPEAL

ALL
ASK

ITS

SUGALTER-

LETTERS
MAIL”

GOVERNMENT
IMPERIAL

SUPPORTING

WE

LANG-

AN

SUCH
DAILY

STOP

COURTEOUS

ULTIMATUM

FROM

ACCOMPANIED

LONDON

ADOPTED

HAIRBREADTH

RENEWAL
HAS

TONE

REASONABLENESS

GRAVE

THUS
ISSUED

PEREMPTORY

EFFECTS

DEPARTED

GESTED
BEING

NO

IS

JOHANCONCEDE

OBLIGATIONS.
OUR

LETTER.

CHURCH COUNCILS MOVING SAME DIRECTION WE SHALL ENDEAVOUR UTMOST
CONTINUE
TAINING
EFFECTIVE

TRADITIONS
YOUR

LORDSHIP’S

PASSIVE

RESISTANCE

CONFIDENCE

AND

THUS
YOUR

RE-

POWERFUL

ADVOCACY.

GANDHI
P OLAK
KALLENBACH
Colonial Office Records: 551/52

1

The original has “sent”, which is evidently a typing mistake.
Lord Ampthill had cabled L. W. Ritch: “Tell Gandhi that in my judgment his
present attitude will alienate sympathies now obtained after ten years patient
persistence, will place friends here and in India in false position and will wreck cause.
Peremptory tone not in accordance with spirit of passive resistance. Earnestly exhort
him to meet half way undoubted wish for settlement.”
2

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

439

291. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
DURBAN,

December 25, 1913
VERY URGENT .
INTERIOR
P RETORIA
HAVE

SEEN

FROM

PAPERS

POLAK

TONE

AND

POWER

FOR

SOME

PREVENT
OF

WHOM

COMPELLED HEEDLESS
I

WOULD

LIKE

ACCEPTANCE
WITHOUT
WAS

THAT

US

MALLY
I

SEE

HOPE

BEEN

TO

DEMNED

PROCEDURE.

BE

[USEFULNESS]
OCCASIONS
REQUESTED
REVIVAL
VENTURE
1

440

ACCEPT

RELIEF
HOPE

AS

THAT

THREAT.

HAS
SUCH

RESULT

RESISTANCE
SMUTS

THAT
IN

LETTER
BUT

WAS
HAVE

CON-

RECOG-NIZED

ON
NOT

CERTAIN
GRANTING

SELF-SUFFERING.
BE

I

MEANT

CONTINUATION

NAMELY
WILL

IT
WE

THAT

BY

INFOR-

OUR

GRACEFULLY

THEM
IS

OR

IT.

ULTIMATUM.

WORD

NOR

FEELING

GENERAL

AN

WITHOUT
GOVERNMENT

FORMALLY

MY

LETTER

GOVERNMENT

INTERPRETED

PART

AFFECTING

GOVERNMENT

WOULD

WAS

ON

EITHER

FOR

HONOUR

RELEASE

THEREFOR

INFORMING

PASSIVE

OUR

DESIRE

ULTIMATUM

OF

DEADLOCK

BOTH

MISDESCRIBED

COMMUNITY’S

SUGGESTIONS

INTENDED

VITALLY

WILL

SUBMIT

WAS

OF

BY

REMOVAL
OR

COMMUNITY
HAS

DICTATED

APPROACHABLE

OUR

REASONS

AM

BE

PUBLISHING

OF

MATTERS

BUT

GOVERNMENT

ABSENCE

NEITHER

FOR

LABOUR

COURSE

HOPE

LEAD

MOREOVER

IN
MINISTER

AND

REGARD

FOR

PUBLIC.

CONSULT

FOLLOW

WITHIN

INDIAN

REASON

APPEAL

MEAN

HIM

DIGNITY

INTIMATION

TO

HIGH

BEG

SUFFERING ON

ANYTHING

SMUTS

MIGHT

CONCILIATORY

INFLICTION

EMPLOYERS

ENTERTAIN

ON

OF

OUR

TO

LETTER1

JOINT

IRRETRIEVABLE.

DO

SUFFERINGS

ONLY

FOR

OFFICIAL

WAIT

LOSS

INDIANS.

AVOID

GENERAL

WHEREOF

FOR
AND

I

OF

IF

NOT

WOULD
LOSSES

REPLY

APPRECIATE

POSITION

INDIAN.

CONSCIENCE.

SELF.

HOPE

SMUTS OF DESIRE

AND

MY

GOVERNMENT

KALLENBACH

VENTURE

ASSURE GENERAL
WHITE

TEXT

PLEASED

OR
I

APPOINT

Vide “Letter to Minister of Interior”, 21-12-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

TIME
THIS

GRANTING

INTERVIEW.

WILL

REFRAIN

FROM

HANDING

PRESS PENDING REPLY.1

GANDHI
Colonial Office Records: 55l/46

292. CABLE T0 G. K. GOKHALE2
DURBAN,

December 25, 1913
GOVERNMENT’S
JECTING
INGS

REPLY

DEMAND

NEGOTIATION.

OUR

ADDITION
HAVE

LETTER

RECEIVED.

COMMISSION,

ASKED

FOR

IT

PRIVATE

THOUGH
LEAVES

RE
OPEN-

INTERVIEW.

GANDHI
Servants of India Society

1

The following telegram, dated December 29, was received from the Minister
of Interior: “Your wire 25th. Minister is pleased to note therefrom that a more
conciliatory attitude is being adopted by the leaders on the Indian question. The
Minister notes request for an interview but in view of misunderstandings which have
occurred in the past he would prefer that the points on which it is desired to make
representations be formaly set out in writing. The Government are prepared to give
any reasonable representations their careful consideration.” Vide also “Letter to
Minister of Interior”, 21-12-1913.
2
It appears a similar cable was sent the next day to Lord Ampthill who
acknowledged it and earlier cables, adding that he was “doing all that is possible”.
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

441

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
LETTER FROM SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR TO GANDHIJI
THE UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA ,
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR,
CAPE OF GOOD HOPE,
April 4, 1913
SIR,
With reference to your letter of the 24th ultimo, I am directed by the Minister
of the Interior to state the question raised by you some time ago in reference to the
issue of permits to enter the Transvaal in favour of certain selected British Indians has
been receiving his attention. Mr. Fischer understands that, in this matter, you are
representing that section of the Indian community in the Transvaal, which was
known some three or four years back as the “Passive Resisters” and he believes that
your recommendations for the issue of permits were confined to persons whose
interests ate more or less indentical with this particular section of the community.
The Minister cannot find that it was anywhere been either implied or accepted that, in
this matter, you were acting on behalf of the entire Asiatic population of the
Transvaal, and this being so, he is somewhat at a loss to understand the attitude you
are adopting.
The actual position is that, when the question of allowing limited number of
educated British Indians to enter the Transvaal annually for the benefit of their
compatriots settled there was being discussed, the Government gave an undertaking
that it would allow six such persons to enter each year; but there was no agreement
that all six were to b e nominated by you, which is apparently the contention you are
now seeking to establish. As you have already been advised in my letter of the 15th
January, the different sections of the Asiatic community of the Transvaal submitted
the names of twenty-two persons for special exemption from the Immigration Law
during 1913, and in order to meet the community as far as possible by giving each
section a share in the permits to be issued, Mr. Fisher decided to increase the number
of permits from six to ten, and in so doing, acceptedfour out of the six of your
nominations, and granted six our of thesixteen other nominations that had been made
to him. In this he was influenced by the knowledge that you were speaking for a
largesection of the population; but nor, so far as he is aware, for the whole body of

442

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

British Indians.
It is, however, apparent that there has been a misunderstanding on the subject
between yourself and the Government, and the Minister will accordingly raise no
further objection on this occasion to the acceptance of the two other names submitted
by you; but it must be understood that the Government can in no way bind itself to
accept in future without question, the proposals for the introduction of educated
British Indians, which may be made by, or on behalf of, one or other of the many
Societies and Associations which already exist, and which there is no reason to
suppose will not multiply in years to come. The Government has undertaken to allow
a certain number of these persons into South Africa every year, and all applications
for inclusion in the list will receive the Government’s careful consideration; but it is
quite clear that unless some definite arrangement is made, such, for example, as a
recommendation by the Government of India in each case, or the actual selection by
that Government of the persons to be admitted, it will be very difficult if not
impossible, to reconcile the conflicting claims to consideration which are sure to be
advanced by these different bodies.
Regarding the second point referred to in your recent communication, I may
say that the new immigration Bill is being published this week. Power is taken in
Section 25(1) to exempt any persons from the provisions of Section 4 (which
describes the persons who may be treated as prohibited immigrants). Those British
Indians, therefore, whose names are included in the annual list of entrants would be
exempted, in respect of the Province in which they are authorized to reside, from the
requirements of Section 4.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
E. M. GORGES
SECRETARY FOR THE INTERIOR
From a photos tat of the origin al: S. N. 5750

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

443

APPENDIX II
TEXT OF THE SEARLE JUDGMENT1
Mr. Justice Searle, in giving judgment, said: I should have been glad to have
had a little more time in regard to giving judgment in this matter so as to have been
able to go into it somewhat more fully, but on account of the departure of a steamer it
is of urgency and thus requires to be disposed of at once. The facts are not in dispute.
The applicant, an Indian who has been living at Port Elizabeth since 1902, obtained a
permit last year to go to India, where he contracted a “marriage” by Mahommedan
rites with one Bai Mariam, who now seeks admission to this country with him, as an
immigrant under Act 30, 1906. It is admitted that she is unable to satisfy the
qualifications of Section 3(a) of Act 30, 1906, and that unless she is to be regarded as
the wife of applicant under Section 4 (e) of that Act, she cannot claim admission.
What appeared at first to me to be a difficulty in the way of the respondent was that a
certificate from a magistrate in India was annexed to the petition in which it was
stated that she was the wife of the applicant; but I understand that that document is
only admitted as evidence subject to the admission made by the applicant that this
so-called marriage was what is commonly known as a polygamous one, in other
words, that the applicant was free to enter any unions of a similar nature during the
subsistence of the marriage with Bai Mariam. As a fact, however, he has not done so,
and the question for discussion, it is agreed between the parties, is simply narrowed
down to this “What is the meaning of the word ‘wife’ in Section 4(e) of the Act?”
Does it mean a wife by a marriage recognised as legal by the laws of this country, or
must the term be extended to embrace a so-called wife by a custom which recognises
polygamy? The courts of this country have always set their faces against recognition
of these so-called Mahommedan marriages as legal unions; although by Act 16 of
1860 of Cape Colony, provision was made whereby marriage officers could
solemnise such and thus give them validity, until so solemnised they remain out of
the pale of legal marriages. It is clear, however,that such solemnisation has not taken
place in this case, and there is no statementeven of any intention to effect this if Bai
Mariam is permitted to land. Itwas in consequence of the existence of that statute that
Magistrate’s case and the others quoted on the same lines were decided. The object of
allowing the wife of an immigrant to land with him was no doubt because of the
intimate legal relations existing between husband and wife, whereby they are partners

1
The judgment was delivered on March 14, 1913, in the Cape Supreme Court.
Hassan Esop, husband of Bai Mariam, had applied for an order restraining the
Minister of the Interior from deporting her.

444

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in legal contemplation for many purposes and the husband is bound to maintain the
wife until they are legally separated by the Court. If, however, persons are admitted as
“wives” who might legally be repudiated the next day after the arrival by the husband
entering into a lawful union in this country with someone else, or even without his
doing so, it seems to me the object of the exemption in favour of the wife would not
be carried into effect. The statute is in general term; it is not framed merely for
Asiatics or, indeed, principally for them, though the word Asiatic is incidentally
mentioned in the Act; not all Asiatics, however, contract unions of a polygamous
character. It is said that at all events one “wife” should be admitted of a Mahommedan
union, and I do not know whether it is to be the first that comes, or the first that is
married; but it is said that otherwise there will be great hardships imposed and
immorality presumably encouraged; these are matters for the legislature to consider,
though I am not satisfied that such consequences would necessarily ensue by the
interpretation of the Act contended for by the respondent. The matter has never been
judicially decided in this Province, but in the Transvaal a recent decision disclosed a
difference of opinion on the Bench. The Transvaal Statute is in similar terms to Act
30 of 1906, and I agree with the decision of the majority of the Court. This is not a
case where merely ceremonial forms of the marriage celebration in the foreign
country by parties domiciled there are different from those required in this country; in
such cases it may well be that the marriage could not be impeached here, but this is a
case where the very elements and essentials of a legal union of marriage are, by
admission, wanting. As pointed out for respondent, when the legislature of this
Colony did intend to put a wider interpretation on the word “wife” so as to include a
reputed wife as in Act 15, 1865, the Act clearly said so; the onus here lies on the
applicant and I am not satisfied that he has discharged it. The application must be
refused. It was suggested that the Court should intimate that Bai Mariam might be
allowed to land if applicant agreed to legalise his marriage under Act 16 of 1860, but
that is not a matter for the Court to interfere with, though I can see no objection to
such a course of the procedure if the Minister should direct it. I don’t even know if
machinery for such legalisation at present exists. As costs are not pressed for, there
will be no order as to costs.
Indian Opinion, 21-6-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

445

APPENDIX III
RESOLUTIONS AT VREDEDORP MASS MEETING

JOHANNESBURG ,
March 30, 1913
RESOLUTION I
This Mass Meeting of British Indians, held under the auspices of the British
Indian Association, expresses deep distress and disappointment at the decision of the
Cape Provincial Division of the Supreme Court, whereby non-Christian Indian
marriages, celebrated according to the tenets of the great faiths prevailing in India,
and which marriages are recognised by law in India, are invalidated and the great
religions of India insulted; and respectfully and earnestly requests the Government to
introduce a remedial legislation recognising the validity of such marriages
throughout the Union.
RESOLUTION II
This meeting is of opinion that the decision referred to in the foregoing
resolution is calculated, if logically acted upon, to disturb Indian domestic relations,
to break up established homes, to put husband and wife asunder, to deprive lawful
children of their inheritances or of the advantages, in some parts of the Union, of the
law of inheritance as to succession and transfer duty, and to prevent the entry into
South Africa of the lawful wives and children of Indians entitled to reside within the
Union.
RESOLUTION III
This meeting is further of opinion that the questions arising out of the
decision are of such vital importance to the British Indian population of South Africa
that, unless the relief requested is granted, it will become the bounden duty of the
community, for the protection of its womanhood and its honour, to adopt passive
resistance.
RESOLUTION IV
This meeting of British Indians authorises the Chairman to forward copies of
the foregoing resolutions to the Union Government, the Imperial Government and
the Indian Government.
CERTIFIED CORRECT
A. M. C ACHALIA
CHAIRMAN
Coloni al Office Record s: 551/39

446

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX IV
DEATH OF GIANT DESPAIR1
Mr. Great-heart, Old Honest, and the four young men went up to Doubting
Castle to look for Giant Despair. When they came to the Castle gate, they knocked
for entrance with an unusual noise. At that the Old Giant comes to the gate and
Diffidence, his wife, follows. Then said he: “Who and what is he that is so hardy, as
after this manner to molest the Giant Despair?”
Mr. Great-heart replied, “It is I, Great-heart, one of the King of the Celestial
Country’s conductors of pilgrims to their place; and I demand of thee that thou open
thy gates for my entrance. Prepare thyself also to fight. . .for I am come to take away
thy head, and to demolish Doubting Castle.”
Now Giant Despair, because he was a giant, thought no man could overcome
him, and again thought he, “Since heretofore I have made a conquest of angels, shall
Great-heart make me afraid?”
So he put on his armour, and went out. He had a cap of steel upon his head, a
breast-plate of fire girded to him and he came out in iron shoes, with a great club in
his hand.
Then these six men made up to him, and beset him behind and before: also when
Diffidence, the giantess, came up to help him, old Mr. Honest cut her down at one
blow.
Then they fought for their lives, and Giant Despair was brought down to the
ground, but was very loath to die. He struggled hard, and had, as they say, as many
lives as a cat: but Great-heart was his death, for he left him not till he had severed his
head from his shoulders.
Then they fell to demolishing Doubting Castle, and that you know might with
ease be done, since Giant Despair was dead. They were seven days in the destroying of
that, and in it of pilgrims they found one Mr. Despondency, almost starved to death,
and one much afraid, his daughter, these two they saved alive. But it would have made
you wonder to see the dead bodies that lay here and there in the Castle-yard, and how
full of dead men’s bones the dungeon was.
When Mr. Great-heart and his companions had performed this exploit, they
took Mr. Despondency and his daughter. Much afraid, into their protection, for they

1

Vide “Letter to Hermann Kallenbach”, 5-3-1913.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

447

were worthy, honest people, though they were prisoners in Doubting Castle to that
tyrant Giant Despair.
They, therefore, I say, took with them the head of the Giant (for his body they
had buried under a heap of stones) and down to the road and to their companions they
came and showed them what they had done, and when they saw that it was indeed the
head of Giant Despair, they were all very merry and danced with joy.
When all these things were finished, Mr. Great-heart took the head of Giant
Despair and set it upon a pole by the highway side: And then the pilgrims went
forward on their journey.
From a copy: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

APPENDIX V
TELEGRAM FROM MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[CAPE TOWN ,]
April 15, 1913
YOUR

FIRST TELEGRAM

NINTH.

MINISTER

DESIRES

ME

TO

REPLY

TO

YOUR POINTS AS FOLLOWS. AS TO SECTION THREE BOARDS OF APPEAL
TAKE THE PLACE OF COURTS EXCEPT IN QUESTION OF DOMICILE. THERE
ARE WELL ESTABLISHED PRECEDENTS FOR THIS. AS TO CLAUSE (A) SUBSECTION 1, SECTION 4, FIRST POINT YOU RAISE APPEARS IS COVERED BY
SECTION 5(F). PROHIBITION OF ENTRY INTO FREE STATE IS NO NEW PROPOSAL
AND WAS

CONTEMPLATED

IN

PREVIOUS BILL.

SUB-SECTION

3,

SECTION

4, AS TO RESTRICTION TO ONE PORT, THIS PROVISION IS NECESSARY FOR
ADMINISTRATIVE PURPOSES BASED ON EXPERIENCE AND IS INTENDED TO
PREVENT UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY VIA PORTS WHERE GOVERNMENT HAS NO
SATISFACTORY CONTROL OVER THE MOVEMENTS OF PROHIBITED IMMIGRANTS.
SUB-SECTION (F) SECTION 5, ANY ALTERATION IN THE DIRECTION INDICATED
BY YOU WOULD SEEM TO CONFER A RIGHT WHICH HAS NOT HITHERTO
EXISTED. AS TO PROVISO TO THE SECTION, MINISTER CANNOT FIND IN THE
CASE OF NATAL THAT RESIDENTIAL CERTIFICATE CONFERRED ANY RIGHTS.
IN THE CASE OF TRANSVAAL,

SECTION

II

OF ACT

36

OF 1908

GIVES

RIGHTS WHICH WILL, OF COURSE, BE RESPECTED, BUT CANNOT SEE THAT
SUCH RIGHTS CAN BE GREATER IN THE CASE OF AN INDIAN THAN IN

448

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

THE

CASE

HIS

OF

DOMICILE

MIGRATION

A

EUROPEAN

IN

SOUTH

TO

THE

WHO,

BY

AFRICA.

CAPE AND

LONG

ABSENCE,

MAY

REGARDING

QUESTION

OF

NATAL

OF

EDUCATED

LOSE
INTER-

INDIANS

WHO

COULD PASS EDUCATION TEST AT PRESENT IMPOSED, POSITION WAS CLEARLY
STATED LAST YEAR BY THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR IN HIS SPEECH
ON THE SECOND READING OF THE BILL, THAT RESTRICTIONS ON INTER
PROVINCIAL MOVEMENT OF ASIATICS IN SOUTH AFRICA WOULD NOT BE
MADE GREATER THAN THEY ARE AT PRESENT AND THERE IS NO INTENTION
OF DEPARTING FROM THAT POLICY WHICH WILL BE CARRIED OUT EITHER
BY GRANTING EXEMPTION OR BY OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION. WITH
REFERENCE SEARLE’S JUDGMENT, GOVERNMENT HAS ALREADY INTIMATED
THAT IT HAS NO INTENTION OF DEPARTING FROM THE PRESENT PRACTICE
IN REGARD TO WIVES AND MINOR CHILDREN. WITH REFERENCE TO YOUR
SECOND TELEGRAM, THE WIFE AND MINOR CHILDREN OF SELECTED EDUCATED
ENTRANT

EITHER

OR THEY

ARRIVE

FALL

COME

AFTER HE

UNDER

THE

OUT

TO

POINTED
IS NOT

AN

HIM
HAD

YOU

THAT

IS

NO

AND

LAST

ANY

SETTLED

ARE

ACQUIRED

EXEMPTION.

IMMIGRATION

UNDERSTAND
THERE

WITH

ADMITTED

WITH

HIM

DOMICILE

AND

THUS

A

REGARDING
YEAR,

DECLARATION,

THE

SWORN

PROVISION,

AND

CANNOT

DIFFICULTY

IS

LIKELY

ASIATIC

COMMUNITY

AS

DECLARATION

IN

THEREFORE
TO

ARISE.

FREE

STATE

AND IT CANNOT BE CONCEIVED THAT ANY OF THE EDUCATED ENTRANTS
WHO

ARE

TO

COMMUNITY
THAT

AS

STRONGLY

DRAFT

THREATS
VIEW
MATTER

OF
UNDER

FROM

THOSE

OF

INDIAN

THE

WILL

LAST
WAS

POINT,

SEEK

WORDS
IN

MIGHT

LEAD

WHEN

TO

TO

BY

ADDED

AS

MINISTER
TELEGRAM

RESISTANCE.

VERY

POSSIBLY,

THE

UNION

RESULTS

IN

WITHOUT

YOUR

THE

MAKING

INDIAN

SETTLE

FOR

WERE

PASSIVE

THROUGHOUT

ANTICIPATED

THE

CONCLUSION,

IN

TO

OF

PROVIDED

REFERENCES

CONSIDERATION,
COMMUNITY

EVER
ARE

CONTAINED

FEELING

INTERESTS

DEFECTIVE.

COMMUNICATIONS

THEREIN

THE

VISITS

DEPRECATES

OTHER

IN

WHOLE

CASUAL

REGARDING

YEAR’S

AND

ADMITTED

A

PROVINCE.

FORMALITY.
LAST

BE

FAR

THE
IN
ON

DIFFERENT

REPRESENTATIVES

THEM.

Indian Opinion, 7-6-1913

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

449

APPENDIX VI
SPEECH BY A. M. CACHALIA
J OHANNESBURG,
April 27, 1913
It has become necessary again to convene a mass meeting in order that you
may consider the long-expected Immigration Bill, which has been just published. A
respectful protest has already been wired to the Government on behalf of the
Association, embodying our objections to the Bill, and a reply has been received
saying that the objections are receiving the careful consideration of the Government.
We may reasonably hope, therefore, that the Bill will be amended in accordance with
our objections. It was, however, considered advisable, regard being had to the very
great importance of the occasion, to obtain the opinion of the whole Indian
community in the Transvaal, as also to consider what steps we should take in the
event of the Government declining or being unable to meet us.
The Bill, if it becomes law in its present form, will make our position worse
than it was before the struggle was commenced in 1906, a position which we, as a
self-respecting community, can never endorse. You will notice, moreover, that it
seriously affects the rights hitherto enjoyed not only by grown-up men but by women
and children also. It affects equally the rich and the poor. It takes away the rights of
those who are domiciled in South Africa, notwithstanding the declarations made by
General Botha that it is not the intention of the Government to molest the resident
Indian community. A Bill which cuts at the very root of existence must be resisted by
those affected by it at any cost.
We, who are unrepresented in Parliament although we contribute to the
expense of keeping it, have only one effective mode of securing redress, and that is
Passive Resistance. Having had considerable experience of passive resistance, we are
in a position to measure our strength as well as our weakness, and to measure also the
value of passive resistance as a remedy. It will not be denied that, during the first
campaign, our sufferings were little compared with the sufferings that the community
had to undergo during the second campaign; but we found, too, that, during that long
period of four years over which the second campaign spread, in the last stages of it,
the number of those who could stand what then appeared to be almost endless
imprisonment was undoubtedly small in comparison, but it was a band mostly of
earnest and indomitable spirits, and it was due to their sufferings alone that we were
able to reach what is known as the provisional settlement. It was called “provisional”
because, whilst it conceded all that we had been fighting for, it had not the force of

450

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

law. The present Bill is supposed to embody that settlement, but, as you have seen
from the objection drawn up by your Committee, it has done nothing of the kind. We
are now pleading with the Government, and we shall continue to do so so long as
there is hope, but, in the last resort, it is perfectly clear that the same means that
brought about the provisional settlement must be adopted now to secure legislative
sanction for the promises contained in the settlement.
If, in spite of all our efforts to the contrary, the community has to engage in a
third campaign, it must necessarily be bitter and painful and involve much greater
sufferings than before. It is evident that thousands will not be ready to engage in such
a strenuous fight, but all who, having understood the spirit of the Bill, are opposed to
it, can endorse the action of those who have the will and the ability to go through the
hardships entailed by imprisonment or any other and further penalty that the
Government may devise. Because they cannot come to gaol, they need not stand out.
They can look after those who may be left behind by the sufferers. They can inform
the Government that they are at one with them in making the demand for redress, and
that they are heart and soul with the movement. I take it that this meeting is
composed of two such classes and that it is actuated by only one impulse, as everyone
of its members is affected equally by the Bill under consideration. I am hoping that
the Government will give heed to the telegram l have referred to in my opening
remarks, but, if unfortunately it cannot see its way to do so, I hope that this meeting
will unanimously pass the only resolution that will be submitted to it.
Coloni al Office Record s: 551/39

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

451

APPENDIX VII
(1) TELEGRAM FROM MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[CAPE TOWN ,]
May 29, 1913
YOUR

TELEGRAM

YOU
IN

WERE
REGARD

NOT

TO

TO

THE

TO

INDIAN

IS,

A

OF

ALEXANDER

HIS

IT

RIGHTS

OF

THE

IN

TO.

ARE

SOUTH

HE

THE

AFRICA-BORN

NONE

OF

IS

OF
TO

THAT

ONE

FOR
THE

ADOPT

INDIANS.

REGARD

ENTER

WHICH

THE

TO

AND

THE

RESIDE

WILL

LED

BY

ASSURANCE

PARLIAMENT

QUESTIONS

AND
WENT

PROPOSED

THE

IN

WHICH

THE

WITH

INDIANS

ONE

THE

UP

CONSIDER

MINISTER

ON

GRIEVANCES
SETTING

TO

AMENDMENT
IT

THE

PROVISION

LINES

PREPARED

THE

IN

REMAIN

THE

WAS

SATISFACTORY

THE

ADOPTING.

ACCEPTED

NOW

PROVINCE

IS

HAS

SERIOUSLY

TO
ON

NOW

CONSIDER
ONLY

REMOVE

YOU

MATTER

FACT,

TO

AND

IT
NOT

IS

BY

PARLIAMENT.

ASSEMBLY

IT

DELETE

FUTURE

STATED

OF

WAY

CAPE

AGREE

THE

OF

MUST

TO

RAISED

AND

THAN

IF

MINISTER

ALLOW

WOULD

CONTENTION

AND,

TREATMENT

POINTS

HOUSE

FURTHER

SENATE

ALREADY

MR.
THAT

ANY

ALL

GOVERNMENT

QUESTION,

ADOPTED

MATTER

OUT

INSTANT.
BY

ASKING

AND
HAS

AS

27TH

COMMUNITY,

OF

ADMINISTRATIVE
MINISTER

GO

RECENTLY

ADVISABILITY
QUESTION

THE

CONSIDERED
MARRIAGE

PREPARED

AMENDMENT

IN

OF

FULLY

UP

NOT

TO

THE

SETTLEMENT WERE CONNECTED WITH THE POSITION OF INDIANSIN THE CAPE
AND

THE

RIGHT

TO

CAPE
ALTER

RESPECT

IMMIGRATION

LAW

IT

THE

IN

DEFERENCE

PARLIAMENT
OF

THE

WAS

DOING
ABOUT

OPINION

ABLE

OF

THE

OPEN

THE

MET

THE

PARLIAMENT
ALLOW

NOT

DOOR

WITH
SO

PUBLIC

EXISTING
HE

FULL

INDIAN

THE

OF
IN

IN

ENTIRE
THE

EDUCATED

THE

THE

YOUR

EDUCATED
THE

THAT
POINTS

GOVERNMENT
INDIAN

REFUSED

NATAL

ENTIRELY

REASONABLENESS

LANGUAGE
WAS

PROVISIONS
IS

PROVINCE

YOU

PUBLIC.

EUROPEAN

IT

CAPE

THE

UNDOUBTED

THE

AND

MEET

DISCUSSION

BORN

THE

CHOSE

IN

THOUGHT

INTERMIGRATION
AFTER

EVERY

TO

CAPE

FOR

WHAT

IT

CREATED

MUST SURELY ADMIT

ATTITUDE

THE

COMPLY

452

TO

RAISE. YOU

KEPT

HAD

ANY

OF

YOU

PARLIAMENT

IN

HAS

WHO

TEST

CAN

AND

GREAT
PERSON,

TO
RIGHT

BUT

AGREE
TO

IN

POINT
TO

ENTER

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

THE CAPE. AS ALREADY INTIMATED,
UNDER

CHAPTER

WILL

BE

DEALT

SPECIFICALLY
STRENUOUS
STATE
A

XXXIII

TO

ALTER

THE

CONTINGENCY
TO

FACE.

TO

COME

TO

CAPE

AS

HE

OF

THE

ON

THE

IS

FULLY

OUT

MINISTER

HOPE
THE

LAWS

OF

ON

THE

THE

THAT

LAW

WOULD

MEAN

OF

THE

ORANGE

FREE

THE

IS

BILL,

NOT

NOT

PARLIAMENT

THIS

OFFER

NECESSARY

ALL

RAISE

WILL

IS

HOUR

YOUR
IT

OF

YOU

WHICH

AT

THINK

ATTITUDE

POINTS

POINTS

AND

SUGGESTION

APPRECIATES

DOES

CAN

ANY

THE
OF

MUCH

BUT

AWARE

NO

OF

PART

GOVERNMENT

TOWN

OF

OF DECLARATIONS

STATE

WITHDRAWAL

THE

LEGISLATURE

ANY

TERMS
THE

POSSIBLE

PREPARED

MATTER

FREE

ADMINISTRATIVELY.

ON

THAT

THE

THE

WITH

OPPOSITION

AND

HOLD

OF

MEMBERS
AND

CAN

THE

BILL

ALTER

REFERENCE .

UNDER

Indian Opinion, 7-6-1913

(2) GOVERNOR-GENERAL’S CABLE TO COLONIAL OFFICE
SECRET
May 29, 1913
IT

IS

POSSIBLE

THAT

FOR

HERE

MAY

CONTINUE

SPITE

OF

CONCESSIONS

SHOULD

LEAD

PUBLIC

OPINION

AND

INDIANS

FEITED
WILL
TO

ANY

TO

SUCH

MADE

OF

SOUTH

WOULD
CLAIM
THIS

PASSIVE

TO

BE

INDIAN
AS

OWN

INDIAN

BILL.

BE

REGARDED

MAY

IF

AS

ON

SERIOUS

HAVING

FOR-

HOPE

YOU

ASK

THEM

I

AND

POSSESS

IN
THIS

EFFECT

VERY

TREATMENT.

GOVERNMENT

THEY

AGITATORS

COMMUNITY

RESISTANCE

WOULD

CONSIDERATE

INFLUENCE

THEIR

IMMIGRATION

AFRICA

PROBABLY
TO

OF

AMONG

ON

RENEWAL

IN

REPRESENT
USE

REASONS

AGITATION

WITH

GANDHI

AND OTHERS. I GATHER FROM FISCHER THAT WOMEN AND CHILDRENWILL
ALMOST

ALL

TAX.

AM

OF

I
TAX.

CERTAINLY
DOING

MATTER

MY
IS

BE
BEST

STILL

EXEMPTED
TO

SECURE

UNDER

FROM

NATAL

TOTAL

£3

ABOLITION

CONSIDERATION.

GLADSTONE
Coloni al Office Record s: 551/40

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

453

APPENDIX VIII
DRAFT IMMIGRATION REGULATION BILL AND THE ACT
T HE BILL AS INTRODUCED

THE ACT AS GAZETTED

3. No court of law in the Union
shall, except upon a question of
domicile in the Union or any Province,
have any jurisdiction to review, quash,
reverse, interdict or otherwise interfere
with any proceeding, act, order, or
warrant of the Minister, a board, an
immigration officer or a master, if such
proceeding, act, order, or warrant
purports to be had, done, or issued,
under this Act and relates to the
detention, or to the removal from the
Union or any Province, of a person who
is being dealt with as a prohibited
immigrant.

3. (1) No court of law in the
Union shall, except upon a question of
law reserved by a board as in this
section provided, have any jurisdiction
to review, quash, reverse, interdict or
otherwise
interfere
with
any
proceeding, act, order, or warrant of the
Minister, a board, an immigration
officer or a master, had, done or issued
under this Act, and relating to the
restriction or detention, or to the
removal from the Union or any
Province, of a person who is being
dealt with as a prohibited immigrant.
(2) A board may, of its own
motion, and shall. at the request of the
appellant or of an immigration officer,
reserve for the decision of a superior
court having jurisdiction, any question
of law which arises upon an appeal
heard before such board under the last
preceding section, and shall state such
question in the form of a special case
for the opinion of such court by
transmitting such special case to the
registrar thereof. The question so stated
may be argued before such court which
may call for further information to be
supplied by the board if the court shall
deem such information necessary and
may give such answer on such case,
supplemented by such information, if
any, and may make such order as to the
costs of the proceedings, as it may
think right.

454

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

(3) For the
section—

purposes of this

“a question of law” shall, among
other questions, include a question of
domicile; and “a superior court having
jurisdiction” shall mean the provincial
division of the Supreme Court which
has jurisdiction where the board was
sitting, or any judge of such division,
or the Eastern Districts Local Division
having such jurisdiction or any judge
thereof, and “appellant” shall not
include an alien.
(4) If the special case aforesaid
is stated at the request of the appellant
he shall, if he is a person seeking to
enter the Union for the first time lodge
with the said registrar security, to such
amount, as the registrar may determine,
for any costs that the Court may order
the appellant to pay.
4. (1) Any such person as is
described in any paragraph of this
sub-section who enters or is found
within the Union, or who, though
lawfully resident in the Province, enters
or is found in another Province in
which he is not lawfully resident, shall
be a prohibited immigrant in respect of
the Union or of that other Province (as
the case may be), that is to say—

4. (1) Any such person as is
described in any paragraph of this subsection who enters or is found within
the Union, or who, though lawfully
resident in one Province, enters or is
found in another Province in which he
is not lawfully resident, shall be a
prohibited immigrant in respect of the
Union or of that other Province(as the
case may be), that is to say—

(a) any person or class of
persons deemed by the Minister on
economic grounds or on account of
standard or habits of life to be unsuited
to the requirements of the Union or any
particular Province thereof;

(a) any person or class of persons
deemed by the Minister on economic
grounds or on account of standard or
habits of life to be unsuited to the
requirements of the Union or any
particular Province thereof;

(b) any person who is unable, by
of
deficient
education,

(b) any person who is unable,
by reason of deficient education,
to read and write any European

reason

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

455

to read and write any European
language to the satisfaction of an
immigration officer; and for the purpose of
this paragraph Yiddish shall be regarded as
an European language;
(c) any person who is likely, if
he entered the Union, to become a
public charge, by reason of infirmity of
mind or body, or because he is not in
possession for his own use of sufficient
means to support himself and his
dependents;
(d) any person who from
information
received
from
any
Government (whether British or
Foreign) through official or diplomatic
channels, is deemed by the Minister to
be an undesirable inhabitant of or
visitor to the Union;
[Paragraphs (e) to (h) omitted.]
Subject to the provisions of section
two and three, an immigration officer
shall cause a prohibited immigrat so
entering or found within the Union or
within any Province into which his
entry, or in which his presence, is
presence, is unlawful, to be removed
therefrom.
(2) A list of all persons who
have been declared under this Act to be
prohibited immigrants in respect of the
Union or any Province, and who have
been removed therefrom or whose entry
into the Union or any Province has
been restricted, shall be laid by the
Minister upon the tables of both House
of Parliament within fourteen days after
the commencement of each session
thereof. Such list shall be framed in
respect of a period ending one month

456

language to the satisfaction of
an immigration officer or, in case of an
appeal, to the satisfaction of the board;
and for the purpose of this paragraph
Yiddish shall be regarded as an
European language;
[Paragraphs (c) to (h) omitted.]
Whenever the Minister exercises any
power conferred upon him by this
sub-section, he shall transmit written
ten notice of that fact to the immigration officer concerned and to every
board. Subject to the provisions of
section two and three an immigration
officer shall cause a prohibited
immigrant so entering or found within
the Union or within any Province into
which his entry, or in which his
presence, is unlawful, to be removed
therefrom.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1)
(a) contained shall be constructed—
(a) as enabling a person to be
deemed a prohibited immigrant in the
Cape of Good Hope or Natal if, being at
the commencement of this Act lawfully
entitled to reside in any Province, he
shows or has shown that he is able to
comply with the requirements described
in section three (a) of Act No. 30 of
1906 of the Cape of Good Hope, or of
section five (a) of Act No. 30 of 1903 of
Natal; or
(b) as abrogating or affecting
any right conferred by Act No. 36 of
1908 of the Transvaal upon the lawful
holder of a certificate of registration
defined in that Act.
(3) A list of all persons who have
been declared under this Act to be
prohibited immigrants in respect of

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

before the session commences,
and shall contain the name, sex, and
nationality of each such person and the
reason of each such person and the
reason for his removal or restriction.
(3) The Minister may from time
to time by notice in the Gazette declare
that persons described in paragraph (a)
of sub-section (1) of this section when
permitted under this Act to enter or
return to the Union or any Province,
shall enter or return at a port or ports
specified in the notice and not at any
other port, and thereupon, it shall be
unlawful for any such person to enter or
return at any other port.

the Union or any province, and
who have been removed therefrom or
whose entry into the Union or any
Province has been restricted, shall be
laid by the Minister upon the tables of
both Houses of Parliament within
fourteen days after the commencement
of each session thereof. Such list shall
be framed in respect of a period ending
one month before the session
commences, and shall contain the
name, sex, and nationallity of each
such person and the reason for his
removal or restriction.
(4) The Minister may from time
to time, by notice in the Gazette,
declare that persons belonging to
classes described in paragraph (a) of
sub-section (1) of this section when
permitted under this Act to enter or
return to the Union or any Province,
shall enter or return at a port or ports
specified in the notice and not at any
other port and thereupon it shall be
unlawful for any such person to enter or
return at any other port.

5. The following person or
classes of persons shall not be
prohibited immigrants for the purposes
of this Act, namely—

5. The following persons or
classes of persons shall not be
prohibited immigrants for the purposes
of this Act, namely—

[Paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d)
omitted.]

[Paragraphs (a) to (d) omitted] (e)
any person born before commencement
of this Act in any part of South Africa
included in the Union whose parents were
lawfully resident therein and were not at
that time restricted to temporary or
conditional residence by any law then in
force, and any person born in any place
after the commencement of this Act
whose parents were at the time of his

(e) any person born in any part
of South Africa included in the Union;

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

457

birth domiciled in any part of
South Africa included in the Union;
(f) any person domiciled in any
Province;

(f) any person domiciled in any
Province who is not such a person as is
described in paragraph (e) or (f) of subsection (1) of the preceding section, or
who has not been removed under section
twenty-two of this Act;

(g) any person who is proved to
the satisfaction of an immigration
officer to be the wife, or the child under
the age of sixteen years, of any person
described in paragraph (f) of his section,
provided that the wife or the child (as the
case may be) is not such a person as is
described in sub-section (1) (d), (e), (f),
(g) or (h) of the last preceding section;

(g) any person who is proved to
the satisfaction of an immigration officer
or in case of an immigration officer or in
case of an appeal, to the satisfaction of
the board, to be the wife, or the child
under the age of sixteen years, of any
person exempted by paragraph

[Paragraph (h) omitted.]
Provided that nothing in this
section contained shall be construed as
entitling a person to whom the provisions of sub-section (1) (a) or the last
preceding section apply, to enter the
reside in a Province in which he has not
previously been lawfully resident:
provided further that if any person,
having been absent for a period of three
years continously from a Province in
which he was previously lawfully
resident of, for a longer period than the
duration of a permit issued under the
authority of any law hereby repealed,
claims to enter, enters or is found in
that Province, he shall not be deemed
to fall within the exemptions contained
in this section.
7. Any such person as is
described in Chapter XXXIII of the Orange

458

(f) of this section, including the
wife or child of a lawful and
monogamous marriage duly celebrated
according to the rites of any religious
faith outside the Union, provided that
the wife or the child (as the case may be)
is not such a person as is described in
sub-section (1) (d), (e), (f), (g) or (h) of
the last preceding section;
[Paragraph (h) omitted]
Provided that nothing in this
section contained shall be construed as
entitling a person to whom the
provisions of sub-section (1) (a) of the
last preceding section apply, to enter
and reside in a Province in which he has
not previously been lawfully resident.

7. Any such person as is
described in Chapter XXXIII of the Orange

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Free State Law Book shall,
notwithstanding that he is lawfully
resident in a particular Province or that
he has been permitted to enter the
Union, continue to be subject in all
respects to the provisions of sections
seven and eight of the said Chapter
XXXIII, and if he acts in contravention
of those provisions, he may be dealt
with under this Act as a prohibited
immigrant in respect of the Orange Free
State.

Free State Law Book shall,
notwithstanding that he is lawfully
resident in a particular Province or that
he has been permitted to enter the Union, continue to be subject in all
respects to the provisions of sections
seven and eight of the said Chapter
XXXIII, and if he acts in contravention
of those provisions, he may be dealt
with under this Act as a prohibited
immigrant in respect of the Orange Free
State.

8. (1) No prohibited immigrant
shall be entitled to obtain a licence to
carry on any trade or calling in the
Union or (as the case may be) in any
Province wherein his residence is
unlawful or to acquire therein any
interest in land, whether leasehold or
freehold, or in any other immovable
property.
(2) Any such licence (if obtained
by a prohibited immigrant) or any
contract, deed or other document by
which any such interest is acquired in
contravention of this section, shall, as
from the date that the holder of the
licence or interest is dealt with as a
prohibited immigrant under this Act, be
null and void.
9. (1) Every person who is
suspected on reasonable grounds of
being a prohibited immigrant may be
arrested without warrant by
an
immigration officer or police officer,
and shall be dealt with in accordance
with this Act.

8. (1) No prohibited immigrant
shall be entitled to obtain a licence to
carry on any trade or calling in the
Union or (as the case may be) in any
Province wherein his residence is
unlawful or to acquire therein any
interest in land, whether leasehold or
freehold, or in any other immovable
property.
(2) Any such licence (if obtained
by a prohibited immigrant) or any
contract, deed or other document by
which any such interest is acquired in
contravention of this section, shall, as
from the date that the holder of the
licence or interest is dealt with as a
prohibited immigrant under this Act, be
null and void.
9. (1) Every person who is
suspected on reasonable grounds of
being a prohibited immigrant may, if
there is reason to believe that the delay
occasioned by obtaining a warrant would
enable such person to evade the
provisions of this Act, be arrested
without warrant by an immigration
officer or police officer, and shall be
dealt with in accordance with this Act.
(2) Any magistrate may, if
information on oath be laid before him

(2) Any magistrate may, if
information on oath be laid before him

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

459

that there is upon any premises a
person reasonably suspected of being a
prohibited immigrant, issue a warrant rant
empowering a police officer of or above
the rank of sergeant to enter those
premises and search for such person and
arrest him.

that there is upon any premises a
named or described person reasonably
suspected of being a prohibited
immigrant, issue a warrant empowering
a police officer of or above the rank of
sergeant to enter those premises and
search for the person named or described
in that warrant and arrest him.

25. (1) Anything to the contrary
notwithstanding in this Act contained,
the Minister may in his discretion
exempt any person from the provisions
of section four or, subject to the
provisions of section seven, may
authorize the issue of a temporary permit
to any prohibited immigrant to enter and
reside in the Union or any particular
Province upon such conditions as to the
period of residence or the calling or
occupation which he may follow therein
or otherwise, as may in the permit be
specified.

25. (1) Anything to the contrary
notwithstanding in this Act contained
the Minister may, in his discretion,
exempt any person from the Provisions
of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) of
sub-section (1) of section four or,
subject to the provisions of section
seven, may authorize the issue of a
temporary permit to any prohibited
immigrant to enter and reside in the
Union or any particular Province upon
such conditions as may be law fully
imposed by regulation.

(2) The Minister may also in his
discretion authorize the issue of a
certificate of identity to any person who
is lawfully resident in the Union or in
any Province and who, desiring to
proceed thereout with the intention of
returning thereto, is for any reason
apprehensive that he will be unable to
prove on his return that he is not a
prohibited immigrant.

(2) The Minister may also in his
discretion authorize the issue of a
certificate of identity to any person
who is lawfully resident in the Union
and who, desiring to proceed thereout
with the intention of returning thereto,
is for any reason apprehensive that he
will be unable to prove on his return
that he is not a prohibited immigrant.

(3) The Minister may authorize
persons outside the Union to issue to
any intending immigrant a certificate
that he is exempt from the provisions of
sub-section (1) (a) of section four, but no
such certificate shall be recognized in
the Union unless the holder thereof
furnish to the immigration officer such
proof as is prescribed by regulation of
his identity with the immigrant to whom

460

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the certificate was originally
issued.
28. Anything to the contrary
notwithstanding in Act No. 36 of 1908 of
the Transvaal, a person who has been
exempted from the provisions of section
four of this Act or, on the authority of a
temporary permit issued under sub-section
(1) of section twenty-five of this Act, has
been permitted to enter and reside in any
part of the Union, shall not be deemed to
be subject to registration under the provisions of the said Act of the Transvaal.

28. Anything to the contrary
notwithstanding in Act No. 36 of 1908 of
the Transvaal, a person who has been
exempted from the provisions of
paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d) of sub-section
(1) of section four of this Act or, on the
authority of a temporary permit issued
under sub-section(1) of section twenty-five of this Act, has been permitted to
enter and reside in any part of the Union,
shall not be deemed to be subject to
registration under the provisions of the
said Act of the Transvaal.
30. In this Act, and in the
regulations made thereunder, unless
inconsistent with the context,—
“domicile”shall mean the place in
which a person has his present home or in
which he resides or to which he returns as
his place of present permanent abode and
not for a mere special or temporary
purpose; and a person shall not be deemed
to have a domicile within the Union or
any Province (as the case may be) for the
purposes of this Act unless he has resided
therein for at least three years, otherwise
than under terms of conditional or
temporary residence permitted by this Act
or any other law or as a person under
detention in a prison, gaol, reformatory
or lunatic asylum; and a person shall be
deemed for the purposes of this Act to
have lost his domicile within the Union
or any Province (as the case may be) if he
voluntarily
go
and
reside
outside the Union or that Province
(except for a special or temporary

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

461

purpose) with the intention of
making his home outside the Union or
that Province (as the case may be.)
[This is a new definition.]
Indian Opinion, 28-6-1913

APPENDIX IX
IMMIGRATION ACT REGULATIONS
Regulations under the Immigrants Regulation Act were gazetted on the 15th
instant. They are divided into 31 Sections.
Of these, Sections 1 to 6 deal with the examination and control of vessels.
Sections 7 to 15 deal with the examination of passengers.
Section 7 provides that all passenger for ports of the Union shall ordinarily be
examined at the ship’s first port of call in the Union.
Section 8 provides that the examination of passengers shall be conducted by
the Immigration Officer on board a ship or at such other place as may be convenient.
Every person, before being permitted to land, shall be required to complete a
declaration in the form set out in the second annexure.
Section 9 empowers the officer to require the passenger to write out the
declaration himself as also to call in the aid of an interpreter.
Section 10 requires the officer to give notice to the master of the ship of those
who have been found to be prohibited immigrants and thereafter the master is
responsible for their safe custody.
Section 11 provides that all examinations shall be reduced to writing.
Section 12 authorises the officer to postpone examination in case of doubt.
Section 13 enables the officer to accept evidence that a passenger, on landing,
can be supported by friends as sufficient proof that he will not become a public
charge.
Section 14 reads as follows:—
“The immigration officer may require for the purpose of an application made in
respect of a wife or child, under paragraph (g) of section five of the Act, a properly
authenticated copy of the certificate of the marriage, or of the birth as the case may
be; or, if no copy of such marriage certificate or birth certificate can be produced, the
immigration officer may require the production of an official certificate under the hand
of

462

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

(a)

an officer competent to give the same stating that in his personal
knowledge the parties were married on a date under the circumstances
stated; or (as the case may be) that the child was born on a date
and at a place set out and of parents named in such certificates; or (b)
the production of a certificate under the hand of an officer
competent to give the same stating that he has taken sworn testimony
or other evidence as to the circumstances and date of the marriage, or the
date of birth and the parcentage of the child, and that such testimony and
such evidence is attached to such certificate together with such officer’s
finding thereon.

“The immigration officer may require any certificate mentioned in this
regulation to be supplemented by satisfactory evidence as to the identity of the
persons referred to in the certificate, and the immigration officer may, in any case of
doubt, require such further evidence as may be necessary to satisfy him that any wife
or child referred to in the certificate is such a wife or child as, under paragraph (g) of
section five of the Act, is exempted from being considered a prohibited immigrant.”
Section 15 authorises the officer to obtain a warrant for the arrest of a person
who may be suspected of being a prohibited immigrant.
Section 16 to 18 deal with diseases and medical examination.
Section 19 is a long one, dealing with the procedure on appeal. It gives the form of
notice of appeal. Pending appeal, the appellant may be received at a detention depot.
Sub-section (3) of Section 19, being rather important, we give in full as under:
“If there be no board which ordinarily sits or is sitting or about to sit at his
station the immigration officer shall also communicate with the immigration officer
in charge by telegraph, and shall inform the appellant that if he desires to be present
at the hearing of his appeal he will be required himself to pay for his passage by sea,
or for this transport by land subject to such conditions as may be imposed and under
escort approved by the immigration officer, and paid for by the appellant to and, if
necessary, from the place at which the board having jurisdiction is to sit. On arrival
at such place the appellant shall be dealt with as provided in sub-section (2) of this
regulation.
Sub-section (4) authorises the officer to issue a temporary permit to the
appellant. The Board of Appeal may summon witnesses; the appellant may give and
call evidence; he may be represented by Counsel, and the officer may also examine
witnesses and be otherwise represented.
Sections 20 to 24 deal with permits and temporary permits. Temporary
permits are to carry a fee of £1 and a deposit of from £10 to £100 for due fulfilment of
conditions.

VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

463

Sub-section (3) of Section 20 says:—
“It shall be deemed to be a condition of every permit that the holder shall
report himself to the officers and at the periods and places specified in such permit;
and if the holder gives any false or misleading address, he shall be liable to forfeiture
of his permit and deposit, and to be dealt with as a prohibited immigrant.”
No permit may be issued for over a year without the sanction of the Minister.
The holder of a permit must give one day’s notice of his intention to
leave.Sub-section (l) Section 21 says:—
“The certificate of identity which may be issued, in terms of sub-section (2) of
section twenty-five of the Act, to persons lawfully resident in the Union or in any
Province shall be in the form and subject to the conditions set out in the Fifth
Annexure to these regulations. There shall be paid in respect of every such certificate,
a fee of one pound, and every certificate shall contain such particulars and marks as
may be deemed necessary for purposes of identification.”
Duplicates of lost permits carry a fee of £2.
The Officer may cancel permits if the holder commits a breach of its
conditions or has obtained it by fraud.
Sections 25 to 30 deal with the detention of prohibited immigrants.
Section 31 provides that the penalty for a breach of the regulations is £50 fine
or three months’ imprisonment, with or without hard labour.
SECOND ANNEXURE
DECLARATION BY PASSENGER OR OTHER PERSONS
(The information required hereunder must be given in English or Dutch)
Name in full
Port of Embarkation
Port of intended Debarkation
Age
(If over 21 years state “Full”)
Sex
Race
(European, Asiatic, or African)
Nationality
(British, French, German, etc.)
If accompanied by wife, state her name
If accompanied by children (or wards) under 16 years, state name and age
of each.

464

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

(If unaccompanied by wife or children, state “Travelling unaccompanied” in
reply to question 8 and 9.)
Address at destination in fullPeriod (if any) of previous residence in South
Africa. (If none, state “None.”) OccupationWhat means can you produce, your own
bona fide property? (If more than £20, state £20. If £20 or less, state full amount, and
explain what documentary evidence you have of definite employment, or support,
promised to you; and what references you can give to persons in South Africa?) What
European language can you write?
Have you ever been prohibited from entering the Province or expelled from it?
Have you been convicted of any crime in any country?
I hereby declare that I understand the above questions, and have answered them
truly.
Declared before me at
this . . . . . . . . .

.
.
day of .

.
.

Signature or Mark of Passenger:
. . . . .
.
.
.
.
. . . . .
IMMIGRATION OFFICER

FIFTH ANNEXURE
CERTIFICATE OF IDENTITY: FEE, ONE POUND
It is certified that . . . . .
. . . . .
having appeared
before . . . . . . . . . . . . .
for the purpose of supplying the
means of identification which are now specified herein, and having intimated that
he/she is about to absent himself/herself from the Province of . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . for a period of . . . . . . . . . . . . on a visit to
. . . . . . . . . . . . this document is issued to the said . . . . . .
. . . . . . and, subject to the conditions enumerated below and to the
verification of the marks of identification, will be accepted by the examining
immigration officer without further evidence as proof of the identity of the said . .
. . . . . . . . on his/her return.
IMMIGRATION OFFICER IN CHARGE
Date
Place
CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH THIS CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED
1. That on the return of the person referred to herein to the Province of . . .
. . . . . . . this certificate shall be surrendered to the examining immigration
officer.
2. That if the person referred to herein seeks to re-enter the Province of
. . . . . . . . . . . after a period of one year has elapsed from the date
hereof, the protection afforded by this certificate shall be deemed to have lapsed, and
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

465

he/she shall be required to satisfy the requirements of the Act.
3. This certificate may be held to be invalidated if the person named herein is
shown to the immigration officer to have made a false declaration in a material point
when applying for a certificate.
Identification Marks:
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
INDIAN OPINION, 26-7-1913

APPENDIX X
LETTER FROM E. M. GORGES
PRETORIA,
August 19, 1913
DEAR MR. GANDHI,
Referring to our previous correspondence on the subject of the Immigrants
Regulation Act, 1913, I beg to say that the points you raised have been fully
considered by the Minister, and at General Smuts’ request I will now indicate what
view he takes of them.
1.
Your first point was that the descendants of indentured Indians would not in
future be able to enter the Cape Province by reason of the proviso to Section 5 of the
Act. General Smuts requests me to submit that this is an entirely new point and one
not raised by you when all the matters at issue between the Indians and the
Government were dealt with by you in your correspondence with him in January and
February, 1912. Your letter of 29th January to the Private Secretary and your telegram
of 1st February referred to the right of educated Indians to enter the Cape and Natal
Provinces from other parts of the Union on passing the education test provided in the
Immigration Laws of those Provinces, while your letter of 15th February, 1912,
contained a specific statement that passive resisters could have nothing to complain
of—”if the present legal position namely the ability of educated Asiatics to enter
Natal or the Cape from the Transvaal (and presumably from Natal to Cape and vice
versa?) by passing the education tests provided by the respective laws of the
Provinces is retained.”
I have only to refer you to paragraph 7 and 8 of Minister’s Minute, 902 A. of
20th December, 1910, printed as enclosure No. 8 to the White Book (Cd. 5579) to
make it clear that the Union Government have all along regarded it as impossible to
allow Indians born in Natal to migrate freely to the Cape, and until you raised the

466

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

matter for the first time in your telegram of April 9th of this year to me the Minister
was not aware that your community had any views on the subject at all.
The rights of the educated Indian inhabitants of any Province to enter the Cape
and Natal by passing the education test prescribed in the recently repealed
immigration laws of those two Provinces are fully secured by sub-section (2) of
Section 4 of our new law and, as you yourself pointed out in your last letter (2nd July)
to me, most of the Colonial-born Indians in Natal have passed through the
Government Indian Schools and possess sufficient knowledge to undergothe Cape
test. You also stated that it was a well-known fact that, throughoutthe time the Cape
Act was in force, hardly any South Africa-born Indian, not belonging to the Cape,
has endeavoured to migrate to that Province as there is no scope for them there. In
view of all these facts the Government cannot conceive that the Indian community
now wishes to make a grievance of the fact that provincial boundaries have been
maintained in the new law, and General Smuts trusts that the position created by that
law will be accepted. You will be aware also that the point was fully discussed in
Parliament last Session and the very strongest exception was taken by members
representing constituencies in the Cape Province to any proposals for allowing
non-educated Natal-born Indians to enter the Cape.
2.
Secondly, in regard to the position of the ex-indentured Indians under the
definition of “Domicile” in the new Act, the Government takes the view that the
provisions of paragraph (f) of Section 5 of the Act would apply to any such Indian
who has resided under annual licence or pass in Natal for three years or more after his
indentures expire and who leaves the Province with the intention of returning thereto,
and that this view is not affected by the definition of domicile in Section 30 of the
Act.
3.
Thirdly, with regard to the question of the declaration required under Chapter
XXXIII of the Orange Free State Law Book General Smuts has no difficulty and rather
sees an advantage in notifying all educated Indians admitted into South Africa of the
disabilities that Indians are under in the Orange Free State. Steps will be taken to have
these disabilities specified on the form of declaration which is required under Section
19 of the Act.
4.
Fourthly, General Smuts is quite prepared when some suitable occasion
presents itself for dealing with the consolidation of the Marriage Laws of the Union
to make provision for the appointment of special Marriage Officers for
denominations other than Mahomedan, upon its being shewn that there is a demand
by the members of such denominations for such appointments and that there are
suitable persons in the different communities on whom the appointments could be
conferred. The present practice of admitting one wife of an Indian now entitled to
reside in any Province or who may in future be permitted to enter the Union,
irrespective of the fact that his marriage to such wife may have been solemnized
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

467

according to tenets which recognize polygamy or that she is one of several wives
married abroad, will be continued so long as she is his only wife in South Africa; but
General Smuts regrets that it will not be possible to go further and admit plural wives
of Indians who are already resident in South Africa.
Believe me,
Yours very truly,
E. M. GORGES
M. K. GANDHI, ESQ.,
PHOENIX
NATAL
From a photos tat of the typewr itten origin al: S. N. 5835

APPENDIX XI
EXTRACT FROM GOVERNOR-GENERAL’S DESPATCH
TO COLONIAL OFFICE
PRETORIA,
October 23, 1913
A new phase of the campaign was inaugurated by Mr. Gandhi on the 17th
instant, when he visited the Natal coalfields and induced a number of indentured
Indians employed in local mines and hotels to strike work until the Government
should promise to repeal the £3 tax during the next session of Parliament. The
adoption of this policy was foreshadowed in Mr. Gandhi’s letter of the 28th ultimo to
Mr. Gorges, a copy of which will be found in the correspondence accompanying my
Despatch, Secret (2) of yesterday. I have not yet been able to obtain full particulars as
to the development of the strike movement, which, so far as I can judge, does not
appear to be causing the Government much anxiety. Some little light is thrown on
the subject by the attached extracts from the Rand Daily Mail and The Transvaal
Leader of today. It will be seen that Mr. Gandhi estimates the number of strikers at
2,000 and says that six collieries are affected, whereas nine collieries are mentioned
by the Durban correspondent of The Transvaal Leader. Mr. Gorges told my Secretary
this morning that the latest official report received by the Department of Justice
estimated the number of strikers at 1,500. He was not sure, however, whether that
estimate applied to the whole area of the strike, and he thought that possibly Mr.
Gandhi’s figure of 2,000 might be correct, although no precise information on the
point was available. The Secretary for Justice, he added, had at the same time been
advised that the movement showed some signs of weakening, as a number of the
strikers were beginning to return to work. An attempt appears also to have been made
to “pull out” the Indians working on the Railways in Natal, but the absence of further

468

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

information on this point may perhaps be taken as indicating that hitherto the
attempt has not been attended with any appreciable success.
Coloni al Office Record s: 551/45

APPENDIX XII
EXTRACT FROM GOVERNOR-GENERAL’S DESPATCH
TO COLONIAL OFFICE
PRETORIA,
November 6, 1913
You will observe that Mr. Gandhi appears to be disconcerted by the inaction of
the Government, and to have made representations to the effect that it was their duty
to arrest the demonstrators and to provide them with board and lodging.On Monday
last General Smuts explained his policy to my Secretary. He said that his refusal to
interfere with many of the Passive Resisters in the Transvaal had led to a collapse, for
the time being at any rate, of the movement, and he thought that a similar policy of
laissez-faire might produce similar results in the case of the Natal strikers. Mr.
Gandhi appears to be in a position of much difficulty. Like Frankenstein he found his
monster an uncomfortable creation, and he would be glad to be relieved of further
responsibility for its support. The Department had been anxious to arrest him, but
this course had not commended itself to the Ministerial mind. If Mr. Gandhi were
arrested, he would be able to disclaim further responsibility for the maintenance of
his army of strikers. So long as he remained at liberty, the Indians would look to him
to provide for their necessities. General Smuts therefore proposed to adhere to his
policy of non-interference, and he would place no obstacles in the way of strikers
entering the Transvaal. They did not belong to the trading classes and could do little
harm. Moreover, there would be no difficulty in returning most, if not all, of them to
Natal later on. At present they were quite peaceable, and if later on, under the stress of
hunger or hardship, they became lawless, they could easily be dealt with. It was not
unlikely that in the end, when the supply of provisions began to fail, they would ask
to be sent back to their work in Natal, and he would then be prepared to provide
transport for their return. He doubted whether Mr. Gandhi would agitate among the
workers on the sugar estates unless the strike on the coal mines proved successful.
The number of strikers now on the march is estimated at 4,000. Mr. Gorges
told my Secretary today, that this morning a body of about 2,400, including
approximately 130 women and 40 children, had crossed into the Transvaal. They
would be allowed to proceed, in the hope that when they were well inside the
Province, Mr. Kallenbach and Mr. Polak might be tempted by the supineness
VOL. 13 : 12 MARCH, 1913 - 25 DECEMBER, 1913

469

of the Authorities to lead further bodies of men across the frontier. Those two
gentlemen, whom the Department were particularly anxious to secure, would then be
arrested on a charge of aiding and abetting the entry of prohibited immigrants into
the Province. The rank and file would, so far as possible, be left undisturbed. The
detention of Mr. Polak was particularly desirable, as he had been designated to
proceed to India for the collection of funds.
Coloni al Office Record s: 551/45

470

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

