1. TO THE COLONIAL-BORN INDIAN
Those of our Colonial-born friends who have not read the
special contribution1 to this journal on the Native Industries
Exhibition in Durban, and [sic] published last week, we trust, will
hasten to read it and ponder over it. It is written by one who is himself
an idealist and who knows thoroughly what he is writing about. He is,
moreover, a friend and fellow-worker in the Indian cause. Our
contributor’s remarks are therefore worthy of careful consideration
by every Indian whose life-mould has not yet been cast or, if it is
already cast, does not give real satisfaction. Our future in South Africa
depends largely upon the conduct of those who are born in this
country and to whom India is merely a geographical expression.
We associate ourselves with the remarks of our contributor that
“lolling on stools in lawyers’ offices” is no “useful ambition”. A
moment’s thought ought to convince our friends that a nation cannot
be built out of clerks or even merchants.“Back to the land” is
General Botha’s advice even to the Europeans who, after all, do follow
many useful occupations. The world lives on its farmers and those
who are indispensable to farmers, e.g., carpenters, shoemakers, blacksmiths, masons, bricklayers, tailors, barbers, etc. It is a sad fact that
very few Colonial−born Indians are found willing enough to learn or
take up these truly noble (because useful) professions. We all live
upon the great industry of the Natives and Indians engaged in useful
occupations in this country. In this sense they are more civilized than
any of us, not excluding European non-producers, inhabiting this
continent. Every speculator may leave the country; every lawyer may
shut down his office, every merchant may wind up his business; and
yet we should live comfortably on this land endowed by nature with a
beneficent climate. But if the great Native races were to stop work for
a week, we should probably be starving. It must, then, be a privilege
for us to be able to copy their productive industry and their ability as
matters of useful handicraft. We assure our friends that, even if all the
1

The witer had praised the Natives’ industry, manual skill and intelligence
which were in the evidence at the exhibition. He felt that Colonial-born Indians had
no desire to be useful, that education would merely serve to produce clerks among
them and that practical training in agriculture or a useful trade was the best way to
equip them for public service as well as for life. Indian Opinion, 8-7-1911.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

1

galling disabilities which we labour under in South Africa were to be
removed at a stroke the pen, our condition would in no wise be
satisfactory until our Colonial-born friends direct their undoubted
ability and energy in the channels pointed out in the contribution we
have drawn attention to.
Indian Opinion, 15-7-1911

2. INDIA’S SORRY PLIGHT
The news that we have had of a complete settlement is
satisfying. A campaign which called forth such sacrifices could
have had only one result. [Yet] reflecting over the outcome, one
is moved to sorrow at our unfortunate state here. Things are so
bad that it would seem an edifice had rotted and lay about in
ruins. If you still see a vestige of form[about it], it is then due to
its solid foundations. People have been enfeebled in body and
mind, and economically. Extreme poverty prevails all around.
There is a [Gujarati] saying about the idle barber who keeps
himself busy shaving wooden seats; likewise you must have also
heard the one about “the weak husband who is brave with his
wife”. Sin is the fruit of the tree of poverty. The economic
situa-tion has greatly deteriorated. People ask in despair how
they can make a living. Here you will [of course] say that
agriculture is the best of all. But that is for men who are patient
and of a steady temperament. People are in an abject state
because of wranglings over affairs of caste, and unhealthy
rivalry in regard to commu-nal dinners and social customs;
[people’s] tendency to be satis-fied with the earnings of a few
hours’ work, say four, six, eight or ten hours; and to waste the
rest; such misguided contentment, the terror of the plague, etc.
Education, which is believed to be a means for promoting
happiness has become instrumental in bringing about the worst
state of misery. The strain of learning leaves one a physical
wreck. The methods of learning are such that they wholly wear
one out in body, in mind, and financially. Add to this the
burden of [keeping up] status in society. By the time a man is
mature and knowing and tries to hold his head high, he is
weighed down with the responsibilities of family.
We find these reflections in a letter by a certain experienced and
educated Indian of South Africa to another. The correspondent has
2

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

given a faithful and vivid picture of conditions in India. We thought it
necessary to cite these views and comment on them for the benefit of
readers. A patriot’s first duty is to know the state of his country.
Having done so, his next duty is to search for a remedy. This done, his
third duty is to give effect to the remedy. The state of the country is as
set forth above. One cannot question that description. Once the
remedy is know, it is up to the readers to put it into practice. Our
function is to help them to discover the remedy.
In the very process of setting forth the country’s sorry plight,
the correspondent mentioned some of the reasons. Let us consider
them further. Starvation is not a cause of misery. It is itself misery.
The contentment men find in service is not a cause of degradation; it
is degradation in itself. Wranglings over affairs of caste, hypocrisy,
unhealthy rivalries, the terror of the plague—these are not causes of a
fallen state; they constitute that state. [In fact] there is a single cause
for all these. We have forsaken our duty. We have forgotten God and
we worship Satan. A man’s duty is to worship God. Telling one’s
beads is no symbol of that worship; neither is going to mosque or
temple., nor saying the namaz1 or the gayatri2 . These things are all
right as far as they go. It is necessary to do the one or the other
according to one’s religion. But by themselves they are no indication
of one’s being devoted to god in worship. He alone truly adores god
who finds his happiness in the happiness of others, speaks evil of
none, does not waste his time in the pursuit of riches, does nothing
immoral, who acquits himself with others as with a friend, does not
fear the plague or any human being. Such a one will not, for fear of
his caste, give communal dinners; if he is young, he will not, for fear
of his men of his caste, marry before he is old enough or until he feels
the need for it, and, if a father, he will not, for fear of men of his caste,
ruin his son’s and daughter’s future. Such a one will not pause, in
deciding on any course of action, to think of what any individual or
community would think of it. He will only ask himself: ‘What will
God within me say of this deed of mine?’ The upshot of all this is that
all of us, whether Hindus, Muslims, Parsis or Christians, have forsaken
our true religion. If this view is right, what we need is not remedies
against the plague or revolt against the British rule; neither big
associations with theirostentatious ways of doing things, nor societies
1
2

The Islamic prayer
The Rigvedic hymn to the Sun God

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

3

nor meetings; neither will it be any use to keep looking at one
another., waiting to act till others give us the lead. One thing alone is
needful; all of us, having learnt our duty; must presevere in it till the
moment of death. If this view is right, we need help from none save
God. We can then do our duty in the midst of a conflagration, can still
do it even if placed on the edge of a sword. The worst then that can
happen is that we lose our mortal bodies. Why fear this? Fear will not
keep the body alive. It will perish, when the appointed hour comes.
If we do our duty in this manner, so easy if only we will think of
it, we shall know the rest as we go on. The first need of a man lost in a
thick wood at night is light. He may then bide without fear till he finds
the road. When he does find it, he will take it straightaway. If he finds
any institutions on the way, he will use them as bridges for crossing
rivers and streams. If the bridges are in disrepair, he will examine
them with the aid of the light and call attention to the cracks of other
defects. This light of duty is easy for anyone to acquire and once it is
acquired, the way will be found forthwith; even a child will admit that.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 15-7-1911

3. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Monday night [July 17, 1911] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

Your letter regarding the trust and other matters came to hand
only today. It will be better if you address your letters to the Farm
hereafter. I propose going to Johannesburg only once a week, that is,
on Monday.
1

The Somali, by which Chhaganlal Gandhi sailed from India, was first
expected to arrived at Durban on july 15, 1911, according to the German East African
Line advertisement in Indian Opinion, 15-7-1911. A news-item appearing in the
Gujarati section the same week, however, mentions that the boat would arrive on july
18, 1911, instead. Acually she arrived on July 20, 1911, Indian Opinion 22-7-1911.
From Gandhiji’s letter of July 12, 1911 to Maganlal Gandhi (p.123), it is clear that
he has heard from Chhaganlal Gandhi but is awaiting a cable from him, presumably
about his arrival. It was therefore, on a Monday following July 12, 1911, that this
letter was written, that is, on July 17, 1911. On this Monday, it was still believed
that s.s. Somali would arrive on July 18, 1911. Thus it is that Gandhiji says later in
the letter that Chhaganlal and the others must have arrived by the time Maganlal got
this letter.

4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The arrangement about the Library is all right. Do not order
books for the present. It is better just to collect money.
I also think it is no longer necessary to keep a separate account
of the profits from the store. If the matter cannot be settled just now,
we shall dispose of it when I go there [next]. Please make a note of
this.
And now to the main part of your letter. With a little reflection,
you will be able to see that the question who should send out whom
just does not arise. When Phoenix is really in difficulties, there will be
no question of sending out or retaining anybody. He alone will stay
on there who has got into the true spirit. The problem then will be
whether anyone will stay at all. No salaries are paid today, but only a
kind of maintenance allowance. Who will remain, prepared to have
this reduced, to face extreme suffering and live on plain bread—that
will be the problem. This means that the problem will not arise. We
shall know then who the true mother is and who the false. The doubt
that has occurred to you is pointless.
And so are your fears about the children. India, being a land of
virtue, has sports of wickedness. So also, other countries, though lands
of sin, have oases by way virtuous spots. We are, however, doing our
work with our eyes fixed on India. Where is the room, then, for any
question about the children? Phoenix will have, and has, a constitution
which will enable all children who so desire to visit India. And how
can anyone say that [the spirit of] Phoenix will remain confined to
Phoenix alone? Wherever the aims of Phoenix are present, there you
will have Phoenix. Do you forget that we are all preparing ourselves
for India? Should you and your children, however, lay down their
lives for India in Phoenix itself, what harm will there be?
If we live in Phoenix as we would in India, there will be only this
difference between India and Phoenix: we shall have adopted the
virtuous practices of India and eschewed the evils that obtain there today. Is this anything to be sorry about? I shall write more on hearing
from you.
If you consider my atman1 to have great power, yours, too., has
it. There is no difference between us in respect of our atmans. The
moment you rid yourself of whatever in you is foreign to the nature
of the atman—timidity, doubt, irresolution, etc.—we are equals, The
1

The individual self which neither does nor suffers anything

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

5

only difference lies in the fact that I have, with great effort, got
rid of many of my defects. If you make the bid with a determined
mind, you, too will be able to cleanse yourself of all such defects and
more.
Chhaganlal, Anandlal, Jamnadas1 and others may possibly be
there before this letter reaches you. I for one am very glad that they
are all coming;
You ask to have a test; but that you cannot have from me. When
the time is ripe, you will get it without asking for it. Readiness is all.
It does not seem likely that any member [of the party coming]
will have difficulty in landing. All the same, I have made the necessary
recommendation2 to the office.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

[PS.] I hope a copy of the Trust Deed will be in your hand next
week. It is only a draft.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5091. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri

4. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
Sunday night [July 23, 1911] 3
MY DEAR HENRY,

The first news I must give you now is that Foolabhai’s letter tells
me that I.O. is suppressed in India. You know Foolabhai of Potchefstroom. The news lacks confirmation. But if it is true, it is nothing
surprising. They could not very well suppress my translations4 of
Ruskin’s Unto This Last and not suppress I.O. which either in the
English or the Gujarati columns re-echoes those views more or less
forcibly. If the paper is suppressed, my first thought is that I must
accept the challenge and go to India at the earliest possible moment.
This may alter our or my plans. It is evident that sooner or later the
Andamans must be my home. And why not? That home should be as
sweet as any other if it be purchased with duty done. But what about
1
2
3
4

6

A brother of the addressee
This letter to the Ragistrar of Asiatics is not available.
From the following item
Entitled “Universal Dawn”; vide “Our Publications”, 7-5-1910.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you? You and Millie must consider the thing. Of course, you are not
at [all] bound to follow me in my expanded activity. Phoenix ought
still to continue. But with me wandering in India or being taken to the
Andamans you will have to ensure your own living. If you have
sufficient faith in Truth of course your living is assured. ‘Look at the
lily of the valley, etc.’ Of course it may be that I am agitating you
quite uselessly. And yet it is not so. This position is bound to arise
sooner or later. The sooner probably the better, if it is in its own time.
This does not in any way alter your immediate programme. You will
continue your honeymoon together with your work there and go to
India in October. Only I thought I must pass on the news with my
reflections. You will have with this copy of the draft Trust Deed.
Please let me have your criticism in detail. A copy is going to
Dr.Mehta too. Every settler is also having a copy for consideration. I
propose to attach to the Deed a schedule containing the signatures of
[the] settlers.1 Please let me have yours. It should be on foolscap-size
paper so that I may be able to use the very paper for the other signatures.
I hope you have now Gregg’s opinion. There was no delay after
I understood your cable.
With love to you all,
BHAI

[PS.]
Kallenbach will probably leave2 next week by s. s. Armadale
Castle. I hope you will make it a point to meet him at Waterloo. He is
travelling 3rd-class throughout. I am anxious that he should meet
Miss Winterbottom3 , Aylmer Maude and such other men and women.
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

Vide also Appendix Extracts from Immigrants Restriction Bill (1912) and
Orange Free State Constitution”, 3-2-1912.
2
For Europe, mainly to visit his family in Germany
3
Florence A. Winterbottom, Corresponding Secretary of the Union of Ethical
Societies, London
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

7

5. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[LAWLEY,]

Ashadh Vad O [July 25, 1911] 1
CHI. HARILAL,

There should have been a letter from you from India. You met
Chi. Chhaganlal there, and he is now already here. I do hope there will
be one by next mail.
Chhaganlal has brought news that Revashankerbhai advised you
to join some commercial class in Bombay, deprecating [the idea of
your going to] Ahmedabad. Chhaganlal also told me that you, on the
other hand, continued to prefer Ahmedabad, up to the time he left. I
still consider Ahmedabad to be better. It serves our purpose better.
Though English may be less easy to learn in Ahmedabad, Gujarati,
Sanskrit, etc., can certainly be done well there. I personally do not like
Bombay at all. You may, however, do what you think best.
I see from Chanchi’s letter that Manilal 2 is suffering from a
serious illness. Please try if you can to persuade him to come here. Let
him and Bali both come. Open air and nutritious but simple food is
the only remedy for a tuberculosis patient. Please write to Chanchi not
to expect regular letter from me. The burden on me at present is
especially heavy, I go to Johannesburg only on Mondays. This is how
things go on: physical labour on the farm up to 10 a.m.; teaching
work at the school from 1.00 to 4.30 p.m.; meal at 5.30 p.m. and
office and other correspondence at night. As I do everything singlehanded, I have no time left and I do writing work till late at night. It is
9.45 p.m. now as I write this and I have more letters to write yet.
Mr. & Mrs. John, Rambhabhai 3 , Mrs. Phillips, Mr. K. Naidoo
and his wife are at the Farm. There are five boys and two girls in my
school. But as they all belong to different standards, even these few
are too many.
I am still on saltless diet. I personally feel better for it and as for
Ba, it appears her very life has been saved. So far as I can see, she is a
1

Chhaganlal Gandhi, who is referred to in this letter as having already
arrrived, returned to South Africa in 1911, and in that year Ashadh Vad 0 corrresponds
to July 25. The zero date also written as Vad 30 is peculiar to the lunnar Vikram
calendar and denotes the last day of the dark fortnight.
2
Manilal Lakshmichand Adalaja; husband of Balibehn, Harilal’ sister-in-law.
3
Rambhabai Sodha

8

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

new woman altogether. Even the children take saltless diet on alternate
weeks. It is possible they might, by and by, adopt it for good. Mr.
Kallenbach has also started the experiment of saltless diet. I have a
feeling that it purifies the blood to a very high degree.
Manilal is at Phoenix. It seems to me his mind is quite at peace
there.
I saw Mr. Smuts again1 as Mr, Quinn’s comrades have not yet
been released. I still hope that they will be. Only two persons remain
now. Smuts talked about the new Bill also. I found him quite amenable, in conversation at least. Perhaps he might even repeal the tax on
women in Natal. I took occasion to raise this issue as well.
Let me know how Chanchi and Rami are doing. You may
send both here whenever you feel inclined to. Take the money
required from Revashankerbhai.. Ba simply longs for them, I told her
that as you were in India the decision regarding their coming here
should be left to you.
Could you read anything while on board ship? Was your luggage inspected on your landing at Bombay? Give me all such details;
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S.N. 9535

6. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[About July 25, 1911] 2
. . .3 Nowadays I am chained to the school. The school works
regularly from 1 to 4.30 p.m. Only on Mondays I let it off since I go
to Johannesburg on that day. It is kept working on Sundays too. We
have something like school for three hours in the morning as well, but
only manual labour is done—either domestic chores or work on the
farm. Because of these things, I see the bodies and minds of the
children improving from day to day.
1
Although there is no record of this visit, it must have been after May 20;
vide “Letter to Minister of Interior”, 20-5-1911.
2
Judging from the similarity of contents between paragraph 1 of this letter
and paragraph 4 of the preceding items, this was written about the same time. In any
case, it was written soon after July 20 when Jamnadas Gandhi arrived in Natal with
Chhaganlal Gandhi.
3
The first few pages of the letter are not available

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

9

Until you put your heart in the work, you won’t be able to
study. If you cannot do this here, please do not imagine you can do it
in England. My impression is that Jamnadas is also your schoolfellow.
If so, the two of you, I feel, should be able to get on very well. Do
look after him and see that he does not bored there.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 102. Courtesy:
Sushilabehn Gandhi

7. LETTER TO H. S .L. POLAK
Saturday night [July 29, 1911] 1
MY DEAR HENRY,

There is yet no confirmation from India of the alleged proscription of I.O. So after all Foolabhai may have been misinformed.
Kallenbach leaves by the same mail as this. I have nothing new to tell
you and I am tired of writing. I have been writing to Aylmer Maude
and others about K.’s visit to London and his desire to see them. They
will insist on presenting him an address. He has refused to accept it at
a public meeting. I have not interfered at all. I have simply carried out
your instructions even in Publishing his portrait2 . The Hindus are
presenting him with a set of Russian books and the Chinese with a set
of Carlyle.
Chhaganlal and Anandlal3 have now returned. Chh. has brought
your pet Jamnadas4 .
With love all round,
Yours,

BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

Inferred from Kallenbach’s departure for London; vide “Reception to Mr.
Kallenbach”, 5-8-1911.
2
As a supplement to the issue of Indian Opinion dated 5-8-1911; ibid., p. 136.
3
Son of Amritlal Gandhi, a cousin of Gandhiji
4
Cousin of Gandhiji

10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

8. AN AGREEMENT
[July 29, 1911] 1
Articles of Agreement between Lower House and Upper House.
Lower House is to proceed to Europe on a sacred pilgrimage to
the members of his family during the month of August next. Lower
House is not to spend any money beyond necessaries befitting the
position of a simple-living poor farmer.
Lower House is not to contract any marriage tie during his
absence. Lower House shall not look lustfully upon any woman.
Lower House is to travel 3rd-class whether by sea or land. Lower
House may, if the exigencies of his business in Johannesburg permit
it,visit India with Dr. Mehta. In the event of his so doing he will travel
the same class as Dr. Mehta.
Lower House will not tarry long in London or any other place,
save the homes of the members of the family.
The consideration for all the above tasks imposed by Lower
House on himself is more love and yet more love between the two
Houses ≈ such love as, they hope, the world has not seen. In witness
whereof the parties hereto solemnly affix their signatures in the
presence of the Maker of all this 29th day of July at Tolstoy Farm.
UPPER HOUSE
LOWER HOUSE 2
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

9. ADDRESS TO H. KALLENBACH3
JOHANNESBURG ,

July 31, 1911
TO

HERMANN KALLENBACH , E SQ.

On behalf of the Transvaal British Indian Association, we, the
Chairman and Honorary Secretary, ask your acceptance of this small
token of the affection and esteem your whole-hearted and brotherly
1

From the contents; vide also vide “Reception to Mr. Kallenbach”, 5-8-1911.
The signature is in Kallenbach’s hand.
3
This was presented to Kallenbach on July 31, 1911, when he left for Europe;
vide “Reception to Mr. Kallenbach”, 5-8-1911.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

11

co-operation has won from the British Indians of the Transvaal.
Yours help during the long struggle that was forced upon us by
reason of the immigration and registration laws was the more valuable
because it was spontaneous.
Your timely generosity in placing Tolstoy Farm at the disposal
of the passive resisters proved an invaluable aid to us. The acts of
personal service rendered by you to our people in adversity can never
be repaid.
We thank you also for your work as Hon. Secretary of the Transvaal European Committee.
All these things and many more have made the Indian community your life-long debtors, and we pray that God may bless you for
them.
A. M. C ACHALIA
C HAIRMAN
M. K. GANDHI
HON . S ECRETARY
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION

Indian Opinion, 5-8-1911

10. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
JOHANNESBURG ,

Shravan Sud 7 [August 1, 1911] 1
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

It appears from your letter that you are upset again. I see no
reason why you should be.
Chi. Jamnadas cap, if he so desires, appear for Cape Matric or
the London Matric, though I do not know what he will gain thereby.
The time he will spend in studying for the examination, things which
are to be later forgotten, will be as good as wasted. The point to be
considered is what Jamnadas ultimately wants to do. Do you intend to
fix him up in Phoenix or have you brought him here just for the sake
of his health? Whatever may have been your intention, you have acted
wisely in bringing him over. . . . 2 used to find out and develop the
1

Chhaganlal Gandhi brought Jamnadas with him when he arrived in July; vide
“Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”, 7-7-1911. The letter was therefore written in 1911 in
which year Shravan Sud 7 corresponds to August 1. The date is confirmed by
Chhaganlal Gandhi to whom we owe this letter.
2
Two pages are missing here.

12

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

general abilities of their pupils. Modern education seems to me to be a
thorough fraud. I sighed when I read the prospectus of Davar’s
School1 ; such is the state of my mind at present.
I am aware that the debt to Revashankerbhai is increasing. I am
wondering how to repay it. It is for me to think about the debt you
have incurred. It will benefit us both if you do not take upon yourself
the burden unnecessarily. Make up your mind not to incur any debt
hereafter. Please let me know how much you will need to draw every
month, including the sum that you must send to Khushalbhai and
leaving the debt incurred you out of account. I think the, Phoenix
constitution [needs to be] amended. Please think it over and write to
me frankly. Do not mind if I express my views in strong terms. In my
present state of mind I can hardly express my ideas in gentle words or
through hints. Just fancy how a pauper will dance for joy if he comes
upon the philosophers’ stone. Such . . .2 is not possible all at once.
I read Indian Idylls (Edwin Arnold’s) to the boys. It hasex
cellent transactions of narrative poems from the Mahabharata.
Amongst them I read “The Enchanted Lake” and found it to be
superb. What is its sanskrit title? Please let me know if you or anyone
else there knows it . I have been thinking that we should have a free
translation made into Gujarati verse by Ambaram3 and publish it. All
the Pandavas go to a lake in the hope of finding water. But in their
impatience they drink from the lake without answering questions [put
to them] by the Yaksha, the guardian spirit of the lake, and fall down
unconscious. Yudhishthira goes last and drinks water after giving the
answers. All his answers relate to [the nature of] obligation, but they
are very ingenious. Perhaps you know the dialogue.
It will be a good thing if you start writing in English gradually.
If you understand Letters of John Chairman4 fully, you may translate
it. I shan’t have the time for it. I re-read the book recently. It is
invaluable.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a copy of the Gujarati original: C.W. 5092 Courtesy: Chhaganlal
Gandhi.
1
2
3
4

Davar’s College of Commerce.
Four pages are missing here.
Ambaram Bhatt, who wrote poems about satyagraha
By Lowes Dickinson.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

13

11. RECEPTION TO MR. KALLENBACH
Mr. Kallenbach had intended to slip away from Johannesburg
quietly and without any demonstration from the Indian community.
But God willed otherwise. As soon as it became known that Mr.
Kallenbach was to leave for Europe, leading passive resisters began to
discuss among themselves the desirability of “doing something’.
They felt that the owner of Tolstoy Farm, who had done so much for
them in his own inimitable way, could not be allowed to leave
unhonoured by the community. It was by an accident that the day of
Mr. Kallenbach’s departure became known. The time was short. But
subscriptions were at once raised. It was decided to present him with
an illuminated address, enclosed in a solid silver casket. The ideas was
incongruous enough. Mr. Kallenbach, who had given up most of his
luxuries, and had taken to a simple life on Tolstoy Farm where he
entirely shared the life of poor passive resisters, often drinking and
eating with them, using a verandah as his chair and his lap for a dinner
table, to be presented with a solid silver casket! Where was be to keep
it? That was no concern of the enthusiastic admirers. So the address
was illuminated and a silver casket ordered and prepared. At
practically the last minute, Mr. Kallenbach was informed that he was
to be presented with an address. Mr. Kallenbach laughed. “What have
I done? You owe me nothing, and if you do, I do not wish to collect
my debt just yet.” This happened on Saturday when he was on his
way to the Farm. He was to leave on Monday. 1 But the determined
men who had done duty as pickets would not have ‘no’ for an
answer. Mr. Kallenbach said; “I cannot receive any public acknowledgment.” His interviewers said; “You must.” Thus they parted, Mr.
Kallenbach thinking the storm had blown over. But on Monday
morning, on his way from Lawley, Mr. Kallenbach was picketed and
intercepted by a zealous band, headed by Mr. Thambi Naidoo, who
had all run from Vrededorp to Canada, a distance of five miles, to
meet him in his own compartment. Others met him at Fordsburg station. What could Mr. Kallenbach do against such determination. He
had to yield. Passive resistance (love) and picketing were once more
triumphant. Mr. Kallenbach hurreid to the Rev. Phillip’s Hall. Imam
Abdul Kadir Bawazeer presided. He related Mr. Kallenbach’s services
1

14

July 31, 1911
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in a few well-chosen words. Mr. Thambi Naidoo read the address
which is as follows. 1
Mr. Easton 2 , on behalf of the Cantonese Club, presented him
with the complete works of Carlyle in a beautiful silver-mounted case,
and Mr. Morarji with the works of Ruskin in a similar case on behalf
of the Hindu Association. Mr. Kallenbach then, in the course of his
reply, said that he did not consider his friends, who had done him so
singular an honour, owed him anything at all. It was he who was the
debtor. It was a mater of privilege to him to be able to do what he did
during the struggle that lasted five years. And he did it for his own
sake. He sincerely believed that he had gained much through the
struggle. At the end of it he found himself a better and stronger man.
He assured his hearers that it was through the struggle that he had
overcome many of his prejudices and his weaknesses. If ever again the
struggle was revived, he was prepared to do what little he could and he
knew that whatever he did in such a struggle he would be the gainer.
After giving renewed thanks for the gifts, Mr. Kallenbach resumed his
seat amid applause. Mr. Cachalia, was absent, being obliged to go to
Warmbaths to attend a sick friend. Mr. Ritch, Mrs. Vogl, Miss Schlesin
and Mr. Isaac 3 supported the Chair on the platform. At the station
there was representative gathering of Indians besides his European
friends to see Mr. Kallenbach off. In order to gain experience and still
further to simplify his life and to discipline himself, Mr. Kallenbach
travelled 3rd class by the train, much to the surprise of his many
friends who had always seen him enjoy all “the good things of life”.
Mr. Kallenbach is travelling 3rd class on the steamer also.
All the settlers on Tolstoy Farm were at Lawley station to see
Mr. Kallenbach off.
1

For the text, vide “Address to H. Kallenbach”. 31-7-1911.
Martin Easton; Acting Chairman, Chinese Association and Quinn’s
successor to that office; associated himself with Gandhiji’s protest against the racial
discrimination implied in the Union Immigrant’ Restriction Bill; vide “Telegram to
Secretary to Minister of Interior”, 18-3-1911.
3
Gabriel I. Isaac; English Jew and jeweller; a practising vegetarian associated
with the Johannesburg vegetarian restaurant; sometime member of Phoenix
settlements; travelled collecting subscriptions and advertisements for Indian Opinion
and was ever ready to be of use to the journal and to Gandhiji; in 1908 offered to
become nominal owner of satyagrahis; shops, following the Government’s policy of
auctioning their goods; in June, 1909, was sent by Gandhiji to Delagoa Bay to assist
satyagrahis being deported to India; vide “Johannesburg Letter”, 31-8-1908. He went
to jail as a satyagrahi during the Great March of 1913.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

15

We understand that Mr. Kallenbach does not intend to keep the
address and the casket himself; but will hand them to his sister in
Germany
Indian Opinion, 5-8-1911

12. MR. KALLENBACH
Our readers will be glad to possess a portrait, which we issue this
week as a supplement, of Mr. H. Kallenbach whom they best know as
the owner of Tolstoy Farm, of which he gave the free use to passive
resisters families and which is still being used for the purpose. Mr.
Kallenbach is leaving for Europe principally for sake of meeting the
many members of his family in Germany and expects to return within
six months. Our readers will recollect that, when both Mr. Gandhi and
Mr. Polak were absent, Mr. Kallenbach acted as the Honorary Secretary of the British Indian Association—a most critical time in the
history of the struggle.
Indian Opinion, 5-8-1911

13. TUBERCULOSIS
We invite the special attention of our Natal Indian readers to Dr.
Murison’s1 letter to Mr. Gandhi on the campaign that he, with the
assistance of Dr. Adams, the specialist, is conducing in the Durban
Borough against tuberculosis. This fell disease is no respecter of
persons and affect all the communities residing in Durban. If its progress is not arrested in time, it is difficult to estimate the damage it
may cause to precious human lives. It is then only proper that Mr.
Jameson and his Committee should seek and command the co-operation of all the communities in their endeavour to root out the disease.
At the desire of Mr. Jameson a small Indian Committee has been
already formed to render the necessary assistance to his Committee to
assist ourselves. But the establishment of the Committee is not enough.
1
Dr. Murison, Medical Officer of Health, Durban. During the 1904 plague,
Gandhiji found him “sympathetic and ready to help”; vide “The Plague Peg”, 16-71904 & “From Pillar to Post”, 30-7-1904. On July 10, 1911 he wrote in reply to
Gandhiji’s of July 4, 1911 (not available), suggesting that an Indian Committee and
about twenty volunteers co-operate with Durban Health Department’s antituberculosis campaign so that the Borough bye-laws for the prevention of infectious
diseases might not be invoked. Indian Opinion, 5-8-1911.

16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

We have no doubt that Dr. Murison ought to be besieged by Indian
volunteers who would place themselves at his disposal to do inspection
and visiting work. They may become angels of mercy in the truest
sense of the term. We feel sure that the work that Dr. Murison expect
(and rightly) from us can only be performed by volunteers and not
paid workers. Who can reason with our consumptives except our leaders? Dr. Adams preaches the gospel of open air, first and last, in the
treatmentof this disease. It will require all the ability and persuasive
powers of those whom the people trust before the latter will adopt the
treatment which is so incredibly1 simple and yet, unless it is understood, so difficult of adoption. Those who are afraid of catching cold
if they breathed the fresh but cold air of the fields rather than the hot
but contaminated and carbon-loaded atmosphere of a stuffy room are
not to be easily persuaded that their salvation—freedom from
consumption—lies in breathing pure and invigorating fresh air even
as we drink pure and health giving water rather than poisoned water
vomited by others. We trust that every influential Indian will have his
name registered is a volunteer worker in the crusade of the Durban
Corporation against tuberculosis.
Indian Opinion, 5-8-1911

14. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
August 6, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I have your very good letter from Hutchinson. Hope you
received my letter on board as also a joint wire from here (the Farm).
Before I received your cheque book, I had paid out, of course
from your account, £ 25 to A.R.M. Roodepoort, £ 15 Partidge & 0-40 Shimwell Bros. There was a notice from the A.R.M. saying that you
should deposit a further £ 25.
The engine is still working on the same hole. I do not know
what is going to happen. I visit the works daily. They have not measured, they say, but have gone down more than 300 ft. I think. The soil
varies from day to day. They got from Pretoria a new coil of rope.
Albrecht2 thought he would first prune the fruit trees. I did not
1

The original has “increditably”.
This, the correct spelling of the German name, is variously spelt by Gandhiji
as “Albert” and “Albret”, wherever it occurs.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

17

interfere. He has now nearly finished pruning. There is only one
native boy working. He is certainly a splendid boy. He asked that we
should feed him too. I thought I would not haggle. He therefore has
food from the kitchen beyond 30/- per month. John wanted me to
give him some ground within the fence, as he said he had not the
means of ploughing the ground outside. In spite of your expressed
wish to the contrary, I thought I would use my discretion in this case. I
thought I should not go wrong if I let him make use of the ground for
one year only. I have therefore pegged out a small portion hardly
30 acres beyond the fruit trees. He is to pay £ 15 for the year. I have
also given him permission to use the small plot in front of the trees to
the right or the left as we pass out at the first gate going to the station
for planting potatoes. I thought we could but do better than at least
having the ground cleared out. I hope the arrangement will commend
itself to you. We have the right to get potatoes for household use.
The native boy has been working at weeding. He is now clearing
up the trees. Strict instructions have been given not to use him for
household or any other work.
Fencing is likely to commence on Tuesday. Everything will
depend upon our friend Albrecht who I may add has been keeping
very well indeed.
I have not seen nor heard from Kennedy.
Quinn has been on the Farm for the last three days. I think his
people are worrying him as his two men are not yet released. He is
likely to be here yet for some days. He works at the garden. Govindji,
the piles patient, goes tomorrow (Monday) completely cured. Miss
Schlesin came here today chiefly to discuss your letter to her and to
discuss her own future. We discussed over the dinner her affairs and
your letter. You will be perhaps angry. If I had not done so, how
could I have taken my school which in my opinion is daily
progressing. No, my dear L.H., we may not use even our dinner hour
for our pleasure. Every minute of ours is pre-mortgaged, seeing that
we are born debtors. We are born only because we owe. We come into
the world again and again until we have paid out what we have
incurred on the score of Karma. Life is Duty.
Have not heard further about Call.
Mrs. John leaves us tomorrow, Mrs.Phillip will do so in 3 or 4
18

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

days. Krishnaswamy will probably stay. He is the brightest and most
promising student, so far as learning goes. The boys again begin
saltless diet tomorrow. They alternate. Krishnaswamy and Ramdas
have remained saltless through and through. They took dholl for
today. But they revert to the saltless diet tomorrow. They all tell me
they are feeling extra heavy today.
L.J. Van Wyk of Van Wyk’s Rust came in on Thursday and said
you owed him 7/6 for his trouble in coming to fetch coal and from
Lenz. He says the coal of course was not brought. I told him I should
refer to you before paying. Shall I pay?
I have not understood what you did regarding the draft of £ 100
or £ 200 you wanted to take with you. I see no entry in your cheque
book as to your drawing. I only see £ 30 drawn. But I propose to
await news from you before doing anything.
As you gave special instructions, the £ 25 and the £ 75 cheques
were sent to your office for depositing in your account.
We all miss you, and Mrs.Gandhi most of all. In the rush of
work, I certainly forget you but she cannot.
P.K. Naidoo and his wife too are leaving in a fortnight’s time, so
that I shall only have Mrs. Sodha1 on hands besides Mrs.Gandhi and
the children. I do not mind it a bit. I shall probably value the greater
leisure I shall enjoy.
You have gone on a brave mission. May God grant you all the
strength you need for resisting temptations. You are deliberately
making your life one of great purposes. I feel sure that your way will
be fairly smooth. If we are clay in the hands of the Potter, all we need
do is to be and remain receptive. I have written much otherwise, so I
shall not indulge in further reflections.
I am most eagerly looking forward to your letter from Madeira.
Nothing further has yet been heard of I.O. prohibition. I did not
give you the addresses of Maud and others.
I hope you have got them from Maud Polak and even seen
some of the people by the time this reaches you.
With love,
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE
1

Rambhabhi, wife of R.M. Sodha

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

19

[PS.]
I am not revising this letter. It is getting late. I have forgotten to
deal with two most important points out of your letter. Although
therefore it is now after 10 p.m. I must deal with them. The word
‘bravo’ in my telegram had no reference to your forgetting the
cheque book. It was meant to congratulate you on your having passed
through the whole ordeal so very creditably. Your bearing at the
station pleased all. Your having forgotten the cheque book was a most
natural thing in that rush. The wonder really is that you put in so
much work that morning with so much self-possession and forget
only the cheque book. You know our mutual canon of interpretation:
‘not to put an unfavourable construction upon a man’s writing or
action so long as a favourable one is possible’.
You were hurt at my simple remark about the charge of your
not being the same whether I was with you or not. I have not in my
wildest dreams suspected you of having withheld anything from me.
Indeed one of the binding links between us is my invisible belief in
your absolute and natural frankness with me. All I said and still say
was and is that when several people bring a charge against us, we
should proceed to examine ourselves upon the assumption that there
is some truth in the charge. We need not jump to the conclusion that it
is baseless. Our friends often know us better than we do ourselves. The
reason is that all of us being not perfect do things unconsciously of
which we are not witnesses but our friends are. There was no rebuke
ever meant when I made the remark, much less any mistrust. Have I
made myself understood! It hurts me to think that I should have even
unwillingly hurt you on the day of your departure.
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

15. LETTER TO H. L. PAUL
August 7, 1911
DEAR MR. PAUL1 ,

I shall watch the career of your institution2 with anxious interest.
Pray congratulate Angle3 for me.
Hoping you are all well.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 4901 Courtesy:
Dr. Cooppan

16. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
Shravan Sud 13 [August 7, 1911] 4
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,

Your letter. I certainly did not conclude from what you wrote
about Sorabji that you are against sending him to England.
Please do not press Harilal to live in Rangoon. It is in his best
interest that he should be allowed to live in freedom, It will be a
different matter, of course, if he does to Rangoon or comes over here
of his own accord, having failed in his plans. Moreover, I see little
chance of his Gujarati improving in Rangoon. If he can be by himself
in Ahmedabad and study, his eager desire for education will be
satisfied in some measure. I will let him know your views, however.
Revashnkerbhai’s ideas is that he should learn shorthand, an ideas
which does not appeal to me in the least. It is contrary to all my
1

Indian interpreter and clerk in the Magistrate’s Court, Durban.
Indian Educational Institute, Durban.
3
Daughter of H.L. Paul. Gandhiji was her godfather and she undertook to train
in Phoenix and work in the service of the Indian community after finishing her
education; vide “Letter to H. L. Paul”, 11-6-1908 & “Letter to H. L. Paul”, 1-7-1908.
4
Although the Indian date does not mention the year, two reference in the
course of the letter serve to fix the Gregorian year. It was during 1911 that a Gujarati
translation of The Indian Nation Builders alluded to in paragraph 6 of this letter was
serialized in the Gujarati section of Indian Opinion. A copy of the book was
presumably sent to Gandhiji by Natesan. It was about this time, too, that Gandhiji
was much taken up with “The Enchanted Lake” from the Mahabharata; vide “Letter to
Chhaganlal Gandhi”, 1-8-1911. In that year Shravan Sud 13 corresponds to August 7.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

21

thinking.
I am not surprised to your views about Amsterdam. To me at
least, all those who are entrapped in the net of civilization seem like
cripples.
Nowadays I read story poems from the Mahabharata to the
boys of my school for an hour every evening. I have no option but to
read from an English book, as half the boys are Tamils. The one
being read at present is Arnold’s Indian Idylls. Last night I read “The
Enchanted Lake” from it. I liked its thoughts so much that I feel like
reading it over and over again, if you haven’t seen the book, please
get it and read this [story]. What has a nation, which has produced
men capable of such grand ideas, to learn from the cowardly present
day civilization?
I have not been able to take the Mauritius report in hand.
Though Natesan has omitted [certain portions], I propose to start printing in Indian Opinion a translation of the article as published now.1
It is not quite true that I take upon myself too heavy a burden.
Your caution is right nevertheless. It is moha 2 to want to do too much
and moha is a great fault. I know this and yet I cannot abandon what I
have taken up; it must not be that is the teaching of our religion. We
should of course, make sure that it is not an unworthy task we have
undertaken. Please do not imagine that I am harming my health
because of the heavy burden. I eat like a bull. I take exactly an hour
and a half four my two meals. I see that some to those around me do
not spend as much time on three meals. It is not true that I keen
indifferent health. However, I am always on the alert to see that
nothing is done through moha. There is nothing, of course, I wish to
gain for myself . But one must keep oneself busy. I go on doing what,
on reflection, seems best to me.
Bande Mataram from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5093. Courtesy: C. K.
Bhatt.
1

The reference is to a series of articles published between August 12 and
November 4, 1911, in the Gujarati section of Indian Opinion. These were translations
of the lives of Surendranath Banerjee and G. K. Gokhale, among other published in a
single English volume by Ganesh & Co. of Madras.
2
Infatuation.

22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

17. THE STORM GATHERING
Thoreau went to gaol for the sake of those who did not belong
to his race. So many Mr. Ritch go to gaol for the sake of us who do
not wear the same skin as he does. For he has received a notice to the
effect that in allowing Indians to remain on the Stands registered in
his name in Krugersdorp, he is committing a criminal offence. 1 We
know that Mr. Ritch is not likely to give up the Stands on account of
the notice. The authorities know well that Mr. Ritch is a trustee
holding the Stands in question for his Indian wards. Mr. Ritch does
not allow them to remain on his stands. They (the Indians) remain on
their own. That is the real position, although, in the eyes of the law,
Mr. Ritch is the owner and no other.
Klerksdorp Indian have been threatened.2 In Roodepoort a
prosecution has already taken place and an appeal is pending. 3 Now
the compliment has been paid to Krugersdorp. Evidently the authorities imagine that Indians will abandon their stores and their stock
immediately they take action. Mr. Neser4 (and he ought to know) has
informed South Africa that the Government have stayed their hand
only because of this being the Coronation year and that actual
proceedings will be take next year. Mean-while, therefore, we fancy
the Government are sharpening their weapons. The notice served on
Mr. Ritch is a clear call to the Indians to show of what stuff they are
1

Ritch was the owner of certain Stands occupied by Indian in the mining area
of Krugersdorp which had been declared “Proclaimed Areas” under the Gold Law, Act
35 if 1908. On August 3, 1911 the Public prosecutor, Krugersdorp, sent him a notice
warning him that he was contravening section 130 of Act 35 of 1908 and was liable
to criminal prosecution. He was directed to ask his Indian tenants to vacate. Indian
Opinion, 12-8-1911.
2
Vide “Extract from Letter to Maud Polak” 5-4-1911.
3
At Roodepoort, one Alfred Tamblin was charged under Section 130 of the
Gold Law of 1908 for subletting a mining stands to two Asiatics, Ahmed Khan and
Abdulla Khan. His counsel argued that under the old Gold Law, an owner had the right
to sublet his stand to coloured persons and that under section 77 of the present Gold
Law, Coloured persons were entitle to acquire rights to stands, but the case was
remanded. Subsequently a Krugersdorp magistrate found Tamblin guilty and sentenced
him. On appeal, the Transvaal Division of the Supreme Court of South Africa
acquitted Tamblin and ruled that the Asiatics in question we protected by section 77 of
the new Gold Law. Indian Opinion 24-6-1911 & 2-9-1911
4
Member of Union Parliament.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

23

made. We have no doubt that if for no other reason, seeing that Mr.
Ritch may himself have to go to gaol, the Indians affected by the
notice will remain firm and show once more to the Government that,
unless they carry with them the Asiatic communities their laws
adversely affecting them must remain a dead letter.
Indian Opinion, 12-8-1911

18. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR1
August 12, 1911
THE S ECRETARY FOR THE INTERIOR
P RETORIA
SIR,

I have the honour to acknowledge your letter of the . . . instant,
I shall endeavour to complete the list of those covered by the
Settlement before the 21st instant. But I fear that it will to be possible
to do so regarding those who are now in India. I had hoped to be able
to complete the list much earlier, but for the reasons given in my
letter 2 to the Registrar of Asiatics, I have been unable to do so.
I have the honour, etc.,
From the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5586.

19. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Saturday night, August 12, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I had your cheerful note from the 3rd-class saloon of your
floating palace. It is evident that you received my letter as also wires
too late to acknowledge. I wrote to you on Monday so as to enable the
letter to reach you on board.
Received your wire but no letter.
Have heard nothing further about Call.
I am sorry that the bore is making no progress. They now bore
about 4 to 5 ft. per day. The ground is very hard. I have written to the
1

This was found among Gandhiji’s paper and was presumably drafted by him.
If the original was sent at all, the date of the letter from the Secretary for the Interior
referred to in the text was possibly supplied before dispatch.
2
Not available.

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Irrigation Department in your name asking for a report on the
progress of the work.
The work in connection with fencing is going forward. Assisted
by Krishnaswamy, Revashankar1 and Devdas, I finished putting in the
pegs today. Albrecht and Naidoo and Coopoo have been putting
strainers and supports near the pegs. The native boy is digging holes.
Ramdas is tarring the poles.
The garden work has been suspended for the time being. The
natives have however ploughed the portion I described in my last
letter. The ground looks very sweet on that account. Quinn has been
hfiing. Medh is still not fit for active work. Mrs. Phillip goes away on
Monday. Krishnaswamy will probably return. He does not wish to leave the Farm. I am becoming more and more absorbed in the school.
The children are daily improving. They are still saltless. The work on
the Farm is becoming more and more methodical. Albrecht is
improving in health.
The vines you were to order have not come forward. If they are
not ordered, I hope you will not order them from there.
Some letters which I think you ought to see herewith.
Miss Schlesin may leave us. She is accepting an educational
appointment. She hopes still to attend to your work. In any case you
need not worry.
There have been no visitors to the Farm. Ritch will probably
come tomorrow.
Hope you had a good voyage and are having a nice time, i.e., a
good time from a moral point of view. Gool says you have captured
him.
So you see I have simply given you a diary. I must now leave
off. Will write more if I have the time.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
Please get the books as per list. If you have no time send it to
Davis.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

Revashankar Jagjivan Jhaveri, brother of Dr. Pranjivan Mehta

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

25

20. LETTER TO H. S .L. POLAK
August 13, 1911
MY DEAR HENRY,

I have your two letters. I hope you have been writing directly to
West too about the typographical and other errors you may have
noticed. West is becoming quite a nice leader writer. He is the hope of
Phoenix. He is the silent ‘doer’.
I shall arrange for further funds for your trip.
I like it that no more funds have been paid to Mrs. Ritch since
July. The last payment to her from the funds ended June 30.
Ritch will take his time before he writes short articles.
Miss Schlesin may be leaving us next week. She wants to take up
an educational appointment. She will still continue to interest herself
in our affairs. She has asked for appointment in a coloured school
and is likely to get the Fordsburg one.
We are having a meeting on the gold law business1 . The receipt
by Ritch of the notice is a very good thing. It will excite public
attention far more quickly than anything else could have.
My little school is flourishing. I am absorbed in it at present.
Nothing else interests me so much as the school.
I am glad you are having an altogether good time all round. For
on your return, there will be no bed of roses for you and Millie in
S.A. You will find that you have plenty to do.
With love to you all,
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

Vide “Indians Support Mr. Ritch”, 19-8-1911 and also “The Storm
Gathering”, 12-8-1911.

26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

21. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
Shravan Vad 3 [August 13, 1911] 1
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

The books you have brought are good ones. 2 Please send me
Bhartrihari Shataka3 if the meaning of the Sanskrit text is explained
in Gujarati or English.
I do not propose to return the money you have spent on the
land. There are difficulties in the way. If you have paid anything for
the land, that I think could be returned. This is only a suggestion I
make about the land, for, if all of them get just enough to live on, how
would it be possible for them to pay its cost or that of the buildings?
And so I have suggested that the dues on account of land should he
written off. Should anyone, however, want to buy off (his share of) the
land, I shall not come in his way. The question you have raised now
had also arisen in connection with Anandlal’s land and yours. Instead
of greeting to return you the money you have spent on the land, I
should prefer paying off your debt. Returning the money spent on
the land will raise many delicate problems. I am sure you will understand this I am waiting for a reply from you again about what should
be paid to each of you two brothers.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S.N. 4782

1

It would appear that this letter was written soon after Chhaganlal Gandhi’s
return to South Africa in 1911. It is moreover in continuation of a subject discussed in
the letter of August 1, 1911, (p. 133), that is Chhaganlal’s request that the debt he
had incurred be set off against the money he had spent on improving his portion of
the land in Phoenix. In 1911, shravan vad 3 corresponds to August 13.
2
Brought by Chhaganlal Gandhi from England or India when be returned to
South Africa.
3
A collection of three hundred stanzas by Bhartrihari, a celebrated Sanskrit
poet and king. A hundred stanzas are devoted to each of the three topics: Niti (morals)
Shringar (love) and Vairagya (renunciation).
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

27

22. INDIANS SUPPORT MR. RITCH
An important meeting 1 of the British Indian Association was
held at the Hamidia Society’s Hall on Sunday evening last. Mr.
Cachalia was in the chair. Invitations were sent all over the province. A
telegram was received from Klerksdorp regretting absence but accepting the decision of the meeting. Representatives attended from
Krugersdorp, Rooderpoort, etc. Messrs Ritch, Quinn, and Isaac were
also present. At the invitation of Mr. Cachalia, Mr. Gandhi explained
the effect of the proposed action of the authorities. The proceedings
were earnest and the meeting showed determination to go through the
impending storm.
Mr. Gandhi explained that he had Mr. Ritch’s authority for
stating that he (Mr. Ritch) was prepared to stand by the community
and incur the risk of imprisonment should it be necessary in making
good the trust he had undertaken on behalf of those whose properties
were registered in his name. After full discussion, the following
resolutions were unanimously passed:
This meeting of British Indians thanks Mr. Ritch for his presence thereat, and
for his magnanimous offer to help the community even to the extent of
suffering imprisonment in connection with notices issued by the authorities
under the Gold Law and in connection with landed property registered in his
name, but held by him in trust for member of this community.

Proposed by Mr. Dadoo (Krugersdorp), and seconded by Mr.
Ahmed Khan (Roodepoort).
This meeting resolves to resist to the utmost the attempt being made to oust
Indian merchants from their possessions and businesses, and to suffer
imprisonment and other trials during the threatened campaign against them in
respect of the Gold Law and the Townships Amendment Act of 1908.

Proposed by Mr. Ismail Amod Moola, seconded by Mr. Amod
Moosajee and supported by Mr. E. G. Coovadia.2
1

Held to consider the notice served on Ritch by the public prosecutor,
Krugersdorp; vide “The Storm Gathering”, 12-8-1911.
2
Ebrahim Saleji Coovadia; well known Johannesburg merchant and some time
Treasurer, Hamidia Islamic Society; acting Chairman, British Indian Association,
1909 and 1910 (Vol. IX p. 252 fn and Vol. X. p. 268 fn ) repeatedly suffered
imprisonment as a satyagrahi in 1908 and 1909; in June, 1909 was elected member of
the proposed Transvaal Indians’ deputation to India, but was arrested immediately
after; vide “Speech at Mass Meeting”, 16-6-1909.

28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

This meeting authorizes the Chairman to send a respectful representation to
the Government, enclosing copies of the foregoing resolutions, and urging
them to alter the above mentioned laws, so as to reassure the Indian
Community and to protect its member in their legitimate occupations.

Proposed by Mr. A.M. Vaja seconded by Mr. A. A. Karodia
and supported by Mr. H. Mal and Mr. M. S. Nana.
It was also decided to start collecting subscriptions in aid of this
struggle.
Indian Opinion, 19-8-1911

23. AN IMPORTANT DECISION
Mr. Ritch as well as the British Indian Association of the
Transvaal are to be congratulated on their respective decisions as
evidenced by the report of the meeting1 of the Association, published
in another column. Mr. Ritch, by his generous action, has put the
finishing touch to the many services he has so selflessly rendered to
the community. His action has increased tenfold the responsibility of
British Indians in the Transvaal. We can only deserve execration from
every right-minded man if, after allowing Mr. Ritch to go to gaol we
though sheer cowardice, avoid the prospect of imprisonment ourselves. It is therefore but meet that the Association passed the second
resolution, committing the community to defend the interests that are
in jeopardy, even to the extent of suffering imprisonment or whatever
more may be in store for it. The third resolution enables Mr. Cachalia
to bring the two very important resolutions to the notice of the
Government. Mr. Cachalia has not allowed any time to lapse. And we
must now await the decision of the Government. We hope that wise
counsels will prevail among the member of the Union Cabinet, and
that they will avert what promises to become a national calamity.
Indians are not to be expected to allow their interests to be played
“ducks and drakes” with. The result of any attempt to force matters
on the part of the Government can therefore only be (a) repetition of
the unseemly spectacle of a mightly Government setting all its machinery in motion to crush a small low abiding community, endeavouring to hold on to its own.
Indian Opinion, 19-8-1911
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

29

24. AN EDUCATION SCANDAL
Formerly, Indian girls attended the ordinary Government
Schools for girls in Durban. Some years ago, Indian girls were prohibited from attending these schools and provision was made for their
attendance at the Higher-Grade Indian School. Promise was made that
the girls would receive separate education from the boys. Notwithstanding the promise, the Government tried the experiment of mixing
boys and girls, and failed. In theory we are quite in favour of boys
and girls receiving education together, But, in practice, it is impossible
to ignore deep-rooted habits or prejudices. Experience has shown that
Indian parents, as a rule, will not allow their daughters to mingle with
boys at a school or elsewhere. And, whenever a forcible mixture takes
place, the result “Let them”, shouts the unthinking reformer. “They
will soon be at home if left alone” But the parents will not wait for the
process. They are not reformers and they will not allow experiments
to be made at their children’s expense. Nor is there any dreadful
hurry for pressing forward the reform. There is already a deadlock.
From an attendance of thirty girls, it fell to below ten through the
stupid zeal of the reformer in the Education Department. At present,
we understand, even the few parents who had held out in the hope of
separate accommodation being provided have withdrawn their girls.
The Government need not be surprised if they find themselves being
suspected of anti-Indian prejudice in not conceding the request of the
Congress and the Indian parents concerned to give facilities for the
separate education of Indian girls.
Indian Opinion, 19-8-1911

25. FOR INDIAN PARENTS
We confess to a sneaking regard for many of General Hertzog’s
pronouncements. His remarks on education and national conservation,1 which we have copied elsewhere from Johannesburg papers,
1

Speaking at Newlands Government school on August 12, Hertzog had
criticized the present system of education which was based on cramming and
examinations and benefited only those who aspired to become advocates and doctors;
the remaining 97 per-cent of the population was left to suffer. He had stressed the
importance of character training, technical education and the mother tongue. Indian
Opinion, 19-8-1911.

30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

are worthy of perusal and careful consideration by Indian parents and
Indian youths. There is a tendency among us to Anglicize our
children as if that was the best way of educating them or fitting them
for real service to the Empire. We do not think that the wisest
Englishmen desire that we should lose our nationality—that is our
hereditary training—or that we should “ape” them. General Hertzog
has, we think, shown most clearly that the Dutch will be in danger of
losing their nationality if Dutch children received their education
through the medium of any other language but Dutch. How true are
his remarks that children, forgetting their own vernacular, are found
lacking in respect for their parents. “Honour thy father and thy
mother” is equally the commandment of Jesus with Mahomet,
Zoroaster and the Vedas. Those, therefore, who are so indifferent to
their mother tongue, no matter how humble it may be are in danger of
forgetting a universal religious principle. If General Hertzog’s
remarks are true of Dutch for Dutch children, how much more so they
are of Indian languages for Indian children. Millions of Indians in
India, although they may not be able to sign their own names, know
the spirit of the great epics, Mahabharata and Ramayana, which play
a part in our national life that very few other similar works do. We
decline to believe that our children can be taught these epics through.
English translations, however accurate they may be. We consider it to
be impossible for us to exist an independent, self respecting human
beings if we forget the poetry of the race to which we belong. We can
never learn it through a foreign tongue.
But some of us labour under the delusion that we may pick up
our mother tongue in later life. All we can say is that such persons do
not know what they are saying. General Hertzog has well said that the
true purpose of education is not to pass examinations but to mould
the character of our children. And character cannot be moul-ded by
making a child unlearn or neglect its past, and pass year in mastering
a foreign tongue. A moment’s reflection must convince anyone that
the adoption of any such course is false economy; it is a criminal
waste of capital inherited from our forefathers.
Indian Opinion, 19-8-1911

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

31

26. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
August 20, 1911
MY DEAR HENRY,

I am without a letter from you this week. I suppose you were
busy with the Congress work. Why did you send the wire to Prof.
Gokhale1 regarding I.O.? If there was any truth in the information, we
would have heard in the natural course. When the prohibition comes, I
do not think we want any fuss about it.
You will not expect long letters from me just now. I am
absorbed in the children and my mind is generally occupied with
thoughts about making myself as capable as I can be as their teacher.
And so when I sit down at the last moment to write the weekly mail,
my mind is a blank.
I hope that you have still enough money to go on with. I do not
want you to have to send me a cable. I hope to send you more if not
the whole of the balance in a fortnight’s time.
With love to you all,
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

27. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Sunday night [August 20, 1911]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Let me give you the pleasant news that after all the boring has
been successful ≈ 80,000 gallons in 24 hours! In reply to the note I
sent to the Irrigation Department, the Engineer whom you have met,
came down. Only he came down simply to inspect a very successful
well. He, however, discussed the whole thing fully with me. Acting
upon his advice we are now boring at the other end ≈ the spot marked
by you. Boring there commenced on Friday. The dismantling and
fixing was done on Thursday. At my suggestion the engine was
worked night and day after water was found, in order to see the
1
Gopal Krishna Gokhale (1866-1915); Indian statesman; President, Indian
National Congress, 1905; founded the Servants of India Society, 1905; member,
Bombay Legislature and Viceroy’s Legislative Council, 1902-15

32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

capacity of the well apart from the test. In your name I have given
Logan 10/- as a treat for the success of their efforts. The second hole
stands at 16 feet. It is very hard ground.
The holes for fencing continue. But I am obliged to use the
native boy at times for work connected [with] the boring also. Naidoo
is not on the Farm. He has not left altogether but will do so shortly. So
I shall be the only adult member of the family apart from Albrecht.
Amies has asked for a cheque for the keys. I am therefore
sending him [a] cheque without waiting for your answer.
I must not forget to tell you that the Engineer advised me to wait
for the windmill till after your return. And this I shall probably do,
unless for the sake of the Farm I find it necessary to fix up something.
The family continues to remain happy. Mrs. Gandhi has evidently benefited very greatly by the Sodha incident. She is very nice
and tactful. The boys still continue to be saltless except on Sundays.
But they are, so it appears to me, more and more finding it out for
themselves that no-salt diet is better. Medh continues saltless. Pragji
too is trying it.
The native inmates are behaving well. The school is flourishing.
I am still absorbed in it. It has never yet been interrupted. Ramdas is
getting [on] and so is Devdas and so are they all. I have not yet
worried the boys to write to you.
I fear that Miss Schlesin has not kept her promise to give you a
full weekly report. I hope to get out the balance tomorrow and send it
to you.
Today we had a host of visitors all brought by our foreman the
Indian carpenter. Isaac too graced the Farm by his presence. Gordon
has not met me at all since. Lapin wrote thanking me for sending I.O.
containing you. He said he was much interested in the account of
“our mutual friend”. Hosken sent his regrets that he could not see
you off.
Have not seen or heard of Kennedy.
I think I have told you that I have offered to take and nurse Call
here if he could be brought here. The Doctor has suggested that he
could not be kept very long at Pilgrims’ Rest. Douglas told me he was
going there himself to see Call. I have also offered on your as also my
behalf to contribute towards any expenses that might be incurred in
bringing and keeping Call.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

33

I have no time to give you translation of verses from the book1 I
alluded to, and which I have now got. I may do so next week.
Please remember me to your sister and the other relations. I am
looking forward to your description of their opinion of you and of
your opinion of Dr. Mehta.
And now good night.
All love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

28. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA2
Shravan Vad 11 [August 20, 1911] 3
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,

There has been no letter from you this week. Still I send this
letter via Europe. If you are there, the week will not go by [without a
letter from me]. And in case you have left Europe, you will get this in
about the same time as it would take if I sent it directly to India.
I have not got Harilal’s letter yet. There has been news from
[Ahmedabad], however, that [Chi.] Harilal has arived there and has
joined a school. He [has written] to me that he is determined to pass
[the matriculation examination]; and so long as he has not passed [it],
he will not be rid of his infatuation, nor will he acquire confidence in
his own powers. Since he has gone with this intention I have no desire
to stop him. If his character remains sound, he will gain much
experience in Ahmedabad. We have had many discussions on what
experience to seek and how. Now, therefore, we can only watch from a
distance how he fares, I hope you will keep up a correspondence with
him.
Bande Mataram from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5567. Courtesy:
C.K. Bhatt.
1
Presumably, Bhartrihari Shataka, a collection of three hundred stanzas by
Bhartrihari, a celebrated Sanskrit poet and king; vide also “Letter to Chhaganlal
Gandhi”, 13-8-1911.
2
This letter is torn at several places and the missing words are reconstructed
from the context.
3
From the reference to Harilal Gandhi in paragraph 2, this appears to have
been written after he had left South Africa.

34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

29. LETTER TO REGISTRAR OF ASIATICS1
August 21, 1911
THE R EGISTRAR OF ASIATICS
P RETORIA
SIR,

I have the honour to enclose herewith a revised list 2 of those
Indians who are covered by the Settlement. I am unable to send you a
complete list of those who are in India,3 as the Association has not yet
been able to get all the names.
The list I am sending you does not include all possible names. I
am in correspondence with some of those who claim to come in under
the settlement. I trust therefore, that you will not mind my sending
you a few more names later on.
You will notice that there are some who have permits issued
under the Peace Preservation Ordinance.4 These names have been
listed, as the persons are at present in the Transvaal, but they do not
belong to the category of the names contemplated to be included
among the 180.
In compiling the list of Pre-War residents, care has been taken to
accept those who have been able to show prima facie evidence of their
residence before the War for three year in the Transvaal. But neither
the Association nor I are in a position to vouchsafe [sic] that the
claimants have substantial claims. Also, whilst care has been taken not
to accept any persons who have already applied under the Acts, it is
not claimed that the list is absolutely trust-worthy in this respect. It is
quite possible that some of them may have already applied and have
either consciously or unconsciously misled the Association.
1

This was found among Gandhiji papers and was presumable drafted by him.
Since the request make in the last paragraph was acceded to, it can be assumed that the
letter, although not published in Indian Opinion, as such letters customarily were,
was actually despatched after the figures had been filled in at the blank spaces found in
the penultimate paragraph. Vide also “Letter to Registrar of Asiatics”, 26-5-1911.
2
Not available
3
Categories (a) and (b) in “Letter to E.F.C. Lane”, P. 59
4
These were persons who had exchanged their registration certificates issued
under the Dutch Law 3 of 1885 for permits issued under the British Peace Preservation
Ordinance; vide “Letter to General Smuts”, 13-6-1908. They were unable to apply for
re-registration under”any of the Asiatic laws”, vide “Letter to Minister of Interior”,
19-5-1911.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

35

The list includes. . . out of the 150 Indians contemplated by the
settlement and . . .out of the 30 Indians at present in India who are
covered by the settlement and. . . Indians who are holders of peace
Preservation Ordinance permits.
I shall be obliged if you will be good enough now to inform me
when the Office will be opened in Johannesburg.1
I have the honour, etc.,
From the typewritten draft S. N. 5587; also photostat of draft in Gandhiji’s
hand: S. N. 5558

30. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL AND MAGANLAL GANDHI
Shravan Vad 14 [August 23, 1911] 2
11 P. M.
CHI. CHHAGANLAL AND CHI. MAGANLAL,

I have the letters from both of you. You may take £9 every
month.
I shall not hesitate to write to you what I ought to say. I do not intend
to return the money spent on the land, whether on the building or
other things.3 If anyone has paid for the land, I think we should return
the amount. That is, if we set up a new convention.
If I have again to break my head over law, 4 it will not be only
because of you. There may also be other factors of a similar nature to
make things difficult for me. That course will be the last remedy, and
the fact that I am obliged to mention it bespeaks my want of faith, my
moha and immaturity. These ideas of mine suggest a false satyagrahi
relying ultimately on brute strength. Personally I know, however that
there is a difference between the two things. It will be best, all the
same, if I do not have to practise law again—I do fervently wish I do
not have to. I also wish, we in phoenix adopt a life of total poverty
while I am yet alive, I pray to God for such a time, but the portents, I
1

This was opened on September 9, 1911.
In his “Letter to Chhaganlal Ghandhi”, August 13, 1911 (p. 142) Gandhiji
was disinclined to compensate him for the improvements he had effected on his share
of the land at Phoenix which Gandhiji now intends to make over to a board of
trustees. He has now made up his mind in this letter, which, clearly therefore comes
after the letter of August 13. In 1911, Shravan Vad 14 Corresponds to August 23.
3
Vide letters to Chhaganlal Gandhi 1-8-1911 & 13-8-1911.
4
If I have to resume legal practice.
2

36

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

find, are all to the contrary. It is unlikely that the time will ever come
when we shall be living in real poverty. Dr. Mehta’s help stands in the
way. As long as this fount flows on, I feel we shall not enjoy the rare
privilege of knowing that we have not a pie left for the next day and
wondering what will happen. I consider this privilege a rare one, for
such is the state of the majority in the world, and such was, and will be
the state of the Buddha and others [like him]. I feel positively that it is
impossible to realize the great atman in any other away.
Jaikrishna Vyas1 and others gave us philosophy indeed but I feel
it was all dry philosophy. True knowledge, I am convinced, was taught
by Narasinh Mehta and Sudamaji . To indulge in the pleasures of the
senses and then assert that one does nothing, that the senses just go
their way, that one is a mere observer; all this is vain chatter. He alone
may argue thus who had achieved complete mastery over his senses
and whose senses function only to keep the body going. By the same
token, there is not one among us who is fit enough to speak these
words and their will be none till we have achieved true poverty. There
is no reason to believe that kings are kings in virtue of their punya 2 .
All that can be said is that they are kings because of their deeds. But
to say that these were necessarily good deeds seems entirely wrong,
considering the nature of the atman.

If all of you agree that these ideas are right and desire that we
should all enjoy the exalted state which I have pictured, God may
well grant us such a time.
Narandas3 has not even replied to my letter.
Saltless diet is in the air at the Farm these days4 . It remains to be
seen how long the fashion will last. Parsee Jivanjee’s two sons have
arrived today to join the school here. I have taken them on condition
that they also do without salt. More later.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5568. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri.

1
2
3
4

Vide “Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”, 9-9-1911.
Accumulated merit
A younger brother of the addressee
Vide also “Letter to Harilal Gandhi”, 25-7-1911.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

37

31. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
Bhadarva Sud 1 [August 25, 1911] 1
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,

Received your letter regarding Polak.
The letter I had addressed to you from Phoenix has been
returned to me as, through a slip, I had left the address incomplete. It
is worth reading and I still want the same thing that I had asked for in
that letter. Hence I send it as it is.
I do not think Polak will become an Anglo-Indian out and out.
You are right in what you say about his nature. He is hot-tempered.
But he is a milch cow.2 His heart is absolutely frank and he is
unswerving in his duty. Praise is everyone’s enemy; how, then, can it
be otherwise with him? But I do not so much as suspect that he would
be corrupted by praise. He is as honest as he is frank. Maybe the
words honest and frank are synonymous. How can we believe that
such men can go astray? Even supposing that the thing does happen, I
for one have no fear. He has done us [good] service. If, after this, he
breaks away, he will sacrifice the bond [of friendship]. We, on our
part, shall have nothing to lose, for the basis [of our relationship] is
one-sided. We have dealings with a person so long as he seems
truthful in speech and conduct. Such association cannot but be
profitable to us. If he changes subsequently, the loss will be his, not
ours. This has been my experience during the entire campaign. Call to
mind the instances of Ally3 and others. You will not be right if you
1
Polak whom Dr. Mehta appears to have met in England left for that country
in May, 1911, and in that year, Bhadarva Sud 1 corresponds to August 25.
2
In Indian languages, this metaphor cannotes one who gives of himself
ungrudgingly.
3
Haji Ojer Ally; born in Mauritius in 1853 of Indian and Malay parents spoke
Dutch, English and Hindustani fluently (Satyagraha in South Africa, Ch. XIV); came
to South Africa in 1884 and devoted himself whole-heartedly to the Indian cause; took
notable part in the agitation against Cape Franchise Law Amendment Act; elected
Chairman, Cape Coloured People’s Organization in 1892; founder president, Hamidia
Islamic Society and member, along with Gandhiji, of the Transvaal Indian Deputation
to England in 1906; vide “Johannesburg Letter”, 25-9-1906. Unable to join the
satyagraha campaign and unwilling, at the same time, to submit to the Asiatic
Registration Act, he left the Transvaal in 1907, leaving behind large interests; vide
“Johannesburg Letter”, 31-8-1907. For the incident alluded to by Gandhiji, vide
“Ally’s Mistake”, 27-7-1907 and “A Brief Explanation”, 22-2-1908.

38

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

say that the money and love I spent on them have been wasted. The
money could have been collected only for that purpose, and he
worked sincerely enough for the money that was spent [on him]. We
had nothing but gain at the time from Ally’s association with us.
Later on in your letter you add that you have made up with
Polak. The foregoing comments, however, stand, and the views you
expressed were certainly worth knowing about.
I also believe that India can have no direct benefit from the
Races Congress1 . The only indirect benefit could be that …2
So long as he does it with an eye on … there can be no bond of
brotherhood with him. Selfishness and friendship have always
frowned on each other. I do not think there is brotherhood among the
English either. They too have learnt to follow the policy of selfinterest. “Honesty is the best policy” sounds a wicked maxim to me.
It images their conception of morality. This criticism applies to the
common behaviour of men. They [, however, ] do have among
themselves selfless people like Polak (according to me).Their behaviour is not influenced by self-interest.
As you have said something about Polak, he has also given me
an account of the same incident. I see from that letter also that Polak
spoke to you frankly.
I believe I tore up [the report of] your speech, expecting that I
would get the full text from Natesan. Now it can be [published] only
if you have a copy and send it to me. I am writing to ask that translations from Natesan’s [book] be stopped for the present.
I destroy all your letters after reading them. I did give a general
idea of your views to Kallenbach and Polak. I hope, I did not do
anything improper.
Pray do no hesitate to write to me because I happen to be busy
night and day.
I have not read Mrs. Besant’s Speeches.
I did not see Gujarati’ s comments on your article. If any other
1

A Universal Races Congress, which Indian Opinion described as a
“Parliament of Man”, was held in London in July, 1911, to discuss the racial question
in its various aspects. The Congress was attended by representatives of the world’s
religions and philosophies, and many papers were read. Mrs. Besant and Prof.
Gokhale also attended. Indian Opinion, 26-8-1911.
2
A page is missing here.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

39

comments have appeared, they have not reached me. If more appear
in future, I shall get them, and the Gujarati’ s comments will also be
here. There are due only now.
I read something from Kanyadohan to the children at night. I
finished the story1 of Prahlad yesterday. The ideas so common among
us, which it faithfully reflects, are rarely to be found among English
books reputedly great.
I am sure you will see to it that Chhagan2 reads such books.
Bande Mataram from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5628. Courtesy: C. K.
Bhatt

32. LETTER TO H.S.L. POLAK
August 26, 1911
MY DEAR HENRY,

The same mail has brought letters from you and Dr. Mehta
about the incident described by you. But like you, Dr. Mehta too
mentions that the little storm blew over. I will therefore not comment
beyond saying that I hope you will practise what you in your letter
have desired ≈ to enter into other people’s feelings. You will need to
do that more and more as we progress.
You may spend up to £800. That I think will be enough. I am
not without some anxiety as to your Indian tour from a health point
of view. But by a careful dietary, you should all be able to keep good
health. The cold weather season in India is certainly not bad. What I
dread is your laziness and easy-going nature when there is no resistance. You brought a corporation with you as a result. Many people
will invite you. You are not the person to walk to your hosts, nor
could you with the children. And you would hardly resist dishes made
of Kosher food. Can Millie alone then resist? With you two gone,
Heaven help the poor children. If you will therefore make a promise
to yourselves as to what even in the Kosher department you would
avoid, you would save a lot of trouble. Don’t you say to yourself
1
A canto from the Bhagavata; Prahlad was a devotee of God persecuted by his
unbelieving father. Gandhiji often spoke of him as an ideal satyagrahi.
2
Dr. Mehta’s son

40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

‘vows for the weak’. That is a prompting of the devil. All the greatest
men have adopted vows. Believe me, to be able to take a vow denotes a
high degree of strength. I do not care to enter into details. But
generally let the children and indeed you yourselves live principally if
not entirely on fruit and farinaceous foods avoiding entirely pulses
and sweets whether European or Indian. I see death in chocolates.
There [are] few substances so heating as the abominable chocolate
that cursed product of devilish slave labour. To give tea and coffee to
children in India is to give them poison.
I know that all of us cannot possibly give time to schooling. It is
likely that you may not be able to do so. But if we have more hands
than enough for the press, some of us could easily give time. So long
as I am in S.A. and free from the turmoil of passive resistance and the
miserable business of law, I should be able to give the main part of my
time to education as I am now doing. Purshottamdas has given certain
hours steadily to the work. Chh[aganlal] is now giving I think an hour
per day. Miss West could be entirely spared for the purpose not of
teaching but of looking after the boarding pupils. West certainly is
anxious to give a certain portion of his time. Miss Schlesin may come
only for that purpose. Maganlal could qualify. And later Harilal and
Manilal are possibilities. Miss Schlesin has accepted a temporary post
as a teacher in the Government school at Mayfair. More when you are
here and fairly settled. The Trust Deed has already been sent to you.
With love to you all,
BHAI
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

33. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
August 27, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

The second bore-hole is going forward. They have gone down
more than 150 feet now. I have ordered another truck of coal. The
Company will not take the order before getting [the] cheque which I
gave. The coal is now at the station. It will be removed tomorrow.
Miss Schlesin has accepted an educational appointment temporarily. I am therefore personally attending to the African Building
matter. I am having all the letters addressed at the Farm. You need not
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

41

worry about me. That work won’t crush me. And as I become more
and more methodical, I shall feel the strain less and less. I cannot send
you a systematic account this time but I shall try to do so next week.
Here are the cheques paid out during the week.
Coal Owners’ Association
5-16-6
B. a/c Municipality for water
1-11-6
Papering and keys
1-19-0
Municipality electric bill
0-10-0
All the receipts from the Building a/c are being banked through
Amies. The receipts here are being banked through Kennedy. I have
not seen him at all. Please do not hesitate to make suggestions and
give hints as to the better management of this account.
Heymann I understand has written a stiff letter about Lapin’s
account being allowed to go into arrears. I shall see the letter
tomorrow. I propose to forward it to Lapin with a personal note. I
certainly think that Lapin could not be allowed to remain in arrears.
The Norwick people will have a good cause of complaint against you
in this business.
Ritch, Miss Schlesin, her co-teacher Boltman (a nice fellow) and
Miss Knudsen1 came to the Farm today. The last named came at my
invitation to examine Albrecht. He is making wonderful progress. I
therefore thought he might be assisted with massage. I have been
giving me some hints which I shall follow. I hope you will not mind
all this. It is to him for the last fortnight in my own way. Now Miss K.
has given me some hints which I shall follow. I hope you will not
mind all this. It is no use keeping a patient on the Farm and not doing
all you can. He is working at the bore-hole business steadily. Fencing
is making slow progress. He is really not fit for work the whole day.
He can do very little after luncheon. I fancy, therefore, that active
fencing will commence after the boring is finished. He might however
do more this week. He does his best.
I cannot again send you extracts from the book I mentioned. I
have absolutely no time to spare.
P.K. Naidoo is now fixed up at Ritch’s and Pragji comes to the
Farm. Pragji did not like a lawyer’s office and P.K. Naidoo had to be
fixed up. Mrs. Naidoo leaves Wednesday morning.
I have got two Parsee lads2 in the school. They are nice boys.
1

A Johannesburg masseuse who had offered to train a few young Indian women
Sons of Parsee Jivanjee; vide “Letter to Chhaganlal and Maganlal Gandhi”,
23-8-1911.
2

42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The school is certainly flourishing.
Call may be sent to the Farm for attention. I have offered to
nurse him partly in person and partly by deputy. He has, it seems, lost
mental balance. If he comes, I propose to use your room for him.
The boys remain saltless. The Parsee boys too I admitted on
condition that they fell in with the settled plan. Of course, they take
salt on Sundays.
The fruit trees are all now in bloom. The boys confine their
attention chiefly to hoeing.
I have given permission to the native John to erect his hut on the
other side of the fence and somewhere near the Kraal. I have also
allowed them to remove some stones from the small Kraal. I hope that
these dispositions of mine will not disturb you. I am endeavouring to
give effect to the spirit underlying the title of the Farm. We should
feel happy in making these poor people happy. I warn them, of
course, that all arrangements are only for a year.
I want to tell you that I am making pleasing discoveries about
your thoroughness and foresight. The foresight in placing a quantity
of coal near the Kraal, in having the strainers for the fence cut and
shaved for tarring, the fencing material taken to the fencing line all
these [and] many such other things ≈ shows your method and careful
calculation. I notice similar orderliness about the African Banking
account. Anybody can easily pick up the thread. Importance of this
method and thoroughness into matters relating to the soul will make
you a far better man than many so-called holy and religious men. I
cannot boast of any such thoroughness or orderliness in my own
disposition. I envy you and wish to copy you in our joint lives.
When I reach the end of your letter, I am so tired that I do not
attempt to write about many thoughts that come to me during the
week and engage in a heart-to-heart conversation with you. I feel that
my first duty is to give you all the necessary information.
With love,
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

43

34. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Bhadarva Sud 5 [August 28, 1911] 1
CHI. JAMNADAS,

I got your letter only today. You will, given patience, recover
there. If you want to stay with me for some time for the sake of your
health, I can take out a permit for you. I think you will feel better
here. But I leave the decision to you.
It is a good question you have asked me. You are entirely right
in your interpretation. If “is” were to be used, the meaning would
chang.2 “Is” is implied in “equivalent”. It is surprising that Purshottamdas should fail to understand this. I think he has a sharp mind
in such matters. The Gujarati word generally used for “civilization”
means “a good way of life” That is what I had meant to say. The
sentence “The Gujarati equivalent for civilization is sudharo” is quite
correct. But that is not what I intended to say. Were we to say, “The
Gujarati equivalent for civilization is good conduct”, according to the
rules of grammar, “good conduct” would have to be taken as a
Gujarati phrase. If you point this out to Purshottamdas, I think he will
understand it all right. Please let me know whether it was for this
reason or for any other reasons that you concluded that “means” was
the right word.
I cannot tell you just now why Ayodhya is called a virgin city. I
would have to read Dutt 3 . Ask me another time. The interpretation
you give does not appeal to me. I may be mistaken though. It does
not seem likely that yodhya came out of yuj.“Virgin” in this context
should be interpreted to mean “holy” in a general sense.
This is the explanation in reply to Maganlal’s question.
“Community of interest” means identical interests. If all of us
pursue the same object, it can be said that we have a “community of
interest”. If the whites seek to gratify only physical needs and we,
spiritual needs, we have no “community of interest”.
I have no information on what Muslim books there are in
1

After his arrival in South Africa in July, 1911, Jamnadas Gandhi stayed in
Phoenix for a while, before he shifted to Tolstory Farm. The letter was, therefore,
written in 1911 in which year Bhadarva Sud 5 corresponds to August 28.
2
The reference is to a passage in Hind Swaraj.
3
The Ramayana in verse by R.C. Dutt

44

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Gujarati. I know that a biography of the Prophet was written by
Narayan Hemchandra and that copies used to be on sale at the
Gujarati Press. Please tell Maganlal that it would be better for the
present not to publish any list of books or journals. It will do if he
reads this letter.
By sheer chance, my school has gained three more pupils, for
the present at any rate. All of them observe the vow of doing without
salt, vegetables and pulses between Monday and Saturday.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5640. Courtesy: Narandas
Gandhi

35. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
Bhadarva Sud 6 [August 29, 1911] 1
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

Your article on tuberculosis will quite do. You say nothing
about preventive measures against it. I have no time just now to revise
the article. Let it be printed as it is. I often plan to write the chapters
on health, but there is always some difficulty. All writing has to be
done at night, so that very little time can bespared. However, I go on
collecting my material. If I find the time to write, I shall write on
tuberculosis and other diseases too.2 It will also have to be considered
whether the chapter should be published only after I have them
allready or as I proceed with the writing.
I have already written about the monthly payment to be made to
3
you.
The prefatory note to the poem you sent was well done. I felt
like revising it a bit, but dropped the idea. My only interest at present
is in the school, so that I can give no attention to other matters and
therefore ignore things. This happens again and again. I sometimes
1
A Gujarati article entitled Kshayano Rog was published in Indian Opinion,
2-9-1911, which is presumably the one referred to in the letter. So was the preface to
the poem mentioned in paragraph 3 published in Indian Opinion, 26-8-1911.
Bhadarva Sud 6 corresponds to August 29.
2
These articles, which Gandhiji did eventually write, were obviously not ready
for publication until 1913.
3
Vide “Letter to Chhaganlal and Maganlal Gandhi”, 23-8-1911.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

45

wonder whether I am right in doing so. But each time I have felt that I
am right in being so engrossed in the school. To be sure, I am not as
fully engrossed as I should like to be; but I can see that other matters
have taken second place. The boys are going ahead so fast that
Krishnasami has lagged behind owing to ten days’ absence. Occasionally, however, I wonder whether the pace is not too fast.
My teaching work is in the nature of an experiment. It is to be
seen what results it brings.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s original in Gandhiji’s
hand: S.N. 5710

36. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
September 2, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

You have surpassed yourself. Your diary I do not call it a letter
is heart-stirring. I prize it so much that I propose to bind it. I have
taken the liberty of letting Medh and Desai read it. It has done their
souls good. I can only pray that you will end, as you have commenced your important pilgrimage. I cannot help thinking that the
rigorous discipline under which you placed yourself on board will
make you a much greater power for good to the members of your
family there than you would otherwise have been. I am sure that your
life will be to them an eloquent sermon. Your words would have been
a mere waste of energy. I am naturally looking forward to your next
diary.
I hope that the letters I have written to you already have given
you all the information you wanted. I could have said more, but I
have not the time. And after all I have certainly given you long
enough letters. I shall certainly try not to miss a single week.
You will be grieved to hear that Call suffers from complete loss
of memory. He is at the asylum in Pretoria. I wrote to the
Superintendent of the asylum. He says that it would not be advisable
to remove Call. I am therefore not bringing him to the Farm anyhow
not just now. I propose to send Isaac to see Call face to face. Sundays
are the days for visitors. But I think they will let Isaac visit Call during
week days too. Douglas, I do not think, has played the game. He told
46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

me he was going to see Call personally. Now he sends me the message
that he cannot go and that I must do what I think proper.
The Lapins have written a nice letter in reply to my note. I
enclose it for your perusal. I shall not now weary you with
Heymann’s letter. I talked to him through the phone yesterday. He
was quite good. Of course, I had written to him too.
I hope to be ready with the monthly statement between now and
Monday. In that event you shall have a copy.
The second hole is making steady progress. But I cannot say
when we shall get water. Logan said on Thursday that he had gone
beyond 200 feet. He has not worked today (Saturday), having worked
overtime during the week days.
Fencing has made some progress during the week. Medh and
Pragji will also help Albrecht and the native boy from Tuesday next.
The boys are now clearing the peach trees. Since Thursday last
I have been going with them. They have been playing too much. Mrs.
Gandhi is a Trojan. Since Mrs. Naidoo’s withdrawal, she with the
assistance (not very great) of Mrs. Sodha, has been managing the
whole household. And we are 14 all told. She gets up before 6 a.m.
and does not retire before 10 p.m.
It shows what people will do when put upon their mettle. She
occupies Mrs. Naidoo’s room and she with Devdas sleeps outside on
the verandah. Ramdas and Coopoo also sleep there.
The boys are still saltless except on Sundays. Medh and Desai
are entirely saltless. Desai assures me that he has given up smoking
entirely.
The first birth has taken place on the Farm today. The native
John’s daughter has given birth to a child. I have been medically
consulted as to the after-birth.
Albrecht is, I think, making steady progress.
Mrs. Goldstone is penniless and friendless. I have invited her to live
on the Farm for the time being. You know her I think. She will come
tomorrow with Ritch. She said she would pass a few days on the Farm.
I have prepared your room for her.
Smuts sent a message that he wanted to see me. I went yesterday.
We had a very sweet chat. He wants me to frame my suggestions for
the next year. We talked mostly about the two civilizations ancient and
modern, not Eastern and Western. I think that he was sincere in what
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

47

he said.
The school is still flourishing. My heart is still on it. And I still
refuse to allow anything else to interfere with it. The two Parsee boys
are well-behaved fellows and they are jolly. Ramdas may become in
time the best pupil in the class1.
The right hand fingers won’t work now. They are having a
fairly rough time of it at present. I have to write all my letters and they
are many.
I have still not met Kennedy. I hope that he or Miss F. has been
writing to you regularly and giving you all the news regarding the
office.
Miss Schlesin comes back on the 1st of October.
I am sorry I am still unable to give you extracts from the book
I referred to. No time.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

37. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Saturday night, September 9, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Another remarkable letter from you. May your life on land be
the same as on board. I do not wish to offer any comment on the
letter except to say that it does great credit to your heart.
The second bore-hole is finished. It was finished on Saturday
last. But it was tested on Monday and Tuesday. It is 220 ft. deep, it
gives 40,320 gallons per 24 hours, water at 50 feet, I think, from the
surface. On Wednesday the engine was removed to the third site.
Logan told me today he had gone down 80 feet. If all goes well, the
operations should be finished by the end of next week.
I went round to the dam with Du Ploi today. He has offered to
make the dam watertight for £40. Albrecht says he could put up two
dams near the 1st and 3rd hole for that amount. He says it is not at all
necessary to renovate the old dam now. I am inclined to agree with
Albrecht. Only following your example, I thought I could not be
wrong discussing the thing with Du Ploi. Albrecht has also suggested
48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that I should have a siphon for one of the bore-holes. I am going to
discuss the thing with Kennedy if he comes tomorrow and if there is
any conversation of importance with him I shall write another letter to
you. I am not going to Town on Monday. So this letter will be sent to
Town tomorrow evening.
I have sent the account with cheque to Heymann. He writes
expressing satisfaction, and suggests that I should not allow Hilt’s
arrears to accrue. I had occasion to talk to Lapin through the phone
on Friday. I have therefore asked him to collect [the rent] from Hilt.
Lapin telephoned saying that the outfitter to whom Amies
objected would not leave and that Amies insisted on his agreement
rights. I have asked Lapin to further interview Hilt and to smooth
matters over. I have a letter today from Amies complaining about the
same matter. I shall do whatever may be necessary. Lapin has promised to send me a wire if need be. I have also suggested that if £1 or
£2 would induce the outfitter to go, he should spend the amount.
MacGeorge has paid in both the amounts.
Albrecht is working practically the whole day since the massage.
He is showing many lovable traits in him. He has risen in my
estimation. No progress this week with fencing. We are on re-laying
the floors. We have commenced with the school. But fencing won’t be
neglected. Medh and Desai are on the Farm. AT Albrecht’s suggestion, we have burnt up the grass between the peach trees. He now
proposes to harrow between the trees. I think that we commenced
burning too late. However, I am a blind man and I follow Albrecht in
these matters. If a mistake has been made, no very great harm has
been done. I am gaining experience with a vengeance.
The native John has not made headway with his house. But he is
creeping up.
Mrs. Goldstone did not come on Sunday after all. I have got
one more addition to my school. I am declining to accept any boys
for the school who would not accept a saltless diet. I am anxious not
to disturb the present boys in their progress. The school still absorbs
me. That is my predominant occupation.
Isaac is going to see Call tomorrow. I have a letter from Dr.
Gibson who says Call should not be removed for the present. He has
returned the two letters you wrote to Call. Evidently Call is not able to
receive any letters. At present it is a living death for him. His poor
fiancee!
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

49

Mrs. Gandhi took a little salt on Sunday and she has had a
severe relapse of her old complaint. Whether salt is to be blamed or
not I do not know. Anyhow, I blame it.
Albrecht loves Chhotalal and he Albrecht. Tonight Chhotalal
sleeps with Albrecht.
I am still unable to give you extracts from the book. But I am
sure you do not need them, after your brilliant experience of the
voyage.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

38. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Bhadarva Vad 1 [September 9, 1911] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I have your letter of Sud 13 2 . If I pay Anandlal and you the
money you have spent on the construction of your house, I must pay
Cordes also. But that will create no end of problems. I[think] it
necessary that we approach all that we have to do in this manner. The
money you all owe me on account of thehouses, I intend to forgo.
That some owe more and others less, need not cause any heartburning. As for the debt you have incurred, I think it would be best to
consider it separately.3 We shall consider the matter further when the
Trust Deed is signed and we come to a final decision. I intend going
there before the Deed is signed, but I think it hardly possible, within
the next two or three months. It should be possible, I believe, next
year. Meanwhile, you may ask me whatever you want to in this matter.
I feel I understand the meaning of poverty better each day. It should
be clearer still if I were reduced to utter helplessness. I never intended
1

In this letter Gandhiji further explains a briefer statement he made on
Jaikrishna Vyas in his letter of August 23, 1911, and this one, therefore, was clearly
written soon after.
2
September 6
3
Following Chhaganlal Gandhi (pp. 142, 149), Maganlal also appears to
have raised the problem of compensation for improvements effected on his portion of
the Phoenix land in the context of the new Trust Deed which envisaged the transfer of
ownership of the land to trustees.

50

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to say that the philosophy of Shri Krishna and Vyas was dry. 1 I only
cited the example of Jaikrishna Vyas, brother of Prabhuram Vaidya.
If you have kept my letter, please go through it again. You may then
understand this better. I don’t know if any word was left out, causing
a serious misunderstanding of the meaning. Jaikrishna Vyas has
written very well on Vedanta. I have read some of his writings. I used
to go to him occasionally. I thought of him when I wrote about
poverty. I had already read the story 2 of Sudama. I was imbued, and
still am, with the ambition to share honours with him and Narasinh
Mehta for poverty. That is how I came to write that Jaikrishna Vyas’s
was dry philosophy and Sudamaji’s the right one and worthy of
emulation. I used to observe that the former carried the key of his safe
on his person, tied at the waist. I knew that he had collected quite a bit
of money. All this seemed to contradict what he says in his book
Panchikaran.
I look upon Shri Krishna as the Supreme God, the Shri Krishna,
that is, who was the charioteer3 of Arjuna, the friend of Sudama and
the Ranachhod4 of Narasinh Mehta. I did not even dream of criticizing Him. In so far as my letter gave you the impression that I did
I have sinned. I shudder to think how I came to write even a single
syllable on the subject. I have been agitated ever since I received your
letter today (Saturday). The katha5 over, I have sat down to write and
my very first letter is this one to you. I think it is a wretched life I live
because I do not devote the time—I can neither spare nor get it—to
reading over letters after writing them. Whatever verb you may use, I
am equally guilty. Things are bound to continue thus so long as the
mind is unsteady.
The reproaches to which Sudamaji’s wife treated him, I regard
as poetic flourishes. However, even if his wife uttered those very
words, the thing does not seem surprising or incongruous. A wife
would speak in this manner. Sudamaji would want to suffer to the
1

Vide “Letter to Chhaganlal and Maganlal Gandhi”, 23-8-1911.
Sudama and Krishna, disciples of the same guru, Sandipani, were friends.
Sudama had a large family and was very poor. His wife chided him for his otherworldliness and persuaded him to go to Krishna for help. Yet once in the presence of
the Lord, he forgot to ask for help. But when he returned home, he found it
transformed by riches.
3
In which capacity he preached the Gita to Arjuna
4
One of Krishna’s many names
5
Reading of narratives from holy books
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

51

uttermost while his wife would have none of it. Since they had a friend
like Krishna, why not seek his help? This at any rate is certain:
Sudamaji was extremely poor and content to remain so. He was,
likewise, an advanced bhakta 1 . Narasinh Mehta rose to the presence of
Shri Krishna but he never desired to be delivered from his poverty.
The saltless diet is in great favour here nowadays. I bring
bananas with me whenever I go to Johannesburg. And apples likewise.
We have bought a small tin of olive oil. In the morning, the boys take
dilute tinned milk, bread (bati) and ghee. At noon, whenever fruit is
available, they get banana, pieces of apple with olive oil and the juice
of sour lemons from the Farm, and bread. The broken rice we had,
has been cleaned and ground; we make khir2 from it. At times the khir
is made from sago and at others, with rice. Sometimes there is only
rice with ghee, stewed apricots, these having been dried last year, and
milk. In the evening, there is coffee (made from wheat) or milk, and
roti3 with ghee. Marmalade has been made from oranges, and that also
is served. Once a week, the boys have rice and dal. Medh and Pragji
have been on saltless diet for a few days. And Ba, of course, all the
time, Though she ate a little of the beans cooked for the boys last
Sunday and was in consequence quite ill for two days. God alone
knows whether the illness was brought on by the beans and salt or was
due to some other cause. I blame it of course on the former. If
Ratanshi’s wife4 were to adopt a saltless diet, all of us, except the
Kaffirs, should get credit for living without salt for six days [in the
week]. But I observe that salt is the very breath of Rambhabai.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5659. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri

1
2
3
4

52

Devotee
Rice cooked in milk
Unleavened bread, flat and round like a pancake
Rambhabai Sodha
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

39. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
HEIDELBERG ,

[Before September 16, 1911] 1
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I think I shall have to wire for Manilal. They are too shorthanded at Phoenix.
I sent you a message about a water-cart. We shall need it badly.
Mrs. P.K. Naidoo is coming and Mrs. Sodha will, I doubt, not.
You are not at peace with yourself. That is bad.
With love,
Yours sincerely,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence: National Archives of
India

40. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Saturday night, September 16, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Kennedy did come last Sunday. He passed the night too at the
Farm. He may come again. We discussed many things ≈ abstract and
otherwise. It was only at night that he opened discussion on your
relations. He showed me your letter to me. From you we went on to
what should be man’s duty in his dealings with friends and fellowbeings generally. He agreed that the safest course was not to analyse
friends even as a son does not analyse his mother or a husband his
wife. Both simply love one another. I do not think he knows what he
proposes doing on your return. And for my part I would wish that
you would not think of your future relations either. Let them grow
themselves. The only thing one may think of is oneself. What is our
duty in [the] given circumstances!
Kennedy and I discussed also the question of laying pipes, etc. I
asked him to get quotations from Vereeniging. This he has done. I
need hardly assure you that I would do nothing rashly.
The third hole is likely to be finished next week. Logan said so.
1

From the reference to the water-cart; vide the following item.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

53

He is now over 200 feet deep.
From your wonderful letters I gather that you are not worrying
about things over here. I am glad.
The fencing still remains suspended. We are making use of the
water-carts and re-laying the principal floors. The school-room and
the kitchen verandah are finished. Men’s quarters will be finished by
Tuesday. The verandah between your room and the school will be
finished by the end of the week. Fencing will then be taken up. I trust
you do not mind the delay.
Albrecht is a brick. Now he works practically the whole day. I
must retract much I said about him. His work is splendid. But his
loving faculty is simply grand. Most of the boys adore him. Mrs.
Gandhi loves him. That is saying a great deal in his favour. He is most
unassuming. He quietly sits through the story I give the children in
the evening. At times it must be uninteresting for him. But he does not
mind it. Of course he is progressing in health. I am not sure that you
and I are good enough to deserve him. Did I tell you that Chhotalal
now sleeps with him and mainly through him it is that Chhotalal too is
saltless.
A solicitor, Vand der Kessels of Heidelberg, motored from
Johannesburg to consult me. I served him in our ordinary style, gave
him principally a saltless meal. He seemed to appreciate the complement paid to him in not making the slightest distinction.
I sent Isaac to see Call in Pretoria. Isaac thinks that Call is not so
bad and could be removed. I hope to go next week myself to see him.
Probably Gordon will go with me. Here is the time table:
Self to get up at 6 a.m. and light the stove and prepare milk for
the boys.
Ring the bell 6.25 for the boys to get up.
Another bell 6.55 for breakfast, the same to be finished by 7.15.
Farm work from 7.15 to 10.30.
School from 1 p.m. to 4.30 p.m.
Going to the engine, etc., between 4.30 and 5.30.
Supper at 5.30 p.m.
School 7 p.m. This is largely some reading from the Gujarati
books together with translation in English. For the last 4 days Mrs.
Sodha and Mrs. Gandhi too have been coming. Albrecht has actually
caught the tunes of some of the Gujarati hymns.
54

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

8 to 10, or later, correspondence, etc.
Since last Sunday I have been omitting the school largely
because I did not go to Town on Monday.
With your letter from London we received letters from Miss
Winterbottom and Maud. Both speak in most flattering terms of you.
Miss Nicholson also writes saying she would endeavour to see you.
Many thanks for the chart and Dickinson’s1 books.
Hilt has not paid for two months. He had taken in an outfitter in
a sample room. This roused Amies’ ire. He asked Lapin to remove the
outfitter. I authorized Lapin to do so even if it cost a few pounds and
wrote Amies not to mind a month. Now Lapin has written saying
Amies is reconciled. The outfitter will of course go at the end of the
month. I shall not weary you with the correspondence.
Kennedy has deposited £ 50 in your account. He told me he
anticipated no difficulty about reducing the Bank’s liability.
I am doing nothing about Mountain View, nor do I know how it
is looking.
Without my asking you, I know you will pass on my regards to
your sister and all your people.
I hope that you receive my letters regularly. I have not missed a
single mail. I mention this as I do not post the letters myself and I am
anxious that you should know that I write regularly.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

41. GERMISTON INDIANS
Indians of Germiston have done well in deciding to oppose the
illegal Notice served on the Indians Stand-holders in the Germiston
Location, by the Town Council of that anti-Asiatic stronghold.2
According to Law 3 of 1885, all Asiatics should live in Bazaars or
Locations. It is true that the law is inoperative as there is no penalty
clause for residing outside Locations. But it is a notorious that in most
1

British author Lowes Dickinson
Indian Stand-holders in the Georgetown Municipal Location had been notified by the Town Council to have their licences endorsed, which would prohibit them
from trading in the Location, alternatively to quit. They wrote to the Town Clerk
protesting that the Council had no right to ask for such endorsement of licences and
that Law 3 of 1885, as amended, protected their tenure. Indian Opinion, 23-9-1911.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

55

of the Transvaal towns there are Locations provided for Asiatics and
most of these places are occupied by them. The Germiston Location is
one of them. There is no law to prevent Indians from trading in such
Locations. Consequently several Indians hold trade licences in the
Location in question. This the Town Council cannot bear. It is not at
all concerned as to how they are to live if they may not trade, nor is it
concerned that the residents of the Location are not in any way
competing with European traders in Germiston. In the Town Council’s estimation, it is an offence for an Indian to trade at all.
Now the Council is powerless by direct and fair means to
prevent the Indians of the Location from trading. So it has resorted to
the Notice above adverted to. The Council thinks that, as Indians do
not possess any leases, it could summarily eject them from their
holdings. It should be remembered that the Indians have built at their
own expense substantial buildings on their Stands. Their eviction from
the Locations must, as very properly pointed out by the Stand-holders
in their letter to the Council, mean virtual ruin to them. Happily the
Indians have decided to ignore the Council’s Notice, and we doubt
not that the Notice will remain a dead letter unless the Council
proposes still further to stultify itself by acting up to it.
The Notice serves to show what a precarious existence it is for
our countrymen in South Africa.
Indian Opinion, 23-9-1911

42. A SHOCKING CASE
We have already printed in these columns a representation
addressed by the Natal Indian Congress to the Minister of the Interior
regarding the forfeiture of two deposits of £100 each on behalf of
certain two Indians who claimed their right of residence in the
Province.1 The immigration laws of Natal provide that, if a man, who
1

Two minors, sons of Saued Ahmed of Durban and M.M. Nathalia of Verylam,
respectively, arrived at Durban on May 15 but wre restrained from disembarking by
the Principal Immigration Officer, who held that one was above sixteen and that it
had not been satisfactrorily proved in the case of the other that the was in fact the son
of his father. The two traders then deposited £100 each against permission to land
pending appeal to the Chief Magistrate, who on May 23 ruled, in the case of Sayed
Ahmed’s son, that the official’s discertion regarding the boy’s age was beyond
appeal. In the second case, he ruled that Nathalisa’s evidence was insufficient. If a
certificate were producted later about boy’s parentage, he would gladly permit
landing. He observed that the law dealt some what harshly with Nathlia and
recommended the rtefund of the deposit, . The boys left for India by the first avialable
boat. Indian Opinion, 9-9-1911.

56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

deposits £100 and lands in order to prove his claim, fails to prove it to
the satisfaction of a Magistrate, he may forfeit the deposit. Thus the
forfeiture is not a legal result of any such failure. It is optional for the
Minister to declare such deposits as forfeited, In the two cases before
us, the boys in question never made deposits themselves. But apart
from that, it was never proved conclusively that the boys had not the
right of residence in Natal. On the contrary, in one case the Magistrate
showed much sympathy. We could understand forfeiture in glaringly
bad cases where deceit has been practised. In these cases fraud has not
been even so much as whispered. The only construction that can be
placed upon the action of the Government is that they intend, by a
policy of confiscation, to defeat the right of Indian residents. If such
is its deliberate policy, we think that General Botha’s statement that
there is no intention to injure the interests of Indians lawfully resident
in South Africa must be set down asinsincere. We hope, however, that
General Smuts will favourably consider the Congress’s representation
and order a refund of the deposits.
Indian opinion, 23-9-1911

43. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Saturday night, September 23, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

The insects about me tell me that I should not do such night
work-not that I should put up a perforated screen to ward off the
insects. However, that is another story.
I have your letter and the report of the interview with Maude. I
am not surprised that Maude has impressed you. He is a true man. But
his reasoning is bad. Modern civilization has had its trial thousands of
years ago. It was tried at the time of the Tower of Babel and found
wanting. It was tried in India and failed. It is again on its trial and is
already tottering. What trial can it want? What does it propose doing?
It either rejects the divinity or seeks to find it outside of ourselves. In
both of these systems, it is hopelessly wrong. His rejection of the
doctrine of non-resistance to evil takes away everything from the
praise he bestows on Tolstoy. If Tolstoy was the greatest reformer of
his age in Europe, he owed it to his doctrine of non-resistance[sic].
The illustration he takes is far-fetched. A non-resistant will not find
himself in the circumstances he describes as probable on a ship. We
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

57

might as well cease to be vegetarians because Icelanders must eat
meat. I fancy that as vegetarians we do not go to Iceland at all. And
who knows that the sinking of a ship by the pranks of a mad man
might not be a proper deliverance for the men on board. Those who
flew from the danger of the Jameson raid 1 courted certain disaster at
Glencoe. I think I told you that I honoured Maude as a true man, i.e.,
a man who tried to act up to his beliefs, but I do not accept his
qualified acceptance of Tolstoy’s teaching. Of course, there must be
rules for the guidance of voluntary associations. Only it must be
borne in mind that Tolstoyan belief does not contemplate huge
settlements in states. Neither men nor animals are expected or intended to roam about the earth. If I serve my neighbours whom I reach
by walking to them I serve the world. When I attempt to do more, I
not only do not do anything good, but I positively disturb the economy of nature in the same way that a man abuses nature by trying to
make money upon money. Both arise out of conceit.
Your next letter should give me a vivid account of your meeting
with Dr. Mehta. I am looking forward to it.
You have asked me to give you not much account of the Farm,
in order to spare me. I however propose to continue the custom. It is
no trouble to me. The 3rd bore-hole was completed yesterday. The
machinery was dismantled yesterday afternoon. The hole is over 260
feet deep. Water was found at 220 feet. It is 60 feet from the surface.
The hole gives over 68,000 gallons in 24 hours. Logan has been
instructed to remove to a school about 10 miles from here. He will,
therefore, probably leave some time next week.
In spite of most strenuous work by Albrecht, floor-laying is not
yet finished. It is a long job. He allowed the school-room floor to dry
for a week. We came to the school only today.
A Johannesburg solicitor (a Jew), with some English friend,
came in today to inquire about the bore-hole, etc. He has just taken
over a farm near Lenz. He was interested in our ideals and I gave them
1
An abortive attempt, in December 1895, led from the Cape Colony by Dr.
Jameson, Administrator of the British South Africa Company, to annex the Transvaal
by taking advantage of a projected Uitlander uprising which did not materialize.
Jameson was captured, tried and convicted. The Raid and the failure of the British
Government to repudiate it unequivocally were among the causes that led to the Boer
War; vide “Speech at Public Meeting, Bombay”, 26-9-1896, “Speech at Public
Meeting, Bombay”, 26-9-1896 and “Speech at Meeting, Madras”, 26-10-1896.

58

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to him. He and his friend had our coffee and bread which they liked
very well. Medh and Desai are still here. They are both working very
well. Medh, Desai, Albrecht and I are restricting ourselves to only one
meal per day for the next eight days. This is that portion of the Hindu
year when millions of Hindus go in for this fast. 1 Of course, we still
remain saltless.
I have read your official letter to Miss S[chlesin]. Indeed I
opened it. She has not even seen it. I will not go into the letter with
you. I shall attend to it. Both the accounts have been kept religiously
separate. I am sorry I do not send you a weekly balance-sheet. But I
have no time and seeing that I personally attend to the matter, perhaps
it is not necessary. If I am making mistakes which you could check it
I sent you a weekly balance-sheet, I think the mistakes should be put
up with. After all I am not likely to err grievously during your
absence. At the same time, as soon as Schlesin returns to the office, I
shall ask her to prepare a statement for you. But I propose to continue
to attend to the thing personally even when she returns. Hilt has not
yet paid the arrear rent. Lapin wrote to me saying Hilt told him he was
going to send it. But Hilt is hardly reliable. I shall ask Lapin again and
press for payment.
Chhotalal often answers ‘Mr. K[allenbach] has gone to Germiston’ and then corrects it to ‘Germany’.
Herewith Call’s letter which you would like to see. I telegraphed
to him and wrote also asking him to come to the Farm if he wished to.
His calling Isaac ‘Irish’shows that the poor man’s mind is still
defective. Mrs. Goldstone never came.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

The reference presumably is to the fasts during Navaratri.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

59

44. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
Aso Sud 2 [September 24, 1911] 1
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,

I have not yet replied to your three letters. Since you were to go
to India, why should I have written [ to you] in England? As regards
the mail to India, well, the old position continues. So it is not possible
to write regularly. Even today I write without knowing when the post
will be cleared.
I am not writing anything to Manilal 2 now. I enclose his last
letter. I have [already] written to him saying that he may come when
he wants to. I have also written to Phoenix about him. I don’t think I
shall be able to go there myself. I shall therefore ask him to come
over. I feel he will gain some experience here. As to his going to Fiji, I
have written to him plainly that he should not. Even if he goes, I think
he will regret it. There was no one waiting at Fiji just to hand him
money.
He has made a great mistake in converting his paper into a
daily. As it is, there is no worth in it. The types are bad, the paper is
bad and so is the substance. He doesn’t have capable helpers in
Mauritius. How then can a proper newspaper be brought out? Besides,
where are the readers? I shall discuss all this with him when he comes
here.
In writing about Ritch and others, you say that I should not take
it ill whatever you write. You should not even entertain such adoubt.
When a view is expressed candidly, why should it offend? Do continue, therefore, to write whatever you think right on any subject on
1

A Reuter cable from Soimla dated September 5, 1911 announced that, whole
there had been belated rains in many parts of North India, famine conditions
continued in the Panjab and Rajasthan. It is to this that Gandhiji referes in the last
paregraph of this letter, and in the year 1911, Also Sud 2 corresponds to september
24 Moreover, it is clear from the contents that this letter comes before that of
October 10, 1911 (pp. 165-7), also addressed to Mehta, where internal evidence
serves to fix the year more firmly.
2
Manilal Doctor; a barrister engaged to Dr. Mehta’s daughter who was at this
time staying at Tolstoy Farm; founded a daily in Manuritius, which appeared in
English and Hindi, for advocating the cause of Indians in the Colony. Gandhiji held
that it was partly due to his efforts that the proposal to ban indenturted immigration
into the Colony materialized. Indian Opinion, 7-10-1911.

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

which you feel the need to say something.
It is likely that whited entertain more hatred towards us than we
do towards them. If, however, we make a great show of love in return
for the little that they show us, there is another reason. It is that we fear
them. Otherwise, so far as my experience goes, many Indians do not
even distinguish between good and bad and take all whites to be bad.
On the one hand, this needles fear must go; on the other, one must
learn to distinguish between good and bad. I believe both will come
about in the course of time.
I do not look upon Ritch, Polak or anyone else as my disciples,
They will all work with us as long as they think it fit. There is no
reason to believe that, after my death, people would imagine that their
actions would necessarily have my approval. Those who have come in
contact with me know that differences of opinion do exist among us
on subjects other than satyagraha. However, I shall not dismiss your
suggestion from my mind.
I have written written a great deal about my going there1 . I, too,
feel that I can render useful service if I am there during the famine. I
shall be there when the time comes. What more shall I say? All my
preparations are meant to equip myself for work there.
Bande Mataram from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
Please read Tolstoy’s Ivan the Fool if you have not done so
already.
Please look up the two or three pages of comments in Indian
Oovland [sic] on your article2 about me.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5629. Courtesy: C. K.
Bhatt

1
2

To India
Presumably, M. K. Gandhi and the South African Problem

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

61

45. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[Before September 28, 1911] 1
. . . and, the Protector having denied it, there was justification for
publishing what was done. Aiyer2 is innocent of what he has written
now. Behind it are some persons bent on mischief. We need fear
nothing on his account. We know our duty.
You may suggest to Dada Sheth3 and others that it is an offence
in law if we publish anything which we cannot prove. But it would be
all right if the Congress wrote about the matter after making due
inquiries. However, further inquiries about it . . .
From a Photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S.N. 6078

46. MR GANDHI AND THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS
The Natal Indian Congress this week received a cablegram from
Calcutta asking whether Mr. Gandhi could preside at the Indian
National Congress to be held at Calcutta in December. The Natal
Indian Congress leaders communicated with Mr. Gandhi by telegraph
1

On September 9, 1911 the African Chronicle, owned and edited by Aiyer from
Durban, reported the case of an indenturede Indian woman, Jannumia, who had been
ill- treated and assaulted by her mistress during her two pregnancies. She suffered
miscarriage the first time and lost her second child shortly after its birth. According
to the report, she and her husband had gone twice to complain to the Protector of
Immigrants but had vbeeb sent back to the employer on bothe occasions. During her
third pregfnancy, she ran away into the woods. Indian Opinion reproduced this story
in its issue of September 16, 1911, but two weeks later, it announced that the
Protector had denied that a woman of that description had ever gone to him. On
September 28, 1911, the Natal Indian Congress addressed the Protector about the
incident, presumably after having made the inquiries syggested by Gandhiji in the
letter. This letter must therefore have been written before that date.
2
P.S. Aiyer; owner and editor of the African Chronical published from Durban,
campaigned vigoroulsy for the £3 tax on indentured Indians through his own paper
and also enlisted the support of European-owned papers like The Natal Mercury and
Preroria News for the cause. The Anti-£3 Tax League of which he was honorary
Secretrary was formed in September, 1911 through his effoerts. When prosecutions of
re-indentured labourers for non-payment of the tax bagan, he brought to The Natal
Mercury’s notice the fact that the Government circular issued in April, 1910 regarding
re-indentured Indians and the tax bore an interpretation different from that of Act 19
of 1910.
3
Dada Osman

62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and telephone, strongly urging acceptance. At first Mr. Gandhi said it
was not possible for him to leave the Transvaal at the present time, but
at length he expressed his willingness to preside if it would serve the
Motherland and on condition 1 that he should be allowed to return
immediately after the session of the Congress. Accordingly, a
cablegram was sent to this effect. Up to the time of going to press no
further news is forthcoming.
Indian Opinion, 30-9-1911

47. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
September 30, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

You are working wonders. If you are, in the midst of your
people, carrying the same spirit, they will learn much from you and
your visit will be a blessing to you and to them.
I have received the no-salt and other pamphlets as also Wagner’s
Simple Life and The Party System for all of which I do not need to
thank you.
The engine has left the Farm. Flooring is not yet quite finished.
I see what a task it was. There are some signs of rain now. There were
a few drops last night.
The first death on the Farm after it changed hands has taken
place. John’s grandchild that was born here died yesterday. I supplied
him with planks for making a coffin. The child was buried somewhere
near the Kraal. I thought that was the best place.
Our semi-fast finishes tomorrow. It will have to be a complete
fast tomorrow. I have not felt it in the slightest degree. It is a question
whether I should now at all go back to two meals. But I shall not be
hasty.
Fencing should begin next week in earnest.
I wrote to Call and wired. Have not heard again.
I have not been able to go to Pretoria. It has been practically
impossible, so tied down have I become to the school and its
appointments.
1

Gandhiji does not here mention the second condition which he laid down in a
personal telegram; vide “Letter to Dr. Pranjivan Mehta”, 10-10-1911.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

63

I have restarted sandal-making. Ramdas and a new pupil are the
apprentices. Between them I finish a pair by 11 a.m. if the back bands
are ready. Repairs and new sandals were badly wanted.
Hilt has not yet paid the arrears. Lapin tells me in a letter that
Hilt has promised to send the money in a few days. I am watching
him.
By the time this is in your hands, you will have heard about the
offer made to me to preside at the forthcoming National Congress in
India. The invitation was sent to the Congress in Natal by six prominent Indians including the All-India Muslim League. Indians are all
overjoyed. They insisted that I should accept the invitation. I have
therefore said yes, but asked for a free hand. 1 I am how awaiting
reply. Meanwhile, Reuter has published the news to the world. And yet
it is likely that they may not have me if I want a free hand. I do not
propose to discuss this matter just now. If I receive a cable accepting
my conditions, I shall cable to you, asking you to return. I shall ask
Polak too to do likewise. If you do not return, I could arrange to fix
up matters during your absence. But it will be better to return. You
may want to come to India. If so, we could start together from here
after making all arrangements, or you may join me in India. My visit
there will be in India more than a fortnight. For I must return in time
for next year’s Union Parliament. This invitation I do not like at all. I
do not want it. And yet I could not say ‘no’. The matter is most
delicate.
With love,
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

Vide “Mr. Gandhi and the Indian National Congress”, 30-9-1911 and also
“Letter to Pranjivan Mehta”, 22-10-1911.

64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

48. FRAGMENT OF LETTER 1
[About October 2, 1911] 2
. . . should have light exercise, such as pacing to and fro slowly,
within the space. If you don’t have clear motions, you should apply
mud packs on the abdomen at night. One Lutavan, who had been very
ill, was restored to health with remedies such as these and he has left
for home. He used to cough so badly when he arrived that I could
hardly sleep. He used to double up [with coughing]. Had been
reduced to a mere skeleton. Here, with half an hour’s Kuhne bath ...3 I
can say more only after examining [you].
I shall send as much matter from here as possible. But it would
be idle to depend on me these days. I am preoccupied with the Farm,
that is, with the pupils. I have neither the time nor the inclination for
anything else.
Manilal Doctor will have arrived before you receive this letter.
Send on the accompanying letter.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S.N. 6076

49. “WASTED AWAY TO A SHADOW ”
General Botha paid to passive resistance an indirect tribute when
at Rietfontein he said the other day that “General Smuts had wasted
away to a shadow when, as the result is his incessant efforts to settle the
question, the gaols were filled”.4 there is no doubt that General Smuts
tried every means to break the spirit of the passive resisters, and it was
only when he failed to do so that he reluctantly recognized facts and
1

The first two pages of this letter are missing. However, it appears to have
been addressed to Chhaganlal Gandhi.
2
Manilal Doctor reffered to in the letter arrived in Durban on October 2, 1911;
vide “Letter to Pranjivan Mehta”, 22-10-1911.
3
A word is missing here.
4
Commenting on a petition by whites asking for deportation of all Asiatics,
Botha said, in his speech of September 26, 1911, that though he would like Asiatics
to be sent away, the difficulty was the “fearfully big amount” of compensation
involved and the fact that under trhe British flag they had to act according to British
principles. Indian Opinion, 30-9-1911.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

65

settled the question. Four years ago passive resistance was taboo. It
was considered by some to be illigal. Others again declared that to
yield to passive resistance was to court trouble with the Natives. Both
the parties forgot that passive resistance took its stand upon Truth and
that it was a weapon that could be effectively used by those who never
relied upon bloodshed. But today we have the Union Premier frankly
admitting that the Asiatic settlement was due to passive resistance. We
feel sure that its worth will be more appreciated with the lapse of time.
Indian Opinion, 7-10-1911

50. THE FOOL AND HIS BROTHERS
PREFACE

We reproduce this tale1 from a most devout piece of writing by
that great man the late Tolstoy. We do not provide a literal translation
of the tale; but we have attempted a free rendering of it so as clearly to
bring out its significance.
This tale is far superior to the one we have already published.2 It
has also been commended by several European writers. All that is told
in it is not only very plausible, but what is more, such things keep
happening even now in obscure places. One should not assume that
such events are improbable because they do not find a place in
recorded history.
The reader will see Tolstoy’s intention for himself as the
chapters succeed one another.
The story is written in a style which makes it as interesting as its
teaching is lofty. If our readers fail to find our version as interesting
as we ourselves found the English translation, the fault should be
attributed to us and not to the story itself.
We have substituted Indian names for Russian lest the latter
detract from the interest of the story.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion , 7-10-1911

1
2

66

The story itself has not been retranslated here into English
Vide “Wonderful is the Way of God”, 23-12-1905.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

51. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI1
[About October 7,1911] 2
. . . Manilal Adalaja has expired.This is a cruel blow. You
should take a lesson from it. I wish that in your infatuation for
modern education you would not sacrifice your health. I shall write
no more, since I have already told you of my views on the subject.
I have received what looks like an invitation to be President of
the Congress. I have accepted it on condition that I have the utmost
freedom [to express my views]. I do not covet the position but, in case
I do have to come, we shall have occasion to meet.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 675

52. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
Aso Vad 2 [October 10, 1911] 3
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,

I have not replied to your two letters because I was not to write
to you in Europe.
Harilal wants to appear for the matriculation examination. I tried
hard to convince him that there was nothing to be gained by doing so,
but the advice sticks in his throat. He refuses to come out of the state
in which I once was, when I was infatuated with degrees. How can one
blame him for it? I do only hope that he will see the light one day. His
motives appear to be good.
Manilal 4 reached Durban on Monday last [week]. He left
Durban yesterday (Monday). He will arrive here (at the Farm)
tomorrow. There was a letter from him from Phoenix, in which he said
1

Only the second page of the letter is available.
By September 30,1911, the enquiry about Gandhiji’s possible candidature for
the presidentship of the Indian National Congress had been made public; vide “Mr.
Gandhi and the Indian National Congress”, 30-9-1911. A news-item in Indian
Opinion, 7-10-1911, mentions that Gandhiji had himself cabled his reply. This letter
must therefore have been written about that time.
3
It was in 1911 that an enquiry was made as to whether Gandhiji would like to
be considered for the presidentship of the Indian National Congress, and in that year
Aso Vad 2 corresponds to October 10.
4
Manilal Doctor
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

67

that he liked the place. Chhaganlal also writes to the same effect. Let
us see how things turn out here.
I have been invited to become the President of the [Indian
National] Congress. It is not clear from whom the invitation has come.
The cable was addressed to the Natal [Indian] Congress, which has
already cabled back that it should be possible for me to go. I have
sent a private cable1 saying that I should be asked only if my freedom
would not be compromised and my presence was thought especially
necessary, else I might be left alone. About twelve days have passed
since the cable was sent, but there has been no reply so far. From this I
infer either that the cable from Calcutta was not an invitation but a
mere enquiry or that my condition was found unacceptable.
I know you are very keen that I should leave for India at an
early date, and stay there for good. The idea appeals to me and I shall
go the moment I can become free here. I think it necessary, however,
to settle matters here. I cannot possibly be there in time for famine
[relief] work. I can see that it is a terrible one. I also know that the
belated rains are almost useless for many people.
Please do not think that I shall incur the sin of falling into the
delusion that I should serve the entire world. I well realize that my
work can only be in India and that in Gujarat, rather in Kathiawad.
Excellent articles continue to appear occasionally in Indian
Opinion, and sometimes I even feel that the fullest advantage is not
being taken of all that comes out. True, Miss Smith’s despatches are
insipid. But I do not wish to discontinue them. Her sympathy is sincere. I pay her nothing. I stopped paying her while I was still in
England.2 But Miss Smith herself asked to be allowed to go on writing
without an honorarium. I agreed. In fact, I do not send some of her
despatches for publication. Only last month, I withheld one. She is not
likely to feel hurt either. Having regard to her feelings, I do not think
it will be right to discontinue her despatches altogether.
1

Not available
During his 1909 visit to England Gandhiji arranged that Miss A. A. Smith,
M.R.A.S., whose book Our Sailor King was published in 1910, should send
periodical despatches for Indian Opinion, which she did pseudonymously as
“Observer”. The discontinuance of her “London Letter” for financial reasons was
seriously considered, but Polak demurred saying, “It is the only non-p[assive]
r[esistance] thing . . . keeping us in touch with the outside world”; vide “London”,
before 25-9-1909. Gandhiji presumably discussed the matter with Miss Smith as
Polak had suggested.
2

68

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I have not got the letter you wrote after meeting Kallenbach.
There was no letter from you last week; only a pamphlet was received.
You must have seen the garbi1 on Jasama 2 in Indian Opinion . It has
also been republished separately, as people liked it. I have instructed
Phoenix to send you a copy. It fell into Chhaganlal’s hands by
chance. I personally feel that in this garbi the poet has conveyed
profound knowledge in sweet and simple language. We have not been
able to ascertain the name of the poet. Please let me know what impression it makes on you.
Bande Mataram from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5630. Courtesy: C.K.
Bhatt

53. THE IMMIGRATION CASE
The Gerber case3 decided by Sir John Buchanan at Cape Town
is one of considerable importance, and, although it refers to a
Russian Jew, it has a bearing on British Indian immigrants. It appears
that this immigrant had £20 in his possession, had paid his own
passage, was in good health, had been convicted of no crime and
was an efficient workman. The Jewish Minister testified that he
was a good Yiddish scholar. And yet the Immigration Officer treated
him as a prohibited immigrant, because, in his opinion, his educational
attainments did not come up to his requirements. We know that the
Jews in South Africa are not labouring under any particular
disabilities, but the silent and insidious opposition against them now
and then comes to the surface, as in the present case. Had Mr. Gerber
been an immigrant from any other part of Europe, and had he
belonged to a different denomination, he would probably not have
1

A Gujarati literary form resembling a ballad. This one was chosen for
publication by Chhaganlal Gandhi who also wrote a preface to it which Gandhiji
commended; vide “Letter to Chhaganlal Gandhi”, 29-8-1911.
2
The heroine; one among many labourers employed by the King Siddharaja of
Gujarat to dig a lake, she successfully resisted his improper attentions.
3
Jack Gerber, a Russian Jew, came to South Africa to join his brother but he
had left his permit behind. He was restrained from disembarking on grounds of
deficient education although he satisfied the conditions for entry. The Cape
Provincial Court ruled that Gerber was entitled to land and that Immigration officials’
decisions were justiciable. Indian Opinion, 14-10-1911.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

69

been subjected to the harsh treatment that was his lot at the hands of
the Immigration Officer. What, however, has happened to him
happens to scores of Indians from month to month, and nothing is
heard of it. We know that it is the settled policy of the Union
Government to restrict Asiatic immigration, but it can be, and should
be, no part of the policy of restriction to turn away men who are fully
entitled under the immigration laws of the Union. In other words, we
claim that intending immigrants, irrespective of their race or colour,
should have the law liberally interpreted in their favour, and equally
liberally administered. We welcome the judgment of Sir John Buchanan as showing that the courts, at any rate, will not, as a rule be
influenced by current prejudices and will not hesitate to interpret laws
in favour of human liberty, and we hope that the punishment awarded
to the Government in making them pay the costs of the application
will serve as a deterrent in the future.
Indian Opinion , 14-10-1911

54. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

October 14, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Your diary is before me. I see you are still pursuing the goal
with unflagging zeal. May you never turn away from it. I am sure that
your steadfastness must be a source of great strength to your people.
They must love you all the more for appearing for the moment somewhat strange to them. The world has a curious way of coming round
to him who does not and will not come round to it.
Fencing is going on apace now. Standards have been now fixed
for the greater part of the way. By Wednesday the fixing of standards
will be completed. Albrecht supervises the whole thing. He is assisted
by Basella and Sam1 and Desai.
You know Sam of Phoenix. He has come here for a change. He
is a worker. So naturally he is a handyman. Manilal Doctor of
Mauritius, Dr. Mehta’s son-in-law and Barrister, has come here to see
1

“Sam” was Govindsami, a machine foreman in the International Printing
Press at Phoenix.

70

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

me. He is a charming man but, as he himself says, very obstinate.
Because he was told by everybody that he would have to do manual
work at the Farm he has promised himself not to do any at all whilst
on the Farm. So much is this the case that he simply idles away the
whole of his time. I can only pity him. He is one of the most straightforward men you could meet. He proposes to leave for Mauritius and
thence for India about the end of this month. He may return to
practise here.
Kennedy told me that he could not come last Sunday as he was
very busy. He however said he would seek the opportunity of coming
some other day.
Gordon has been coming to the Farm off and on.
You showed some concern as to whether I did write regularly.
Well, I have made it a religious duty not to fail at all. So that if you
have not received my letter any week, the fault must be the postman’s,
either at my end or yours. The letters have been always (I think)
posted at Johannesburg. One week I may have posted at Lawley but I
think not even one week.
Call is still at Pretoria. He is getting on. I sent Isaac again and
propose to send him from time to time. It is no use my trying to go. I
have not a minute to spare. The arrears are appalling.
Nothing yet certain about the Indian visit. I expect a cable any
day. But I feel that I am not going. I certainly hope I am not.
You will be pleased to learn that Smuts is releasing two of
Quinn’s men. These are long-sentence prisoners. Quinn feels like
having received a new lease of life. This is more to him than his own
release from gaol.
Of course you will go to India, if you think you should. Things
here are in a fair condition. Thanks to your careful arrangement, the
African Building matter causes little trouble.
After a gentle reminder to Lapin, he has sent me another cheque for
£62. Hilt is not at all playing the game. He has not yet paid the rent. I
have asked Lapin to press for payment. Am I right? I hope you do
not mind my not sending you a weekly account of income and
expenditure.
I have drawn a cheque for £60 for the Government regarding
the mill.
No, I am not sending you I.O. from here. On second thoughts, I
felt that you would get Maud to send you a copy. I take it that she has
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

71

your German address. Needless to say we are still saltless. I am most
strictly so. I have been also on one meal per day for the past fortnight
with the exception of one day’s break. I broke the rule today because
Mrs. Gandhi and Miss Schlesin wept over it. I have now placed myself
under stricter discipline by limiting myself beforehand to so much
only per meal and taking much less time than usual. This is harder for
me than one meal per day. But I think I shall cope with it. This
experiment only started today.
Please give my love to all your people.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

55. CABLE TO G. K. GOKHALE
JOHANNESBURG ,

October 20, 1911
NATAL
CONGRESS
WHICH
RECEIVED
CABLE
PRESIDENTSHIP
MISTOOK
NATURE
INDICATOR
ADDRESS
SHOWING
YOUR
OTHER
PROMINENT
NAMES.1
RECEIVERS
THOUGHT
THERE
WAS
DEFINITE
INVITATION
AND
PRESSED
ME
ACCEPT.2
YOUR
CABLE
SHOWS
OTHERWISE.
WIDRIG3
COMPETE.
I
PERSONALLY
WOULD
AVOID
HONOUR.
MY
VIEWS
BEING
UNORTHODOX
PROBABLY
CONFLICTING.
CACHRYOS4
WITHDRAW
MY
NAME.
DISCUSSION
MUCH BETTER ENTIRELY YOUR HANDS.

From a copy: File No. 45. Courtesy: National Archives of India

1

For the explanation of “the muddle” regarding Congress presidentship, vide
“Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 30-10-1911.
2
Ibid
3
Meaning ‘I do not wish’
4
Meaning ‘If you can’

72

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

56. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

October 22, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Your having become considerably reduced does not perturb me
a bit. Your letters show me that your mind is vigorous. The vigour of
mind is possible only in a healthy body and I am anxious for you to
have a healthy body which need not necessarily be a strong, i.e., a
weight-lifting body.
I must congratulate you on having a relation who has to be
arrested for an imaginary political crime.
Gordon has been regularly sleeping and supping and breakfasting at the Farm now for a week. For the weekend he has not been to
Town at all.
Albrecht has gone to Town. I think he wanted a change. But he
is to inquire about a siphon for one of the bores. I agree with him that
we should have one hole working. There seems to be great scarcity of
water just at present. He returns on Monday.
The fencing Inspector wrote two days ago suggesting that the
fence should be completed without delay. All the standards were
completed on Wednesday. For part of the work the wires are also in.
The work is going forward. We hope to finish it by the end of the
week.
I have Chhaganlal’s brother1 , who arrived with him on the Farm
as a patient.
We still continue saltless; I entirely.
I think that in your absence, in view of Heymann’s, I should
have written to the Lapins. It cannot do them harm to pinch themselves a little to pay even a friend. They have not taken it at all amiss.
They have sent me a guarantee for Hilt’s rent. For the moment I
forget the guarantor’s name. But I have told them that they may
accept the guarantee if they consider the guarantor to be a good man.
I hope to send you the July account that you want.
1

Maganlal Gandhi

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

73

I do not think I am going to India at all. The invitation was not
formal. I have therefore cabled Prof. Gokhale saying I would rather
that he withdrew my name from discussion.1
Dr. Mehta writes saying you are almost sure to go to India.
I hope that you have been getting I.O. from London.
With love to you and all,
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

57. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION
TRANSVAAL ,

Aso Vad 0 [October 22,1911] 2
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,

I have your last letter written from Europe.
I keep writing to Harilal from time to time saying that his
hankering after examinations is not right. If he writes to you,
please tell him the same thing. If he still does not give up hisnotion,
there is nothing for it but to bear this punishment for my sins.
It is imperative that you go [to India] during the famine, whatever people might think. As for me, how can I get away? I don’t see
how I can leave before the end of next year.
It looks as if there won’t be any occasion for me to attend the
Congress.3 It appears that the cable from Calcutta was not an invitation, only an enquiry. There is a cable from Gokhale saying that the
President will be elected on the 28th.
And so I have cabled that it would be best if my name were not
discussed.4 I have also said that my views might sound peculiar and
appear contrary to [those of the Congress]. I believe, therefore, that I
1

Vide also “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 30-10-1911.
Both the invitation to Gandhiji to become the President of the Indian
National Congress and the famine in India referred to in the letter serve to establish
that it was written in 1911.
3
Vide “Letter to Dr. Pranjivan Mehta”. 10-10-1911.
4
This cable is not available.
2

74

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

shall not have to go. For a variety of reasons, it is to wished that I
don’t have to go.I live on saltless diet consisting mainly of fruit. It is
not to mortify the body that I do this but so that the body, mind and
atman may be in fuller command of themselves and purer. I
commend the diet to children also.
I believe that salt, being an irritant, is harmful. By inducing an
artificial appetite, it makes one eat more and arouses the senses
gratuitously. This may or may not be true, but our shastras speak of
the virtue of abstaining from salt. It is therfore likely that the practice
is a beneficent one. I have not noticed that it has had any bad effect. I
have observed that all sick persons, to whom I had suggested the
giving up of salt, have if anything benefited from it. If, on the basis of
your medical knowledge, you see anything wrong in this, please
correct me.
Manilal 1 is here. It is more than a week now since he arrived
here. He is a pleasant and good-natured person. He appears to be
enamoured still of a literary education. To my way of thinking, he
does not seem to have a sound physique. He has too much fat which is
due entirely to the way he lives. Many persons had told him that at the
Farm one could not, after meeting me,resist manual work. To disprove
this false notion, he made a vow in jest while at Phoenix, and in order
to live up to it, he has done no work at the Farm. The Farm stood in
no need of his work; only it was essential for his body. But he did not
work. In a way, I think it is just as well. That work is done only
because of me is utter superstition. It might partly be dispelled by
Manilal. Personally, I think, whoever works does so because he knows
that it is good to work. It is true, of course, that some persons work out
of regard for me. This, however, is another matter.
On the other hand, I also noticed that, in a settlement such as the
Farm, where a certain method of work has evolved, the upsetting of
that method by a well-behaved person like Manilal sets impressionable
youngsters and novitiates an unintended bad example. It should be
considered gracious of a thoughtful person,—in fact, it should be his
duty to a certain extent—to conform to the regulations of a settlement
such as this. A guest is under no obligation to work. But Manilal
cannot be reckoned among this category of guests. He held to his
course, ill-conceived as it was, in a superb manner, that is, with a
cheerful and innocent air—so that I feel somewhat hesitant in making
1

Manilal Doctor; vide “Letter to Dr. Pranjivan Mehta”. 10-10-1911.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

75

these comments.
Manilal has done commendable public work in Mauritius, and
he appears to have won the affections of the Hindus in abundant
measure. Thanks to his lack of patience, he could not gain the
goodwill of the Muslims, neither did he make a determined effort to
do so.
His own intention, it seems, is definitely to leave Mauritius. He
does not think he can make a living there, and if there is a possibility
of his being able to do so after a few years, he says frankly that he
does not have the patience to wait.
He has come here only because you were so insistent. Although
I do not see that he has repented having come.
He is inclined to settle here or in Natal. If he does decide to stay
on, he would assuredly earn enough for his needs. If he does not, I
should blame only him.
Now that he has been in Mauritius, done all that public work and
won the people’s affection, the best course for him, as I see it, would
be to brave all hardships and stay on there until he could earn a living.
But it is pointless to think about that. The other thing he could
do is to come here and devote himself to teaching and other activities
small and big at Phoenix and we shall then pay his expenses.
Neither is this idea acceptable to him. Therefore, the only thing
that remains is legal practice, so far as this country is concerned. He
would like it, for some time.
It would be best to marry him off now. He says that Jeki1 is also
impatient. Even if Jeki is not well, I don’t think it would be right to
stand in their way. If she is unfit for conception, let us hope and
expect that they will behave thoughtfully. If they do not, or cannot,
there is nothing for it but to leave Jeki to her fate.
If, therefore, Manilal comes here,2 he hopes to bring Jeki with
him. Manilal desires that, if she comes, she should live at Phoenix and
come under my influence. He himself finds it too great a strain to
conform to my way of living, but he approves of it. So, if it suits Jeki,
he will be glad.
I am sure that there is nothing about my mode of living that is
too great a strain on others. It of course happens that a person who
1
2

76

Jayakunvar, Dr. Mehta’s daughter
To settle in South Africa
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

has been to England or who has come under the influence of English
ways does not like my way of living or finds it too much of a strain.
Besides, Manilal has not the least faith in you. He charges you
with having changed your views too often and jumped from one
extreme position to another. He makes a similar charge against me
also, if not as vehemently. And so he thinks that, by taking up the
middle position, he would profit from both East and West. I have told
him that this is a confession of sheer helplessness, impotence and
laziness. But he is in no condition to realize this now. I believe he will
come round with time and experience, being a sincere man.
I give him the money he needs from what I have. I shall debit
the amount to your account. I don’t suppose anything more remains
to be said in this matter. You will get this letter about the same time as
he arrives. He intends to attend the Congress. I shall give him letters
[of introduction] to Professor Gokhale and others.1 If it is settled that
he should occupy himself with the work here, please send him back in
time. As for the wedding, we can as well arrange to have it here, if so
desired. If he is coming here, it will be best for me to stay on in South
Africa if only for a short time. It will be right for me to leave only
after he is properly settled. He could be fixed up in partnership with
Ritch any time. Ritch’s practice is well established.
Bande Mataram from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5631. Courtesy:
C. K. Bhatt

1

Vide “Letter to G.K. Gokhale”, 24-10-1911.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

77

58. SPEECH AT NEW YEAR’S DAY FUNCTION
JOHANNESBURG ,

October 23, 1911
A function was organized to celebrate [the Gujarati] New Year’s Day on
October 23,1911, by the Hindu Association of Johannesburg at Rev. Mr. Phillip’s
school. Mr. Gandhi presided . . . and arrived with his wife at ten sharp . . . After
explaining the significance of the auspicious day of Diwali, Mr. Gandhi made some
suggestions in that regard and wished everyone a happy New Year . . .

[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion , 4-11-1911

59. LETTER TO G.K. GOKHALE1
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

October 24,1911
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

I wish to write a long letter to you regarding the Congress
presidentship muddle.2 It was a muddle of course on this side. But of
this later.
Mr. Manilal Doctor has, as you are aware, done very good
public work in Mauritius & gained the affection of the poor Indians
there to whom he became a friend in need. He has been to South
Africa on a visit and is likely to settle in one of the provinces in the
near future. Meanwhile he is proceeding to India to attend the Congress & he wishes to work there for a resolution condemning indentured labour altogether. I agree with him entirely and think that it
never did any good to anybody. Eighteen years’ observation has
taught me that it is no solution for our problems in India. I venture to
1

This is the letter of introduction which Gandhiji had promised; vide “Letter to
Dr. Pranjivan Mehta”, 22-10-1911.
2
For “the muddle”, vide “Mr. Gandhi and the Indian National Congress”,
30-9-1911 and the letters to Dr. Mehta, 10-10-1911 & 22-10-1911 and “Letter to
G.K. Gokhale”, 30-10-1911.

78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

hope therefore thatyou will be able to see your way to furthering Mr.
Manilal’s efforts.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: G.N. 3809

60. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
LAWLEY,

Kartika Sud 2, [19]68 [October 24,1911]
CHI. MAGANLAL,

This 1 is the last stanza in the Ayodhyakanda. Dwell on it. It
constantly rings in my ears. In this difficult age devotion has been
given the primary importance. One needs the discipline and regulations even for such devotion. I see every moment that therein should
lie the roots of our education. What other blessings can give you?
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

[From Gujarati]
Ashram Bhajanono Swadhyaya, p. 301

61. MR. AND MRS. POLAK2
Mr. and Mrs. Polak are probably by this time on their way to
India. Mr. Polak has left his mark in the United Kingdom during his
brief stay there. A time which to him was one of well-earned rest, he
utilized for working on Lord Ampthill’s Committee with the zeal and
devotion of a true soldier.3 The meeting held under the chairmanship
of Sir Mancherjee to bid godspeed to Mr. and Mrs. Polak was a fitting
end to the busy programme Mr. Polak had mapped out for himself
during his stay in London.
1

Not translated here. The quotation from Tulsidas dwelt on the devotion of
Bharata for Rama and his practice of austerities too difficult even for ascetics.
2
Vide also “Polak’s Work”, 1-7-1911.
3
For a specimen of Polak’s work on behalf of the SABI Committee during his
stay in England, vide Appendix S. A. B. I. Committee’s Letter to Colonial Office”,
17-6-1911.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

79

Mr. Polak has reminded the Union Government that it will have
to face stubborn opposition if it do not repeal the tax on indentured
Indians of Natal and if it attempt to drive the Transvaal Indians into
Locations.1 We hope that the Government will be pleased to note the
reminder. There must be a halt to the anti-Asiatic campaign. And the
best method is for the local Government to decline to be party to a
persecution of the resident Indian population.
Indian Opinion , 28-10-1911

62. A FRUIT OF PASSIVE RESISTANCE
We commend to the attention of our readers the remarkable
letter from Bombay (which appeared in our last issue), signed by
Mrs. Jamnabai Nagindas Sakai 2 and Mrs. Jaijee Jehangir Petit3 , the
joint honorary secretaries of the committee formed to assist the Transvaal Indian Women’s Association in its efforts to hold a Bazaar for the
exhibition and sale of their work.
The list of the members of the Committee shows that the ladies
represent the best Mahomedan, Parsee and Hindu families of Bombay.
The presents are not to be considered in connection with their monetary value. They are a demonstration of the attention which our distinguished countrywomen in India give to us, their humbler and poorer
countrymen in this our land of adoption and exile. Nor are the
Bombay ladies alone in their care for us. The Calcutta ladies, too, have
responded liberally to the appeal sent by the Association.
The Transvaal Women’s Association itself is one of the
important products of the passive resistance struggle. It represents, it is
true, only a few Indian women of Johannesburg. They are mostly if
not all, passive resistance families. The Association owes its present
1
In the course of a speech at the farewell meeting, Polak predicted there would
be “fights” over these two issues. He also said he believed that “legal effect would be
given” to the Provisional Settlement in 1912. Indian Opinion, 21-10-1911.
2
Also President of the Gujarati Hindi Stri Mandal
3
Wife of Jehangir Bomanjee Petit, a Bombay millionaire. he was one of the
Joint Secretaries of the Bombay South African Committee and Joint Honorary
Secretary of an Indian Committee appointed in 1909 under the chairmanship of Sir
Pherozeshah Mehta to collect funds in aid of Transvaal satyagrahis deported to India;
also collected large sums of money for Gandhiji’s Passive Resistance Fund; was
Polak’s host during his 1909 visit to India and undertook to publish his pamphlet, A
Tragedy of Empire: The Treatment of British Indians in the Transvaal.

80

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

activity to the genius of Mrs. Vogl, assisted by Miss Schlesin. Mrs.
Vogl has been occupied with the organization of the Bazaar practically for the past twelve months. All her spare time has been devoted
to the work. Under her tuition and guidance, our girls have been
preparing the work which the public of Johannesburg will have the
opportunity of appreciating or criticizing. 1 The Transvaal Women’s
Association contains in it the material for a structure of the highest
importance to the Indians of South Africa. And our sisters in India, by
their thoughtful assistance, will have done not a little to help on the
structure. All honour to them and to the passive resistance movement
which has made possible such a harmonious blending as we notice in
the composition and the activity of the Transvaal Women’s Association and the Indian Ladies’ Committee.
Indian Opinion , 28-10-1911

63. TRIUMPH OF SATYAGRAHA
During Diwali, some Hindus burst crackers. The Durban police
went into a huff over this. A leading Hindu gentleman was arrested.
They all decided not to let the matter rest at that. It reached the ears of
Mr. Dawad Mahomed and Mr. Parsee Rustomjee. They hurried off to
the Mayor, and argued that, after all, the whites also exploded crackers
during Christmas. Why then should the Hindus [they asked] not do so
during their festivals? Why should they have to take special permission for this purpose? No one seeks such permission during
Christmas. “If, in spite of this, you wish to harass Hindus for exploding crackers, we shall also join them in this as a mark of sympathy. You may then arrest anyone that you like.”
The matter is not serious and the victory 2 not much of a
triumph. The significance of the event, however, is great. Because we
boldly came forward to suffer the conseqences of doing what was
right, we had, it transpired, nothing to suffer and our self-respect was
preserved. This is satyagraha.
Another, more significant, feature of this case is the fact that a
Muslim and a Parsi rushed to help in a matter which concerned
Hindus alone. The outcome was indeed happy. If the right course is
1

Vide “Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”, after 18-5-1911.
The Mayor’s decision permitting Hindus to explode crackers during Diwali
was publicized through handbills. Indian Opinion, 21-10-1911.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

81

followed in one case, it is bound to happen that it will be adopted on
other occasions as well. If one knot in a tangled piece of sting can be
unravelled, the other too can easily be undone.
How can Hindus, Muslims, Parsis and Christians all be united?
Mr. Mahomed and Mr. Rustomjee have provide the answer.
If Muslims come forward to sympathize with Hindus in what
concerns the latter alone, if Hindus do the same and if both these
communities act in this manner towards Parsis, will there be anyone so
bereft of reason as to seek to come in the way of affection developing
among them?
Let people’s religions be different. You worship a Being—a
single Entity—as Allah and another adores Him as Khuda. I worship
Him as Ishwar. How does anyone stand to lose [by this arrangement]?
You worship facing one way and I worship facing the other. Why
should I become your enemy for that reason? We all belong to the
human race; we all wear the same skin; we hail from the same land.
When the facts are as simple as that, it will be nothing but folly and
short-sightedness to bear implacable enmity towards one another.
The moderns make a key which will open many kinds of locks.
They call it the “master-key”. Likewise, satyagraha is the master-key
to our innumerable hardships. How much could be achieved if only
all the Indians would use that key! Satyagraha is not a difficult term to
understand. It only means adherence to truth. Whatever else the
ethical life may mean, it cannot be ethical if it is not based on truth.
Truth is easy enough to follow once we know its meaning.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion , 28-10-1911

64. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
October 29, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

You have made yourself an advertising agent for me. You
compel people to like me where before they did not. I can only hope
that I shall die as you think I am. I have, I think, often told you that
no man may be called good before his death. Departure by a hair’s
breadth from the straight and narrow path may undo the whole of his
82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

past. We have no guide that a man whom we consider to be good is
really good except after he is dead.
Mrs. Mayo writes to me about you in most flattering terms. You
have found a place in her heart and she in yours. Your reply to her
about me is quite characteristic of you. And I feel sure of this much
that if I did go to India, I should certainly not surrender an iota of my
(our) ideals. But I do not think I am going. I need not therefore
detain you on this topic. How I wish I had seen the people whom you
describe. Your descriptions would then be more life-like for me.
Horhoff has been deducting 10/- per month for a certain tenant he
says he has brought in. Did you make any such arrangement with
him? Miss Bennett says Horhoff never brought any tenant. I have
therefore asked him to refund what he had deducted.
I have not worried about the extracts from the book can’t get
the time at all.
Albrecht does unthinkingly profess to know more than he does.
He has no notion of fence-building. I have been doing it myself for
the last five days and I think that I shall be able to finish it myself.
Albrecht has a very good eye for straightness. He is still with me and I
am doing the work subject to his approval. I can only hope that we all
unknowing people will not make a mess of it. Anyhow we are making
steady progress.
I may tomorrow accept the tender of Stewarts and Lloyds for a
windmill for £72 odd. Kennedy says his is the best tender. I propose
shifting one of the tanks. The windmill will draw 400 gallons per
hour. Our tanks are, I think, 1,000 gallons each. The overflow water
will be allowed to run through the natural gutter on to the present
dam. In all this I am being guided by Albrecht. He thinks we ought to
make some use of the water we have.
I fear your hope that I should be the first agriculturist on the
Farm is a vain hope. I hardly think I can overtake you there. You
have, in this matter at any rate, a natural ability that I have not. And I
am still hovering about the outskirts of farming. I have not yet really
touched and mastered a single tree.
We had a visit from Adams1 today. He would not get off his cart.
He, however, had our coffee.
With you I do not think much of the medical examination by
the doctors. You must be the best judge of your system. Loss of
1

Dr. Adams

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

83

weight is of no consequence. I still feel that both morally and
physically we are well without salt and the things we have abandoned.
I must now close as I have much more to write and the watch
shows already 9 p.m.
Kennedy has not come again.
Gordon, I think I have told you, passed nearly the whole of last
week at the Farm. He will come again.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

65. LETTER TO G.K. GOKHALE
JOHANNESBURG ,

October 30, 1911
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

I have to thank you for your long cablegram with reference to
the Congress Presidentship muddle. I was sorry to hear about your
illness. Will you never be able to travel outside India and England?
British statesmen do; why cannot Indian statesmen? If you could
possibly pay a brief visit to South Africa, it would not be now a question of your courting imprisonment, but it would still serve a double
purpose. It would bring the people here nearer to India, and it would
give me the privilege of so nursing you as to restore you to health. In
my opinion, we have at Tolstoy Farm, as also at Phoenix, convenience
enough for patients like you. I am quite sure that I can anticipate Mr.
Kallenbach’s warm welcome to you at Tolstoy Farm, and, of course
Phoenix you could treat as your own home.
The first intimation I had of my name being seriously discussed
in connection with the Congress Presidentship was a telegram from the
Natal Indian Congress, advising me that it had received an invitation
for me to preside at the forthcoming session, and urging me strongly
to accept the invitation. My reply1 was in the negative. I, at the same
time, enquired about the name of the sender of the invitation. Much to
my surprise, the names sent were those of yourself, the All India
Moslem League, Mr. Petit, Mr. Natrajan, Mr. Natesan, Mr. S. Bose and
1

84

Not available
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Mr. Malviya1 . The inclusion of your name and that of the All-India
Moslem League gave the cablegram an importance which made me
waver in my decision, and I felt that, if you who knew my views so
well also wished me to preside, there must be some special reason for
the invitation. The news was received by me at the Farm. I travelled to
Johannesburg, and the people at Durban confirmed the telegrams
through the telephone and simply insisted upon my accepting the
invitation 2 . To them, it was a unique honour to the Indians of South
Africa and an equally unique opportunity of bringing the South
African Indian case still more prominently to the notice of the Indian
public. Had I not been so foolishly egotistical, I should certainly have
doubted the correctness of the message that was sent to me from
Durban. Before, however, I had had reason to doubt the accuracy of
the message, I had allowed the Durban Congress to accept the invitation, but I felt that I should send my own cablegram3 independently
to you, which I did. Three or four days later I received from Durban a
letter confirming the telegraphic messages, which, however, included a
copy of a letter from Reuter, which put a different interpretation upon
the cable. It seems to me that, during the time that I was in Cape Town,
Mr. Polak, who was in Durban, had arranged for a code address
covering the names given above. Advice was evidently given to all
these parties of the code address, and Mr. Bose of Calcutta made use
of it. In deciphering the cable, therefore, our people at Durban read
the cable to mean that it was sent by all the six parties,but Reuter’s
letter, which was sent to the Congress at the time the code address was
registered, shows that the code word might mean, according to
circumstances, one or all the names. In this instance, if my interpretation is correct, the code indicator must be read to mean only “Mr.
1

Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya (1861-1946); “patriarch” of the Indian
National Congress; editor of The Hindustan, 1887-9, The Indian Union, 1889-92 and
The Abhyudaya, 1907-9; member of Provincial Legislative Assembly, 1902-12,
Imperial Legislative Council, 1910-20 and Indian Legislative Assembly, 1924;
associated with the Congress since 1886; he was elected President of the 1909 Lahore
session and the 1918 Delhi session; Vice-Chancellor from 1919 to 1940, of Benares
Hindu University which he had founded in 1916; President Hindu Mahasabha, 1923-5;
attended Round Table Conference, London, 1931-2. Gandhiji was his guest on the
occasion of the founding of Benares Hindu University, when Malaviya used “lovingly
to explain... like an elder brother the various view-points of the different parties”.
and in 1924, used to read out the Bhagawat to Gandhiji during his 21-day fast.
2
Vide “Mr. Gandhi and the Indian National Congress”, 30-9-1911.
3
Not available
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

85

Bose”, as the cablegram was from Calcutta. So reading it, I concluded
that the so-called invitation was no invitation at all, but that it was
merely an enquiry to know whether the Natal Indian Congress could
spare me. Probably, had Mr. Bose known my whereabouts precisely,
and that cablegrams addressed to me simply “Gandhi” would reach
me, he would have cabled to me, when of course there would have
been no fuss, and I should have simply answered that I could not
accept the honour; but the mischief has already been done, and the
over-enthusiastic people at Durban even authorized Reuter to publish
the news. Your cable in reply to my second cable1 , informing me that
the decision had yet to be made, confirmed my interpretation of the
cable. The rest you know. I can only hope that the decision at
Allahabad will be against my nomination2 . I may receive it tomorrow.
This is being dictated on the 29th, Sunday. I could not very well
occupy the presidential chair, and conceal the views which I hold so
strongly on many questions that are debated year after year at the
National Assembly, and I am fully aware that an expression of those
views on the Congress platform might not only be unacceptable to our
leaders but might even place them in a false position, which I should
be the last person to desire to do. I am also aware that my views are
likely to be considered immature and based on insufficient data, also
that I may myself change them, and, however strongly I may dissent
from any of these three propositions, I think that all those who differ
from me have a perfect and reasonable right to enunciate them. It
seems to me that, just now, I can best serve the cause, that is as dear to
me as it is to the Congress, by simply serving the South African Indian
cause, and, if an opportunity offers itself of going to India, to serve
my countrymen in an independent capacity, if not, unofficially under
the guidance of a leader like you, from whom I have derived inspiration. Though our views differ, I know, on many matters, my regard
for you and for your character as I have pictured it to myself remains
the same as before.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Form a photostat of the typewritten original: G.N. 3804
1

Not available
A Reuter message published in Indian Opinion, 4-11-1911, said that Pandit
Bishan Narayan Dhar would be elected President of the Indian National Congress.
2

86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

66. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Unrevised
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

November 6, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

It is on Sunday night I am writing this thought it is dated for
Monday. I am fairly tired and not in the mood to write.
Thank God I am not to preside at the Congress. It would have
been a most frightful thing, had I been obliged.
A remarkable incident happened at the Farm during the week.
We were making very fair headway with the fence. One day when I
was not at that work, Desai came and informed me that someone had
torn up the fence. This is the analysis of my mind. The thought could
not have occupied more than a second. ‘Some evil-minded person has
done it. I must inform police.’ ‘You coward. Your philosophy is skindeep. No, the police must not be informed either for your or my sake.
The fence should be re-put and someone must sleep near it, if
necessary.’ Thus resolved I went down to the fence myself. I found
that the probability was that the fence was torn up by cattle. Anyhow
we fixed the poles much more strongly than before. I took with [me]
plates and nails to fix on to the poles. No one slept there and there has
been no further interruption. The incident, however, touched me
deeply and set me thinking as to the right course of conduct. The
most prominent idea that forced itself on me was that we, if we were to
carry out the ideals we hold were unfit to hold more land than we
actually used. The corollary is not that we should give up the land
(though even that may not be quite so farcical as one may imagine)
but that we should fence only so much as we wanted and used and no
more. Then we should be able to overtake any damage with much
greater ease. I discuss this only to show you how my mind is working
and how more and more introspective I am becoming daily. This does
not in any way alter my plans during your absence. I shall go through
the programme as we have mapped it. Fencing will be finished.
I have accepted the tender of Stewarts and Llyods for £ 72 odd
for erecting a windmill. I have described to you the whole thing I
think. They will send an erector in the course of the week.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

87

I have also told John that he might buy four oxen for which
money will be advanced to him. It may mean £ 30. I feel that it is
much better to let the natives feel that here they may depend upon the
fairest treatment. And I have no doubt that if it proceeds from the
heart and is uniform, continuous and not from affectation, it will bless
both the parties. Anyhow just now I am generous as your steward. Of
course John has to repay before the year is out. I am letting Basella
too do pretty much as he likes. I see that I can get much more
satisfactory work that way.
We had a very busy Sunday. A party of 13 came, all but two
unexpected. These were Miss Schlesin and Gordon. The others were
Indians. Poor Mrs.Gandhi, she may foam and fret afterwards. But just
on such occasions she is at her best.
I note that you are seriously affecting the lives of your people
there. Your telling me that they love me now more and more flatters
me, but it ought not to. They love me as they see me through your
glasses. However, of this when we meet.
Of course, you will continue your practice as long as you find it
necessary. But I do say that it would be unwise to take precautions
beforehand on the basis of Kennedy leaving you for certain. In your
place I should simply let the future take care of itself. If you return
committed to a definite course, naturally your actions will be in that
direction. Whereas if you leave the future in the lap of the gods, you
will find your course much smoother and certainly far more natural.
With love to you and all to whom you have introduced me,
Yours sincerely,

UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
I can report nothing about Call.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

88

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

67. THE £3 TAX1
Recent events have shown that there is a great deal of confusion
in regard to the question of who is liable to pay the £3 tax under Act
17 2 of 1895. The Law Department seems to have decided that an
Indian who has re-indentured or entered into a civil contract of service
under the Masters and Servants Act, which he is entitled to do under
Clause 3 of Act 19 of 1910, is liable to pay the tax of £3 for the
period of his re-indenture or contract of service. The clause in the Act
runs:
The payment of arrears of licence money, due under Act No. 17, 1895,
by any Indian, shall be suspended during the period of a re-indenture or
contract of service for a term of not less than two years, and in the event of his
return to India at the expiration of such contract or indenture, payment of
arrears shall be waived.

In order to get at the true meaning of this clause, it is necessary
to go back a few years. In the year 1905 it was found that a great
many ex-indentured Indians were not paying the £3 tax, for the
simple reason that they were too poor to do so3 . Consequently an Act
1

This article and “A Breach of Faith”, pp. 186-7, seem to have been
occasioned by the summons served on one Devaragulu, under civil contract with a
Durban Indian, for non-payment of arrears due to the £3 tax. When the Magistrate’s
attention was drawn to Clause 3 of Act 19 of 1910, he suspended the order for
payment and adjourned the case sine die. Similar summonses had been served on about
21 Indians then under re-indenture. On September 16, 1911, a meeting of Indians held
at Parsee Rustomjee’s house in Durban formed the Anti-£3 Tax League to fight for
repeal of the tax. Indian Opinion, 9-9-1911 & 23-9-1911. Vide also Appendix
“Summary of the Protector’s Report”, 11-11-1911.
2
This was passed soon after Natal became a self-governing colony in 1893;
vide “Statement Presented to Constitution Committee”, 29-5-1906. It did not
envisage payment of the £3 tax by women.
3
Vide “Indentured Indians”, 22-4-1905. The hardships of Indians who were
obliged to pay the tax came to light from time to time; vide, for instance, “The Poll
Tax”, 17-3-1906. In 1911, at Stanger, a woman hawker was sent to prison for two
weeks for failure to pay this tax owing to extreme poverty. Indian Opinion,
8-7-1911. The Indian Immigration Law of 1891 fixed the wages of indentured Indians
at 16s. per month for the first year, rising to 20s. per month for the fifth year (Vol. I,
pp. 215-6), while the wage for a Native worker in the Rand mines about the year 1901
was 45s. per month and Native labour was unobtainable even at that price; Gandhiji
had always therefore argued that the Indian labourers’ savings from which they paid
the tax could not have been very considerable. Maud Polak, in a letter to the Colonial
Office (C.O. 477) mentions a Natal planter who testified before a South Afican
Commission that “only 6 per cent. of ex-indentured Indians could afford to pay the £3
tax”.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

89

was passed which prohibited any person from employing or letting
land to an ex-indentured Indian who could not produce his £3 licence
for the current year. A contravention of this Act meant a fine of £5 to
the employer. It also provided that an employer could pay the £3 and
deduct the amount from the wages of the Indian. In this way it was
thought to force the Indians to pay the £3 tax or leave the country.
Later on in the same year, another Act was passed which entitled an
Indian who was subject to the payment of the tax to re-indenture for a
term of not less than two years. This was not possible before. He could
also regain the privilege of being sent back to India which he had
forfeited by paying the £3 tax. The Prime Minister of Natal, in
moving the second reading of this bill, said that
the bill had been brought in so as to enable the Indian who might not be able
to pay the £3 tax upon his freedom from indenture to reindenture. There might
well be times when an ex-indentured Indian would not be able to pay the £3
tax, and it was only fair that he should be allowed to reindenture. It was not
only that the right was given to him to re-indenture, but he would become
entitled to the passage back to India, which he would otherwise have forfeited
by not availing himself of it at the conclusion of his previous indenture.

So here it is quite clear that it was intended that an Indian who
entered into a contract of re-indenture had not to pay the tax. But this
inducement was not sufficient. At the end of 1909, the planters were
crying out for more Indian labour and the Government of India had
threatened to stop immigration to Natal. What was to be done? In the
Legislative Council, the Hon. Mr. Baynes pointed out that
the £3 residential fee was a severe condition upon Indians, including the polltax. It was a fact that the number of Indians leaving the Colony was greater
than those coming into it. He thought they should prevent this exodus of
labour.

The Colonial Secretary, in moving the second reading of
Amendment Bill, stated that
representations had been received both from the Indians themselves and from
the magistrates to the effect that the licence of £3 was unable to be paid, and
the Government felt that the obligations would be met if the licence were
removed so far as Indian women were concerned and that was the object of the
present measure. The Indian Immigration Commission had inquired into the
matter, and had recommended the course now proposed.

Sir Liege Hulett supported the Bill and said that it was never
intended that the £3 tax should apply to women and girls. But, on the
motion of Mr. Kirkman, an amendment was passed giving magistrates
discretion to relieve any Indian women from the payment of licence
90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

money. To the same Bill Mr. Clayton moved a new clause in regard to
the payment of arrears, quoted at the commencement of this article,
which was passed into law. This law was passed in January, 1910 and
in April of the same year a circular 1 was issued from the Colonial
Secretary’s Office, Maritzburg, printed in English, Hindi and Tamil, to
the effect that Indian men and women who should have taken out the
£3 licence, but had not done so, could re-indenture for not less than
two years or enter into a civil contract for not less than two years, and
while under contract or indenture, the licence money would not be
claimed, and should they return to India, they would not be made to
pay the licence money due2 .
Reviewing the above facts, it is not possible to come to any other
conclusion than that it was never intended that ex-indentured Indians
would have to pay the £3 tax during the time of their re-indenture or
contract of service. This review is made for the special purpose of
clearing up any doubt there may be as to the intention of the
legislature regarding the payment of the tax during re-indenture. The
tax itself we have always fought against, tooth and nail3 , and we shall
continue to do so until this pernicious and unjust law is wiped off the
Statute-book.
Indian Opinion , 11-11-1911

1

Vide “The £ 3 Tax Again”, 30-4-1910.
The confusion appears to have been caused by this circular which was sent
round among Natal Indians in April, 1910, before the formation of the Union. This
emanated from the Colonial Secretary’s Office but the Protector’s Department
provided Hindi and Tamil translations. While Clause 3 of the Act exempted reindentured Indians from “arrears” of the £3 tax, the English circular mentioned
“licence money due”and the translations probably suggested exemption from current
payments as well. Aiyer (footnote 2, p.162) brought the issue to the notice of The
Natal Mercury which, in an article published on November 8, 1911, opposed the
interpretation as contained in the circular produced by Aiyer with that of the Union
law officers who argued that the interpretation would depend upon the wording of the
statute which they held made re-indentured men liable to payment of the current tax.
Indian Opinion, 11-11-1911.
3
Natal Indians had always objected to the £3 tax on indentured Indians who
had become free men on the ground that the tax was not a source of revenue but a
measure designed to drive the Indian out after his term of indenture and that it was
repugnant to British constitutional traditions. For Gandhiji’s views on indenture and
the 1895 Bill, vide “Speech at Public Meeting”, 26-9-1896. 9.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

91

68. FAMINE IN INDIA
We refer to the famine as “Famine in India” though Gujarat
and Kathiawar [alone] are affected. If a part of the body is injured, the
whole is injured; in the same way, a famine in Gujarat is a famine in
India.
We gather from letters and newspapers from India that this
year’s famine will be much worse than any in the past. Men and cattle
are both dying off. The last rains, it seems, have failed. One has
actually to see the conditions to realize that they are beyond
description. Even a day’s starvation makes us irritable. If we do not
get the food we are used to, there is no limit to the anger we vent upon
the cook or the lady of the house. Suppose, instead, that for eight
months we have had almost nothing to eat. The body is reduced to a
skeleton. The belly almost touches the back. One can stand up only if
helped by someone else. If we can visualize this for ourselves and
suppose further that hundreds of thousands are in this state, we shall
then have some idea of the conditions that obtain in India.
How can we help? The first way is to restrain our luxurious
ways, our pretensions, our pride and our sharp practices and crave
God’s forgiveness for the sins we have committed. After this, if we
feel that our minds have been purified, we may pray to God for relief
for India in this cruelty inflicted on her.
If we proceed in this manner, money can be saved. We can use
this money to provide relief to the famine-stricken. We are ready to
accept money from those who cannot themselves send it, and to do so
on their behalf. Already, we are in correspondence with a generous
person who has come forward with the money he is willing to spend
for this purpose. The money sent by us we shall pass on to this gentleman or to some public body of standing and publish the receipts.
The important thing is not how to send the money but how to
collect it. It is our belief that the money sent by those who have made
their minds simple and pure as we have suggested, will bear worthy
fruit, as good seeds do; of this there can be no doubt.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion , 11-11-1911

92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

69. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

November 11, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

If you still think that you should send my letter about Aylmer
Maude to him, you may do so.
I can fully appreciate your difficulties about even keeping to
two meals and a saltless and vegetableless diet.
Your experience about your cousin is disconcerting. Your description of it does credit to your heart. You are there in the midst of
the subtlest temptation. The people you want to serve may unconsciously be your death-traps. Your very abstemiousness ≈ the leaving
off of salt, etc., may surround your life with romance and a halo and
may then be itself a temptation. Yes, the path of those who want to
think and live right is narrow like the edge of a sword. They may not
only not swerve an inch from the path, they may not even lift their
fixed gaze from their goal. I have seen acrobats rope-walkers in India.
They walk on a rope fixed to poles in mid-air quite twenty feet or
more from the ground. They walk with a bamboo stretched along
their outstretched arms and their gaze steadily in front of the other
end. They may not go away a hair’s breadth from their path. Well,
that of spiritual rope-walkers is a millionfold more difficult. Happily,
they have also correspondingly greater strength. You are one of those
spiritual rope-walkers. In The Song Celestial, Krishna says: “A good
man must think of ME (God) performing every function of life.” It is
too true. When there is no witness, He is the most vigilant and active in
noting our lapses if also our merits. Our merits count for nothing. For
that is what we owe. Our lapses simply swell the heavy debit side.
Beware then; think of the articles of our agreement, and God willing
you will be safe. I know that I am addressing myself to a condition
which existed one month ago and which, if it is existent at the time I
am writing this, may have made a big alteration in your life. But I
have very great faith in you enough to know that you cannot fall.
Stewarts and Lloyds have not yet sent the material. They will
next week. Fencing is steadily progressing. Desai and Albrecht attend
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

93

to it chiefly. Ramdas and another young man go to help. I am
engaged in making sandals for the coming Bazaar1 .
The money for the bore-holes is being paid from your account
at the Natal Bank. I have paid in all £ 85 yet. They have not served the
final account.
The school is going forward but not forward enough to satisfy
me ≈ chiefly owing to my defects. I am learning. I have not succeeded
in drawing the best out of the boys.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

70. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

Kartak Vad 5 [November 11, 1911] 2
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,

As there have been no letters from you, I have not written regularly either. The post has become irregular now; so I put off writing to
you whenever there is other important writing to be done.
I am awaiting replies to some my letters.
It is a good thing indeed that the proposal about the Presidentship of the Congress was dropped. I think I wrote to you about the
long cable3 I sent to Prof. Gokhale. If I had known that it was only an
enquiry from the Calcutta committee, I would have flatly refused
regardless of any pressures brought to bear upon me. I would be
altogether useless if placed in a position in which I cannot express my
views freely.
1
The Indian Bazaar organised by Mrs. Vogl, who sympathized with the Indian
cause and took a keen interest in Indian women. The Bazaar had been held by her in
1910, and in 1911 was inaugurated on November 15 by William Hosken.
2
This letter takes the episode of the presidentship of the Indian National
Congress further and was thus written in 1911.
3
This is not available; vide, however, “Letter to Dr. Pranjivan Mehta”, 22-101911.

94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The Kathiawar famine appears to be a fearful one. I hope you
are still firm about wanting to visit the place. You will no doubt help
with money but it would be well if, alongside of that, you can explain
to the unthinking princes, should you come across any, and to others
that the poor are being ruined through the imposition of railways, etc.
I feel all the time that what other countries can afford, India cannot.
The prosperity of the people does not consist in exports or imports. If
we produce what we need and consume it locally, we would be free
from famine to that extent.
My little school is expanding gradually. More boys would join
if there were no severe regulations regarding diet, etc. I feel [however]
we should not relax these regulations. In fact, I do not wish too many
boys to join. If they did, my work would greatly increase and I would
not be able to that give attention to the boys’ character which I should
like to.
Bande Mataram From

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5632. Courtesy:

C.K.

Bhatt

71. ADDRESS TO MRS. VOGL1
JOHANNESBURG ,

[November 15, 1911]
DEAR MRS. VOGL,

It would be ungrateful on our part if we did not give public
expression to our feeling of appreciation of the great services rendered by you to the Transvaal Indian Women’s Association. This
great Bazaar is the coping-stone to the work done by you.
During our darkest hours, when those who were near and dear to
1

This address, signed by fourteen ladies of Johannesburg, was presumably
drafted by Gandhiji who “. . . on behalf of the Indian Women’s Association welcomed
the guests. He paid meet tribute to the noble work done by Mrs. Vogl and read the
following address which he handed to Mr. Hosken for presentation to Mrs. Vogl.”
Acknowledging the present, Mrs. Vogl said, among other things, that the proceeds
(which on December 9, 1911 amounted to £138.10.9 according to Indian Opinion, 912-1911) would go towards furthering educational work and perpetuating the memory
of Nagappen (Vol. IX, pp. 283,299 & 523 and Vol. X, pp. 335 & 338) and
Narayansamy (Vol. X, pp. 334,335 & 337-8) “the two heroes who fell in the passive
resistance fight” Indian Opinion, 25-11-1911.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

95

us were in prison, you and Miss Schlesin, by unremitting zeal, assisted
us in no small measure to forget our misery.
You have indeed been a true sister to us, and, so long as the
European community contains women like you, we need not despair
of seeing the two divisions of the Empire living in peace and friendliness.
We ask you to accept the accompanying1 as a slight token of our
esteem for you.
Indian Opinion , 25-11-1911

72. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

Kartak Vad 12 [November 17, 1911] 2
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,

I have your letter. I was very happy to hear that you and Chhagan did not eat meat on board ship. I believe that your taking him
back to India [from England] has been the saving of his life. It would
have become difficult to make him give up his Western habits had
more time gone by.
There is nothing to be said now about my speech 3 in regard to
which you expressed your hope. But I am these days in so fiercely
earnest a state of mind that I could not have spoken otherwise. That is
why I asked for full freedom, should they invite me [to be President].
I can well understand that they cannot grant this. It is just as well that I
do not have to go there as President.
That the Gujarati has now agreed to publish it has no interest
for me. It appears that they have taken it up when it became certain
that there was no risk in doing so. I have already written to you at
1

This was “a beautiful writing-desk” presented to Mrs. Vogl.
The episode of the presidentship of the Indian National Congress is here
narrated to its conclusion. This letter, which is in continuation of Gandhiji’s earlier
letters to Dr. Mehta, pp. 165-7, 168-71 & 183-4, was clearly therefore written in
1911.
3
Presumably the draft of the Presidential address for the Congress Session.
The text of this speech, however, is not available.
2

96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

length about Manilal.1
I have also explained to you about Miss Smith. 2 I have the
feeling that she is not a dishonest woman. She keeps to one line.
Whatever she sends for I.O., she does out of love. Money is not the
consideration at any rate.
Herewith a list of the [printing] types required here. I am unable
to pay for them. Neither am I in a position at present to secure the
help elsewhere. I am not writing directly to Revashankerbhai about
them. You may pass on the list to him and ask him to dispatch the
types if you feel that would be all right.
Bande Mataram from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5633. Courtesy: C. K.
Bhatt

73. A BREACH OF FAITH
Apart from the legal effect of the £3 Tax Act, it is necessary to
examine the bearing of the cirucular3 we referred to in these columns
last week. There are cases when legal quibbles have to be deliberately
set aside. The £3 tax episode is, in our opinion, distinctly such a case.
The late Natal Govenment bound themselvels through their circular to
exempt the Indins who re-indentured themselves from the payment of
the tax altogether. We consider that the English text bears only that
construction and no other. But the translations, if anything, are still
more binding on the Government in that the people acted upon them.
The Government must apply the simple rule of interpretation, viz., the
meaning of the circular is the meaning that the men concerned
reasonably gave to it. Now there can be no doubt whatsoever as to
what meaning the men gave. So much for the circular and its effect.
The Union Government are using the force of the tyrant in
seeking to interpret and enforce the Act in question in defiance of the
circular. We contend that the Acts of the late Government are binding
on them, if they are to retain the respect of the inhabitants of South
Africa, no matter whether they are poor Indians or highly placed
1

Vide “Letter to Dr. Pranjivan Mehta”, 22-10-1911.
Vide “Letter to Dr. Pranjivan Mehta”, 22-10-1911.
3
Vide “The £3 Tax”, 11-11-1911.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

97

Europeans. It is a distinct breach of faith for them to override the
circular and now want to exact £3 per year from the poor, deluded reindentured men. Our appeal to the present members of the Ministry is,
perhaps, specially appropriate. They insisted on and succeeded in
getting accepted the interpretation1 of the Vereeniging Treaty which
they, the weaker party, placed upon it. Let General Botha beware lest,
in the hour of triumph 2 , he forget the lesson of the past and now
steam-roller poor, ignorant men into subjection.
Indian Opinion , 18-11-1911

74. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

November 19, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

You will be pleased to hear that Call is now at the Farm. I went
over to Pretoria to fetch him. He is looking fit and well. He was
overjoyed to be discharged from the asylum which he did not like at
all. He has been discharged only provisionally. I have signed a paper
undertaking to look after him and to produce a medical certificate at a
later date as to his sanity. His memory is certainly weak but he is not
insane in any shape or form. I am giving him your felt mat and your
blankets. He is using bed-sheets. I propose to keep him with me
during all the Farm week. We sawed wood together this morning.
Gordon has come to see Call. I feel somewhat angry with myself. I
should have gone to Pretoria earlier. In that case probably Call would
1

The reference is to the Boers’ insistence, after the War, on their right to
interpret the word “Native” in clause 8 of the Vereeniging Treaty so as to deny the
franchise to the Indians. At that time Lord Milner allowed the Boers thus to interpret
the clause which, however, only put off “the question of granting the franchise to
Natives” “until after the introduction of self-government”; but Indians were willing to
forgo the right of political franchise as well ; vide “Petition to Natal Legislature”, 106-1903, “Statement Presented to Constitution Committee”, 29-5-1906, “Letter to
The Outlook” and “London”, 27-8-1909.
2
Botha’s hour of triumph is a reference to how, within five years’ of losing
the Boer War, the Dutch, under the Het Volk, had won the peace. As Gandhiji put it at
the time (Vol. VI, pp. 343-4 & 357-8), “in defeat, the Dutch had truly won”. Also,
they were able subsequently to turn the Union of 1909 to their advantage, that is, to
promote the interests of the Dutch language and those of the poor among themselves.

98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have come to the Farm earlier. As it is, he wrote to the Lapins who
telephoned to me. Hence his discharge.
Stewarts & Lloyds’ man comes tomorrow (Monday) to erect the
windmill. John has now got 4 oxen. I have to pay £ 32 for them and a
plough.
I am surprised to learn that you did not receive any letter during
the week you wrote your last letter. I have never failed and hope not
to in future so long as you are away.
I am glad to have the news about your niece. Nevertheless my
remarks of last week are not without their use.
The fence is all but complete. I am not satisfied with the way in which
the gate has been fixed. I do not know the thing and Albrecht in my
opinion has made a mess of it. Poor man, he worked at it 3 days. He
will work again at it. Only 500 yards are now left.
The Bazaar went off very nicely. 1 The Mayor and the Town
Clerk were present. Nearly £ 100 profits were made; no raffle was
permitted.
I fear that we shall not have much fruit this time in our garden.
This is due to want of rain. And I was not able to water the trees.
Lapin felt disappointed over not hearing from you at all after
you left Maderia.
I hope that you have been writing to your brother here.
I think that your letter to Mrs. Ritch was very good.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

On November 15.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

99

75. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
Friday night [November 24, 1911] 1
MY DEAR WEST,

Your letter could not have shaken me more severely than if you
had informed me of some serious personal loss. My consolation is
that the news may be totally unfounded. In have so much faith in his
probity and general purity that I shall continue to disbelieve the
charges, so long as I have not your definite judgment. At first I
thought I should write to him but I think I shall assist your investigation by not writing so long as he does not mention the matter.
Your sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 4414. Courtesy: A.
H. West

76. AN UNFORTUNATE ANSWER
Mr. Harcourt’s reply on the £3 tax question is most unfortunate2 . If it represents the settled policy of the Union Government,
they are in for a big battle, not of words but of action. The free
Indians owe it as a duty to themselves and to their poor brethren to act
so as to secure repeal of the obnoxious levy. With the stoppage of
theintroduction of indentured labour from India the last vestige of
justification for the levy ceases. The Imperial Government cannot so
easily be allowed to shirk their obvious duty. If the levy is wrong,
neither the Royal sanction nor the determination of the Union
Government can make it right. The sooner the Natal Indian Congress
makes the position clear as to the steps to be taken by the Indian
community the better it will be for all concerned. The iniquitous tax
must be removed at any cost.
Indian Opinion , 25-11-1911
1

This was written about the same time as the letter to West (pp. 190-1) where
internal evidence helps to fix the date more firmly. From the subject-matter it is clear
that this was the earlier of the two letters and the Friday preceding was November 24.
2
In answer to a question by sir. W. J. Bull, Lewis Harcourt replied in the
Imperial Parliament “that the legislation had been passed with the full knowledge of
the Indian and Imperial Governments”. He added that, while immigration of
indentured Indians to Natal had ceased, the South African Government was not
prepared to repeal the £3 tax. Indian Opinion, 18-11-1911.

100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

77. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
November 26, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Today is Sunday. I came into Town last night as I have to go
with Cachalia today to Krugersdorp to make collections for the Polak
deputation.1
Call too is in Town. He came in yesterday morning. Call will not
stay long at the Farm I fear. He does not like anybody on the Farm
except myself. He cannot bear the sight of children (Indian). He
considers that no one on the Farm knows how to eat, sit, walk, run or
stand. The slightest thing upsets and irritates him. I do not let the
children go near him. When he eats, the children are not to be near
him. He has the kitchen verandah all to himself. I have withdrawn the
night school from the school room and it is held in the kitchen room.
Special food has been brought for him. Of course the above condition
shows disease. He tells me these things quite freely. I am now seeing
whether Call could be placed elsewhere. If he had all the conditions
agreeable to him, he is likely to recover quickly. Beyond good, nonstimulating food, fresh air and good surroundings, he needs nothing
more. Call’s condition shows how bad we must all be. Call’s bad
points come to the surface because the poor man has lost control over
himself. But Call at his worst seems to be an angel and certainly a
good man compared to what we should be if we lost control over
ourselves and the worst in us had full play. The inner man must be in
harmony with the outer. We ought to be able to think and feel as we
act. That is, if I act politely towards you, I ought to feel that also. Do I
always think and feel well of people when I act well with them? I am
afraid it is not always thus. To that extent that I fail, I am a liar. And
yet I must not act otherwise. I must continually try to eradicate
feelings and thoughts which are contrary to my actions as they ought
to be. Then I should be a wholly truthful man. May you and I have
the privilege of becoming such men. I am full of thoughts on this
matter which if I had the time I should put down in this letter but I
must close.
Your remarks on your niece are good.
1

Vide “Letter to Dr. Pranjivan Mehta”, 8-5-1911.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

101

The windmill was finished on Friday. We shall begin to draw
water from Tuesday probably. Call may lay the piping. He has
offered to do so and if he is well, I shall let him.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

78. LETTER TO A.H. WEST
M.K. GANDHI
ATTORNEY
21-24 C OURT C HAMBERS,
C ORNER R ISSIK & A NDERSON S TREETS,
P.O. BOX 6522, JOHANNESBURG ,

November 27, 1911
MY DEAR WEST,

An otherwise excellent number has been spoilt today by the
letter-press on the supplement. It looks altogether too bad to describe
the Mayor, Mayoress, etc., as being next to me. It looks very inappropriate, and Mrs. Vogl, who was the centre of the show, ought undoubtedly to have been mentioned. I don’t know whether Miss Schlesin
wrote to you, but I told her she should ask you to insert all the names.1
With reference to the £ 3 tax, the first step to take is not to advice
the men to refuse to pay the tax, but for the Congress to send a
petition to the Prime Minister, signed by all the Indians in Natal- say
15,000 signatures. There should be a mass meeting held. The Congress should then ask the Indians in the other Provinces to support.
We must then await the reply from the Prime Minister. Then there
should be a petition to Parliament next year, and, if Parliament rejects
the petition, there should be an appeal to the Imperial Government by
the Congress aided by the other Associations in South Africa. Finally
the refusal to pay the tax! Then, undoubtedly, the Congress should
undertake to feed the wives and families of those who may be imprisoned. The men would undoubtedly go to goal, if there is a body of
earnest workers. For this purpose, either you will have to be in Durban
1

Vide also “Krugersdorp Agitators”, 3-6-1911 and “Letter to Ratan J. Tata”,
1-4-1912 and “Mrs. Vogl’s Bazaar”, 22-6-1912.

102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

continuously, or someone else will. The thing cannot be taken up
haphazard. If the men were asked to go to goal today, I do not think
you would find anybody taking up the suggestion, but if the
preliminary steps as described above, are taken, by the time a final
reply is received the men will have been thoroughly prepared to face
the music. I know, too, that the thing is quite capable of being done,
but one man at least must be prepared to devote the whole of his time
to the matter.
If it were a question of deciding whose word was to be accepted,
I should any day prefer Thakar’s to Virji’s. However, I have written to
Virji, and there may be letter waiting for me at the Farm.
Thinking over the teachers for Campbell’s1 Estate, I think it
might be as well for you to tell Campbell that you would want three or
four months’ notice to supply him with a teacher. He should also give
you the salary he is likely to offer. For Hindi we might spare a Gujarati man from Phoenix. The experiment will be so valuable, that we
might lend the services of one reliable man and, for a good Tamil
teacher, we might have to import a good man from India.
I am glad you were present at the function to Hosken & Co.,
and that you subsequently drove with Hosken. He is, you must have
noticed, a very frank and enthusiastic man. I hope he will visit you at
Phoenix. Who drew up the address to Hosken and the others?
I consider Lutchman Panday’s suggestion to be quite impracticable. There are not sufficient workers to form an Association of the
kind he suggests, nor is the movement of Indians in the different Provinces so unhampered as to allow of such an Association doing useful
work.
Yours sincerely,

M.K. GANDHI
From a copy: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

1

Marshall Campbell, Chairman, Board of Directors, Natal Estates, Lt

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

103

79. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
Magshar Sud 6 [November 27, 1911] 1
CHI. MANILAL,

I have your letter. I had asked you what faults Mr. Sam 2 had
found with the Farm but you have forgotten to answer.
There is no need at all to worry about my health. As my hair is
[cut] very short, you felt that I was in bad health. It doesn’t ever
happen that I go to sleep at midnight and get up at three. Mostly I go
to bed at 11 and get up by about 5.30 or 6. There is nothing
extraordinary about this. You ought therefore to be free of worry on
my score. I still believe that I can work longer than any of you. It may
be that I can’t stay up late. The lady beside me is the Mayor’s wife.3
Even before you thought of the matter, it had occurred to me
that if you could free yourself from there you . . . December . . . 4
About £150 must have been realized at the Bazaar. After deducting expenses, there will be a net collection of £100.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I shall send a reply5 to Mr. Chamney’s letter.
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 98 Courtesy: Sushilabehn
Gandhi

1

The Bazaar referred to in the letter is Mrs. Vogl’s Indian Bazaar which was
inaugurated by William Hosken on November 15, 1911.
2
“Sam” was Govindaswami, a machine foreman in the International Printing
Press at Phoenix and a shikari.
3
This is presumably a reference to a photograph taken at Mrs. Vogl’s Bazaar.
Indian Opinion, 25-11-1911, mentions that the Mayor was present.
4
Two pages missing here
5
Not available

104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

80. FRAGMENT OF LETTER
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

[After November 27, 1911] 1
. . . has become self-seeking. Our teachers have brought us
down through unworthy education. Or, rather, it is wrong to say this.
As we are, so are our teachers. Our priests are Maheshvaras2 or
Harajivans3 only in name. As for knowledge of Brahman4 , they are
not familiar even with the A B C of it. We don’t ask for much; what
then, can we expect? God is the Supreme atman. The atman exists.
Moksha5 is possible for it. The ideas of Papa 6 and punya are true.
Deliverance is possible even at the end of the present life. Once we are
firmly convinced of this, we must take up the quest. There is no
reason whatever to believe that anything is right just because it is an
established practice or because it was done by our elders. Such an
attitude is in conflict with belief in the freedom of the soul. There is
much that is good in the old. However, just as there is smoke wherever
there is fire, the good in the old is [inevitably] mixed with other things
not as good. Wisdom consists in distinguishing between the two and
drawing out the essential.
The letter7 that Cordes has written . . .
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 5665. Courtesy:
Radhabehn Choudhri
1

As the last incomplete line in this fragment suggests, the thoughts in this
letter appear to have been inspired by a letter from Cordes (Appendix X) at Madras.
Gandhiji had earlier attempted to wean him from Theosophy, (“Letter to Dr. Pranjivan
mehta”, p. 65) but unsuccessfully as would appear from Cordes’s letter which sounds
like a friendly farewell note. The Trust Deed which his letter enclosed was signed and
witnessed by Cordes on November 12. Assuming 15 days for the post from Madras to
reach South Africa, this letter by Gandhiji, which is possibly addressed to someone in
the Phoenix Settlement, of which Cordes had earlier been a member, must have been
written some time after November 27, 1911.
2
Literally, “the Supreme God”, a name of Shiva, the God of austerity and selfmastery in the Hindu Trinity
3
Literally, “One who lives in Hara”, i.e., in Shiva
4
The Absolute
5
Deliverance from phenomenal existence
6
Sinful action, resulting in degradation and punishment
7
Vide Appendix “Cordes’s Letter to Gandhiji”, 12-11-1911.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

105

81. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
Tuesday [November 28, 1911] 1
MY DEAR WEST,

Your letter requires a long reply. But I cannot deal with all the
points just[yet]. I was not in Town yesterday. Got your letter only last
night.
My own opinion is unformed. Appearances are all against . . .
and so is his letter to me. And yet the thing seems to me to be
unbelievable. I do not believe in the innocence of the girls. If . . . did
it, they knew that it was wrong. The excessive tickling betrays a
corrupt mind—it may be unconsciously. If . . . has done it he has
meant no mischief. I should not consider the offence itself of a very
serious nature but his hiding the guilt is certainly serious. I do not
make light of the offence. What I say is that concealment is more
serious. I have written to him in this light.
Manilal is a lad. He must obey. He ought therefore to stay even
unwillingly.
Anandlal will leave here at the latest on Saturday. He will take in
H’Burg and standerton on his way. I suggested to him that he should
be there on the 1st of January at the latest. He seems to have done well
here. He has not stayed beyond a day at the Farm. There is no doubt
that he likes collecting.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
1

As this letter appears to have been sent from Tolstoy Farm, it could only have
been written between July 20, 1911, when Anandlal Gandhi arrived in South Africa
(“Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”, p. 129) and about the middle of January, 1913 when
Gandhiji shifted to Phoenix. The only references to any “collection” tours by
Anandlal Gandhi during this period occur in the Gujarati section of Indian Opinion,
25-11-1911 & 9-12-1912-11. The first mentions that Anandlal has left on a
collection tour and the second, which is an extract from a longer item written on
December 3, adds that Anandlal Gandhi joined others at Boksburg for collecting
subscriptions for the Indian famine fund. The reference to the famine (cited already in
letters to Dr. Mehta, pp. 161, 166 & 183) confirms that this letter belongs to 1911.
Writing on a Tuesday Gandhiji says that “Anandlal will leave here at the latest on
Saturday” and promises to post some Gujarati articles for Indian Opinion “on
Wednesday”. It is reasonable to assume, on the authority of the news-items, that the
letter was written between November 25 and December 3, and the only Tuesday
between the two dates is November 28. We learn from the second news-item that
Anandlal Gandhi actually left on the morning of the 3rd, that is, a Sunday.

106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
Your analysis of the evidence is splendid. You are an eternal
demonstration to me that sound judgments do not come out of book
knowledge but native wit and possession of ordinary virtue.
Please tell Thakar I want to send two short leaders or some-thing
like that for Gujarati. This I may post on Wednesday.
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 4415. Courtesy: A.
H. West

82. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI PATEL
Magshar Sud 8 [November 29, 1911] 1
DEAR SHRI RAOJIBHAI,

I have your letter. I gather from it that you want to work in
Phoenix. It is a good idea. I shall encourage you, but I doubt if you
can stand the strain. In Phoenix
1.
you will have to observe brahmacharya;
2.
you will be under a vow of scrupulous regard for truth;
3.
you will have to do chiefly manual labour, that is, work with the
hoe and the shovel;
4.
if you intend to add to [your] book-learning, please forget all
about it. Whatever addition comes naturally of because circumstances
demand it will be welcome;
5.
you should make up your mind that our duty is to strengthen
character rather than acquire book-learning;
6.
you should fearlessly oppose injustice from the caste or the
family;
7.
you should embrace absolute poverty.
You should think of joining Phoenix only if you would and can
do this. You should tell yourself that life there will grow harder as the
days pass and know that this is for your good.
Learn to think along these lines if you decide to come over in
March. Continue to write to me.
With due regards from

MOHANDAS
From Gandhijini Sadhana (Gujarati): Raojibhai Patel; Navajivan Publishing
House, Ahmedabad; 1939
1

Raojibhai Patel, says in his book that the letter was written in 1911. The
letter itself offers no internal evidence.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

107

83. AN ATTACK ON ASIATIC MORALS
We reproduced last week the full text of a leading article in The
Transvaal Leader on the so-called Asiatic invasion of Boksburg in the
form of the opening by Mr. Bhyat of a store in that town. The Leader
of Mr. Cartwright’s time is not the Leader of today. It would be
difficult to find anything so virulent and offensive to Asiatics as the
article in question. In the opinion of its writer,
the Asiatic trader casts his sinister shadow, and, with his primitive mode of
existence, his complete indifference to the simplest amenities of life, his
Oriental ingenuity and his inferior standard of civilization menaces the future
of the European shopkeeper.

In another place, the writer considers Oriental civilization to be on a
“much lower grade”. Then, again,
the European trader cannot much longer keep up the fight against the
commercial wiles and the social iniquities of the inscrutable coolie.

The article ends with the desire
to protect the European from the unfair competition of the coolie who in so
many towns of the Union has established himself at every street-corner,
bringing with him the unfamiliar habits and dress of Asia.

In the extracts we have quoted, the reader will not fail to notice how
Asiatic morals have been attacked, how their habits and mode of life
decried, and how unfavourably the Asiatic civilization has been compared with the European. The ignorant writer has not hesitated to use
the word “coolie” in writing of Asiatic traders. We are, however, not
disposed to quarrel with the writer either for his ignorance or for his
sentiments. The very civilizaiton he represents makes for ignorance,
inasmuch as its exacting demands upon the frail physical frame
render it well-nigh impossible for any dweller therein to have any but
a most superficial knowledge of things in general, and, as those
nurtured in it are continuously taught to consider that civilization to
be the best, naturally one is prone to look down upon anything that
does not satisfy its arbitrary standard. And so we find that the writer
looks down upon the Asiatic trader with contempt, because he is
“indifferent to the simplest amenities of life”. The Founder of Christianity showed much greater indifference to these amenities and his
mode of existence was infinitely more primitive than that of the Asiatic trader, and yet we are quite certain that the writer never intended to
108

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cast any reflection upon Jesus.
The question, therefore, that we have to address ourselves to is
not whether to placate men of the writer’s stamp (and, after all, they
represent undoubtedly the majority of the Europeans in South
Africa), but whether we must alter our simple mode of life and take
over what we consider to be the vices of modern life, in order to retain
our foothold in their country. Those who have done so know to their
cost that they have not, on that account, been able to make themselves
more acceptable. Their Asiatic origin is still their sufficient condemnation. The two systems are struggling to live side by side in South
Africa. The experiment is interesting. We can only hope that, if the
Asiatic has faith in himself and in his civilization, he will not lower the
latter, and we doubt not that that which has stood the test of ages will
come out scatheless in the test it is now undergoing in this subcontinent. But the handful of Asiatics in South Africa have to remember that, if they do not want to disgrace the country of their origin or
their system of life, they must thoroughly represent it, and not present
a parody of it. They must live up to the moral code that has been
handed down to them for ages past. With them, honesty is not merely
the best policy, and on that account only to be observed when it is
profitable, but it must be adhered to at all cost and in all circumstances. With them, might is not right, but right is always might. They
can have nothing to do with the doctrine of the survival of the fittest!
They have to live and let live. If they catch the modern craze for
competition and adopt the characteristically grasping nature of this
vaunted civilization, they will certainly go under.
Indian Opinion , 2-12-1911

84. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
December 3, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Today is Sunday, Gordon is here. He is keeping well. His farm
is still unsold.
Your brother is to be married today. He sent me the invitation. I
wrote wishing them a happy life. He invited Call to stay for a few days
at his house and to look after it while he was away. Call left the Farm
yesterday. He is still unhinged. He likes no one at the Farm. He said if
it was a matter of choice, he would prefer the asylum to the Farm. I let
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

109

him do pretty much as he liked even to the extent of spiriting leather.
He took it into his head to make for himself a pair of sandals. He
made a horrible pair. He is never of the same mind for two minutes.
Of course I shall watch him wherever he is. How nice it would have
been if you had been here. He likes you immensely. He thinks that
you are his only great friend. I am trying to get compensation for him
from the company. He has been offered £3-2-6 per weeks. I am still
in correspondence with the manager.
The windmill is working. The wheel does not turn the whole day
long. Naturally, therefore, we do not get 9,000 gallons of water per
day. The water is allowed to run into the dam but it has not reached
there yet. I might lay the pipes as far, I shall go slowly.
£ 100 were cabled to you last week. You had written to Kennedy
who was then in Durban. Miss Friedman asked me and I drew a
cheque for £ 100 and the manager cabled transfer of £ 100 to the
Bank there.
I am certainly sorry that you are considering commercial
propositions. You have not gone to Europe for that purpose. We did
discuss these matters here and you seemed to think that you would
clear off the bond from the property itself. He who would be good
and do good must have patience. As in diseases so in other matters we
must let Nature have her course. Our business difficulties are also a
variety of disease ≈ mental, it is true. And we may no more suppress
these diseases without suffering from other eruptions than we may
physical diseases without their breaking out in another form. We have
to eradicate them and there is only one way of doing so. I agree with
your analysis of Fisher Unwin. I too met him when I was last there.
You had introduced me to the Daniels in your previous letters.
If Kennedy is at the office tomorrow, I shall discuss with him the
question of your staying longer and if he is agreeable I shall cable. I
am anxious that you should stay for your pleasure, it may be ever so
subtle. The condition also should be that you are to stay only with
Mrs. Mayo or return. Germany is certainly not now the place for you.
We are not intended to seek temptation. We can resist it only when it
forces itself on our attention.
Did I tell you that the boys had left off the saltless diet? I
noticed that they were getting tired. So at present only Medh, to an
extent Mrs. Gandhi, and I are saltless. With me it seems to have come
110

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to stay. Even with the simplest diet it is possible to overeat than undereat. Why then need we multiply dishes?
We had fair rains of late. We are therefore having a good crop
of apricots. And so we have the eternal stew.
You want me to discuss with you the Indian tour. It is probably
as well not to go. Personally I think that it is time for you to return.
But you are the best judge. If, therefore, you wish to stay on and that
at Aberdeen, you may do so if Kennedy is agreeable. Please do not
mind me. It is no trouble to me to look after things here. At present, it
is Miss Schlesin who looks after them. I simply sign and endorse
cheques.
There are now 15 boys at the Farm. Some of them are very
good but I am not satisfied with one or two of them. I could not reject
them as they accepted the conditions on the Farm.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

85. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
M.K. GANDHI
ATTORNEY
21-24 C OURT C HAMBERS,
C ORNER R ISSIK & A NDERSON S TREETS,
P.O. BOX 6522, JOHANNESBURG ,

December 4, 1911
MY DEAR WEST,

I have your letter. I return the Aiyar1 correspondence for you to
file there. I do not want to keep it here. At the same time, I do not
wish to destroy it.
Your report on Eastern Vlei is very good. I certainly think that
we ought to take notice of the Henwood case. Even if the man was a
thief, it was nothing short of persecution; and, if you do not consider
the thing to be stale now, you should still punish it. When the man has
1

P.S. Aiyar, owner and editor of The African Chronicle published from
Durban: Honorary Secretary of the Anti-£3 Tax League formed in September 1911
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

111

finished his sentence, he may be interviewed and more may be
published, but the case should be followed up. Indeed, it would be
well to post up somebody in order to meet him upon his discharge. So
far as I am aware, Magistrate’s notes can certainly be seen as a matter
of right by interested parties.
I intended to write to Khan asking him to waive his fees about
Muthuswamy because the amount has to come out of passive
resistance funds, but I thought that I should ask you whether I should
do so before writing the letter. This I forgot to do. Shall I now write or
do you think that the amount should be paid without more ado?
With reference to the supplement, if the dog were in the centre, I
think that your remarks would have been justified. As it is, the dog in
the present instance was not sitting in the centre, but Mr. Hosken was,
and, if you had said ‘Mr. Hosken is in the centre with Mrs.Ellis to his
right’ and so on, it would have been all right. No one can be held
responsible not even the photograph for the arrangement of those
who sat for the group. I went there at the last moment, and, so many
important persons having come in, I hardly think that Mrs. Vogl also
could control the thing. Without giving the official designations, the
names could have been printed. But, of course, you could not reason
this way, not having seen the Bazaar and not having been intimately
connected with the work. But I do say that you should have seen the
impropriety of introducing the chief members of the group through
me. 1
I consider you to be entirely capable of handling the £ 3 tax
business, but I am not just now in a position to feel the pulse of the
community there. Whether, therefore, they would rise to the occasion
or not is entirely for you to judge. You should, therefore, discuss the
thing freely with them, tell them that you would be prepared to stay
for a month in Durban and work the thing up, if they want you to do
so. But, of course, after having gone into it, it would not do for you to
limit yourself in any way. You will have either to do or die. You may
stay in Durban for a month less or more. I personally cannot set any
limit to work and say, ‘All right, work for a month, and then things
may be left to take their course’. That could be done, if I were
managing the thing, but, in this instance, if the thing is to be done at
all, I want you to become the initiator and organizer. Your responsibility will, therefore, be towards yourself and your God. If I felt like
1

112

Vide also “For Satyagrahis”, 27-5-1911.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

being free to head the movement, I should plunge without a
moment’s hesitation. But just now, I am not in that condition at all. I
shall certainly criticize you freely, and watch the working, and give
advice. More I cannot do. So that you must count the cost before
embarking on the enterprise. You should also take care that you do
not in any way clash with what Aiyar is doing. I have now learnt
something about Munroe. I have distrusted the agitation from the
commencement, that is, I have not been able to consider it to be
unselfish. Apart from this question, if it is necessary for you to stay in
Durban with the family for a month, of course you should do it,
looking to me for the deficit for that month’s expenses.
I should like to see the text of this address to Hosken. Was it so
long-winded as suggested by Aiyar? You will do what you think is
proper regarding Jamni. Anandlal has commenced collections1 . I
share the view you have expressed about him. If Manilal is not to
come during the month, you will have to get him to cheerfully reconcile himself to the delay. The coming here is with him on the brain
now, and I do not wish to discourage him at all. I do not know what is
going to happen to him or to any of us in March. If you detain him
there, let him realize that he should put the exigencies of the work
there before his inclination and take pleasure in the thought. I shall go
through the essay you have sent, and we shall certainly publish it if the
ideas are at all acceptable. You may nurse the lad, even while he is out
of Phoenix.
Yours sincerely,

M.K. GANDHI
From a copy: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

86. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
December 7, 1911
DEAR MR. LANE,

I promised when I saw General Smuts last in Johannesburg that I
would submit my views as to how the terms of the settlement could be
satisfied. General Smuts asked me to submit my views when he
thought there might be difficulty in passing legislation applying to
1

viz subscriptions for the Indian Famine Relief Fund; vide “Famine in India”,
11-11-1911 and “Famine in India”, 9-12-1911.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

113

South Africa, in view of the resolution1 of the Imperial Conference. I
have studied the proceedings and it seems to me that the resolution
does not affect the question. It seems to cover only alien immigration.
Anyhow, it seems to me that, if general legislation cannot be
passed, the Transvaal Immigration Act should be amended along the
lines suggested by me in Cape Town. You have the text of my draft2 . I
find it difficult to improve upon it, and I confess that I see no
constitutional difficulty in the way of the suggestion being carried
out.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

E. F. C. L ANE , E SQ.
P RETORIA
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5595

87. LETTER TO A. H. WEST
M.K. GANDHI

Attorney
21-24 C OURT C HAMBERS,
C ORNER R ISSIK & A NDERSON S TREETS,
P.O. BOX 6522, JOHANNESBURG ,

December 8, 1911
MY DEAR WEST,

In the papers I am sending today you will find interesting
correspondence regarding the £3 tax. Here is work for you. Can you,
and will anyone assist you, to collect statistics showing in what cases
the tax has been remitted?3 Is it possible also to find out all the serious
cases in which remission has not been granted? The more statistics we
can give the earlier will be the repeal of the tax. It seems to me that it
is possible perhaps to get Europeans in Natal to sign a petition for its
1

The Imperial Conference which met in London on the afternoon of June 19
passed two resolutions. The first called for “greater uniformity in Imperial legislation
concerning immigration and the exclusion of aliens”. Sir Joseph Ward’s resolution
asking for more powers to regulate British and foreign shipping “which was really
connected with his recent attempt to penalize vessels with Lascars in their crews” was
lost. Indian Opinion, 22-7-1911. Vide also Appendix “Lord Crewe’s Speech on
Indians in Dominions at Imperial Conference”, 19-6-1911.
2
Vide “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 7-4-1911.
3
Vide “The Iniquitous Tax”, 16-12-1911 .

114

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

repeal, and, if we can get an influentially signed document, we can
certainly bring about repeal during the forthcoming session without
resort to passive resistance.
Yours sincerely,

M.K. GANDHI

[PS.]
The full text of the Germiston Judgment herewith should be
reproduced.
From a copy: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

88. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

December 8, 1911
DEAR PROF. GOKHALE,

It pains me to think that you had to dictate, ill though you were,
that long letter of the 3rd Nov. last. I can quite understand what worry
that wretched cable of Reuter’s must have caused you.1 Pray pardon
me. It would have been a tragedy, if through any sense of false feeling
for me after the publication of the cable, I had been nominated. I
need hardly assure you that the discussion there in the Press has not
worried or affected me in the least degree.
I saw in your letter to Mr. Ritch reference to your daughter’s
illness. I hope that she has entirely recovered.
Mr. Polak is with you. I need not therefore say anything about
the situation here. I only hope that a resolution about the entire
stoppage of indentured labour to any part of the world will have been
carried.2
May I repeat my invitation to visit S. A. and that at the earliest
moment for the sake of your health and of those who love you and
who wish to see you live yet for many a year in full possession of
your health both bodily and mental? What a nice thing it would be if
1

Vide “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 30-10-1911.
Vide “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 24-10-1911. This resolution was passed at
the session of the Indian National Congress which concluded on December 28, 1911.
Indian Opinion, 6-1-1912.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

115

you could come with the Polaks—earlier by all means if possible. Do
please decide to come.
I am,
Your sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: G. N. 3805

89. MIXED SCHOOLS AND MORALS
We gladly make room for Mrs. Wybergh’s spirited contribution1
to the Worker on the question of mixed schools. The matter was taken
up by The Transvaal Leader, and the Education Board has invited
Mrs. Wybergh to prove her charges. This Mrs. Wybergh has offered
to do if her informants, who are teachers, are fully protected. There is
some hesitation on the part of the Board to give the full protection she
naturally asks for. We are not just now concerned whether Mrs.
Wybergh furnishes the Board with proofs in her possession. What we
wish to place on record is the fact that The Transvaal Leader and
practically the whole of the Johannesburg Press suggest that the
system of mixed schools should come to an end, especially for grownup boys and girls. It seems to have been taken for granted that, in
substance, Mrs. Wybergh’s indictment is true.
“Rest and be thankful” was Lord John Russell’s motto. We
admire the wisdom of those Indian parents who instinctively recoiled
from the stupid experiments that the Natal Education Department
wished to try among us of mixing boys and girls. This is essentially an
age of innovations and rash experiments. Movement is mistaken for
progress. So long as you move, it does not matter whether you are
moving backward or forward. The existing order of things must be
bad and must, therefore, be improved, says the zealous reformer.
“Hasten slowly” should be the motto of the real reformer. Mrs.
1

In her article, Mrs. Wybergh had said that, whereas in London co-education
had been dropped as its wrongly conceived ideals had tended to exaggerate instead of
equalizing sex-differences, in Johannesburg it had been adopted merely to save the
expense of separate school buildings for boys and girls. She charged that no care had
been taken “to guard against the great and obvious dangers”. The results of the system
were such that she could not record them without rendering herself liable to
prosecution. The parents seemed to be ignorant of this but conscientious schoolteachers were at their wits’ end. Indian Opinion, 9-12-1911.

116

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Wybergh’s revelations show clearly that we must be most careful
before we uproot systems or customs that have been handed down for
generations, unless we know them to be immoral.
Indian Opinion , 9-12-1911

90. FAMINE IN INDIA
We have started a Famine Relief Fund.1 Mr. Gajjar has made a
beginning. We have had several letters from which we learn that a
number of Indians are willing to take on [the task of] going round for
collections. This is our brief appeal to those who have realized how
dreadful the famine is.
Please do not turn away those collecting contributions, saying
that you have already paid towards many funds. Do not hesitate to
send your contribution directly either. Those who have money have to
contribute towards a variety of funds, but there can be no comparison
between a famine Fund and other funds. To this Fund, even the
poorest Indian can contribute. One who lives on coarse roti and ghee
may go without ghee for a time and pay the money thus saved into
the Famine Relief Fund. Such a one should bear in mind that while he
gets at least millet roti and ghee, people in the famine areas do not get
even roti. There is no fodder for cattle and both human beings and
cattle have been reduced to skeletons. If this is realized by everyone,
there is no Indian who cannot make a contribution, however small.
We admit that there is no charity like that which one dispenses
directly, where one can see it being use. This is what people do in our
country wherever they have not been caught in the wind from the
West. The villager gives in charity after the fashion of the village. He
shares his food with any poor person who may call at his home. He
does not even dream of being able to help those whom he cannot see.
He knows that even to think of it is pride and is like claiming to be
God.
But we have been caught in the wind from the West. It is this
which has brought us to this land. If people suffer overmuch during a
famine, it is due to the Western atmosphere. What is our duty at a time
like this? Our foremost duty is to quit this monstrous atmosphere here
and rush to the side of the famine-stricken, to live as they do and take
1

Vide “Famine in India”, 11-11-1911.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

117

them along the right path. We may be inclined to do all this, but
perhaps lack the requisite strength. A man like Vibhishana 1 had to
endure the monstrous atmosphere for a long time; what strengthhave
we before him? There may be others, moreover, who do not feel this
way and do not even want to get away from here. It is essential that
both these types of people must send as much help as they can to the
famine-stricken.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion , 9-12-1911

91. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

Magshar Vad 4 [December 9,1911] 2
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I have your letter. I was not in the least worried about the matter.
I don’t blame you or anyone else for the thing. Everyone makes such
a mistake. The magistrate in alliance with a lawyer—and a veritable
rogue to boot! So what else could be expected? Both want to make
money, and quickly. Personally I think, there has been no libel,3
legally speaking. If the nominal lapse is an offence, they may have £1
as fine. Even this should not be necessary, however.
If the magistrate and the lawyer take it into their heads to ruin
us, the case may perhaps go to a court. Never mind if it does.
It is not things like this that keep back people from going to the
help of the poor; it is their money. When we do not spend the money
on ourselves, why should we mind its loss through such chances? It is
occasions like this which test our worth. It would be Satanic to believe,
with our money safe, that we have obliged the person concerned. Why
1

The virtuous brother of Ravana. He tried long and hard to convert Ravana but,
failing in his attempts, went over to Rama before the great battle began.
2
This letter appears to be sequel to that written to Chhaganlal Gandhi about
September 28, 1911, and was presumably therefore written in 1911. In that year
Magshar Vad 4 corresponds to December 9.
3
This possibly refers to the account of Jannumia’s case which Indian Opinion
had republished from the African Chronicle; vide 1st footnote”Fragment of Letter to
Chhaganlal Gandhi”, 28-9-1911.

118

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should we feel humiliated by anything that the Congress people or
others might say? What our conscience tells us, that alone is our
humiliation or our credit.
You should go on doing your work without any anxiety or fear.
If we have surrendered our all to Krishna, He who is the Lord of
all will look after everything. If He does not, why should you and I
bother? Our duty is to make sure whether we have in fact surrendered
everything to Krishna or are holding back something for ourselves.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a Photostat of the Gujarati in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 6077

92. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

December 10, 1911
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

For the first time since your departure from London a week has
passed without a letter from you. You have so used me to the
regularity of your correspondence that last Thursday left a sad blank
when I saw among the letters nothing from you. But I know that you
were travelling. You told me you were leaving for Berlin on a Tuesday
or Wednesday. I therefore assume that you were travelling and without
reach of a station where you could post your letter to be in time.
Gordon was here today (Sunday) as he was last Sunday. He likes
to be here. He is keeping well.
Call is still in Johannesburg. He may leave for London next
week. It all depends upon the Medical Superintendent of the asylum.
Call is by no means right yet. But probably a voyage will be the best
thing for him. He may be a total wreck for ever, i.e., remain an
imbecile. He is no lunatic, but he has no control over himself.
The fencing is now almost complete. Just a little finishing is
required … probably there is a day’s work. We are drying apricots in
the manner suggested by you in your letter from Potchesfstroom.
I had a talk with Kennedy. His answer as to further prolongation
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

119

of the agreement was not quite satisfactory. I have asked him to think
[it] over and let me know. He seemed to resent the fact that you had
not written to him in the matter. On the whole I think it is better for
you not to take more than the time you intended to when you left.
After all 8 months is a fair time. You could still pass a few weeks at
Mrs. Mayo’s. I certainly think that you have stayed enough with your
people. They know now what you are. Their assimilation of your
(our) ideals now depends upon your living the life according to the
ideals for a length of time. But you and I are not living the life for
them or anybody else. We are living the life because we want to,
irrespective of what the rest of mankind do.
Your brother was duly married on Sunday. Herewith a cutting, if
you have not received it through other channels.
I have now 18 boys in the school, much to the disgust of Mrs.
Gandhi. And yet I must continue as I have begun. There is no looking
back. One hesitating step and I perish. We have now 4 Mohammedan
boys.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

93. THE INIQUITOUS TAX
We publish elsewhere an instructive letter 1 from the Colonial
Secretary addressed to Lord Ampthill’s Committee, and the Union
Prime Minister’s Minute to the Governor-General, on the Natal £3 tax,
exacted from ex-indentured men, women and children. That the
taxing legislation was imposed with the knowledge and consent of the
Government of India and of His Majesty’s Government, and that the
consent was obtained on a correct representation of facts, does not
make it any the less criminal. It may be considered very gracious on
the part of the Union Government to be ready to consider any specific
cases of hardship brought to their notice. We venture to think,
however, that every case of the exaction of this tax is a specific case of
hardship. But, apart from that, if, as Mr. Sauer2 has pointed out, they
have watched the law carefully and all complaints have been inquired
into, why have they not produced statistics to show in what case and
under what circumstances the tax has been remitted? Our columns
have been full of cases of hardship, especially on women. The
Government really were bound to waive the tax in respect of women
1

Dated November 14, 1911, this was sent by Harcourt, Secretary of State for
the Colonies, in reply to paragraph 6 of the SABI Committee’s representation of June
17, 1911 (Appendix VIII), which asked for exemption from the £3 tax for Indian
women and children saying that the amending Act of 1910 (Natal Act 19 of 1910) had
“but slightly improved the situation”. It also drew attention to disparities between
decisions of individual magistrates. Along with his letter, Harcourt enclosed the copy
of a despatch from the Governor-General of South Africa containing a minute dated
August 22, 1911 from the Union Ministers on the subject. The minute, signed by
Sauer, said that the £3 tax had been imposed “on grounds of policy, with a view to
limiting the free Indian population as much as possible” and that the Ministers
considered its repeal inadvisable. The minute added that the application of the law in
particular cases had been “carefully watched” and all complaints inquired into and that
the Ministers were convinced that there had been “no undue harshness in the
administration of this law”. Commenting on this, Harcourt had observed that the
facts had been “correctly represented” in the minute and the legislation had been
passed with the full knowledge and consent of the Government of India and of His
Majesty’s Government and that he could only accept the Ministry’ decision. Indian
Opinion, 1612-1911.
2
J. W. Sauer; member of the Cape Legislature and later of the Union Cabinet;
fellow-passenger with the Transvaal Indian Deputation of 1909 on board s.s.
Kenilworth Castle; vide “Deputation’s Voyage”, 23-6-1909 Gandhiji who met him
during the voyage found him “full of sympathy”; he promised all possible help.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

121

entirely, as has been shown by us by quoting speeches of responsible
members of the now defunct Natal Parliament when the amending
measure was passed.1 The Minister’s Minute is, we are constrained to
say, calculated to blind the Imperial Government to the serious nature
of the hardship entailed on those who have to bear the burden. We
trust that the attention of the Imperial Government will be brought to
the almost unanimous condemnation2 by the South African Press of
the wretched treatment meted out to people who have deserved better
of those for whom they have slaved for a number of years. We think
that it was open to Mr. Harcourt to have at least invited the Union
Government to consider the new situation that has arisen by reason of
the stoppage of recruiting indentured Indian labour for Natal. The
question of limiting the free Indian population as much as possible
does not now arise as witness General Smuts’ own statement made to
his Pretoria constituents on the 7th instant:
If ever Asiatics were introduced here as indentured labourers, there would be
revolution. That door was closed for ever.

We note with considerable satisfaction that, in the absence of
Lord Ampthill, Lord Lamington has been moving the House of Lords
in the matter of the forthcoming legislation.3 We hope that the
forthcoming Union Parliament will see a fulfilment, at least to the
letter, of the promise made by the Union Government in the Provisional Settlement. We wish that His Lordship may take up this question of the iniquitous tax, and bring the pressure of public opinion to
bear upon His Majesty’s Government with a view to its repeal.
Indian Opinion , 16-12-1911

1

Vide “The £3 Tax”, 11-11-1911.
A number of European-owned papers such as The Natal Mercury, the Natal
Advertiser and the Rand Daily Mail had, in a series of articles and editorial comments,
condemned the £3 tax.
3
On December 6, in the House of Lords Lamington asked for the production of
correspondence between the Colonial Office and the Union Government relating to
British Indians in the Transvaal. He also asked for information regarding the
operation of the draft Municipal Ordinance, the Gold Law and the Township Act,
Indian Opinion, 9-12-1991.
2

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

94. TELEGRAM TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
MINISTER OF INTERIOR1
December 21, 1911
P RIVATE S ECRETARY TO INTERIOR
[PRETORIA ]
THANKS

YOUR

WIRE.

WILL

CALL

TOMORROW

MORNING.

From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S.N. 5598

95. LETTER TO A.H. WEST
M.K. GANDHI
Attorney

21-24 C OURT C HAMBERS,
C ORNER R ISSIK & A NDERSON S TREETS,
P.O. BOX 6522, JOHANNESBURG ,

December 22, 1911
MY DEAR WEST,

Yes, with reference to Obligadoo, we ought to get the chargesheet. I want to see the two counts on which he was prosecuted. You
will see the Prosecutor accepted his plea of guilty on the first count
and was satisfied. Generally, when a Prosecutor does that, you may
depend upon it that he has a very weak case, and, as a matter of fact,
this plea of guilty ought never to have been accepted by the Magistrgistrate as a plea of guilty, because the accused has qualified it, saying
he was in want of this money and took it. This qualification immediately takes away guilty knowledge. The mere taking of the money
was certainly not theft. The sentence, of course, is preposterous.
Of course, the leaders will not take up the £3 tax agitation
without your harassing them. Aiyar may be left to himself and he may
have all the credit and all the glory. We simply do the work if the
leaders are ready to do their share of it. When Parliament opens, of
1

This was sent in reply to the telegram from the Private Secretary to the
Minister of Interior, which read: “Private. Am taking copy of draft copy of
Immigraiton bill with me Johannesburg tomorrow and am asked by Minister to show
it to you for your personal information. Can you conveniently call at the Minister of
Mines room during morning”. S. N. 5598. Gandhiji’s reply is drafted in pencil at the
bottom of the above telegram.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

123

of course we shall have to get Mr. Alexander to ask questions. Meanwhile you should get the facts independently of the Ministers. They
will not help.
I have asked Manilal to pocket his own inclination and do as
you advise him, and I think that his feeling need not be considered so
long as his services are required there.
I have written to Muthu exactly in the same sense that you have
spoken to him, and, if you want him, by all means have him, but it
must be understood that he will have to do plenty of out-door work.
Yours sincerely,

M.K. GANDHI
From a copy: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National Archives of
India

96. WHAT TO EXPECT FROM THE IMPERIAL
GOVERNMENT
The letter (for Downing Street a long one) written to Lord
Ampthill’s Committee by the Colonical Office on the petition of the
British Indian Association regarding the Transvaal Draft Local
Government Ordinance1 forms sad reading, and if confirmation were
wanted, it confirms the opinion held by many passive resisters that it
was the strength of passive resistance alone which brought about with
General Smuts the Provisional Settlement which should be reduced to
legislation during the next two or three months. We do not wish to
convey the impression that Imperial Government sat with folded arms
and that the Union Government were not in any way affected by the
representations that were made by the Imperial Government, but what
we do wish to convey is that the Imperial Government would not have
moved at all in our favour, had it not been for passive resistance. Mr.
Harcourt’s letter of the 23rd November last, says in so many words
that the Imperial Government will not intervene on our behalf even in
order to secure redress of tangible grievances. The fact that something—it does not matter to them whether it is just or unjust—has
been done before is sufficient reason for them to reject any approach
1
For the sections of the Ordinance affecting Asiatics and the BIA’s petition,
vide Appendix “Transvaal Draft Local Government Ordinance, 1911: Extracts
Affecting Asiatics”, 10-6-1911.

124

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

on behalf of British Indians in order to undo an admitted wrong. We
need not have been told that the municipal franchise was taken away
from us by a previous Ordinance, nor that most of the clauses in the
proposed Draft Ordinance were virtually a re-enactment of old
provisions. It did not strike Mr. Harcourt that it was quits the proper
thing for the British Indian Association to have drawn attention to
such re-enactment, especially in the new circumstances arising from
the Union of South Africa, and there can be no reason why Mr.
Harcourt could not have pressed for a revision of a vicious policy at
an opportune time like that of the impending passage of the Draft
Ordinance in question.
It grieves us to find Mr. Harcourt as representing the Imperial
Government concurring with the Union Ministers in their policy of
shuffle. He and they insult our intelligence when they tell us that we
could have no ground for complaint because the clauses regarding the
issue of licences are of a general character. They must know as well as
we do that, in the vast majority of cases, such general clauses have
been in administration made applicable only to Asiatics. A passage,
however, in Mr. Harcourt’s letter dealing with the matter wherein the
deprivation of the right of appeal to a court of law is referred to as a
hardship supplies a ray of hope that something may be done in this
direction.
It is wonderful how in an important communication dealing with
weighty matters the most trifling and contemptible arguments have
been seriously taken up in answer to our complaints. Mr. Harcourt,
for instance, justifies the deprivation of the right of Indians, other
Asiatics and, for that matter, other Coloured people to be employed in
bakeries, etc., on the exploded ground of sanitation. He ought to
know by this time that the clause in question is purely an attempt to
take away the means of livelihood, and an avenue for employment,
from honest people. Surely the sanitary authorities can be trusted to
look after sanitation and to see whether bakers and their employees
observe the rules of hygiene. We are also gravely told that similar
disability in connection with a different matter altogether has been
created against female labour. The crying grievance regarding tramcars is similarly rejected because it is a “matter of long standing”, as
if a crime oft repeated actually became a virtue. We are sorry that the
Imperial Government, in taking up the attitude as exemplified in Mr.
Harcourt’s letter, are abdicating their function of holding the balance
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

125

evenly between conflicting local interest in the different parts of the
Empire; for this letter is not an isolated lapse from tradtion, but it is
merely the carrying out of a new departure, noted now for a long time
by well-wishers of the Empire with a great deal of pain. We could wish
that there would be a reversion to the old and fearless attitude of
absolute impartiality which at one time ruled at the centre of the
Empire when self-interest at the centre itself was not in jeopardy.
Indian Opinion , 23-12-1911

97. A SHAMEFUL ACT
The brief report of the Nathalia case1 we published last week has
disgusted every member of the community as it disgusted the judges
themselves who decided upon this matter. It is enough to make one
despair of the utility of law courts if the judges cannot right a wrong
that they themselves acknowledge. The late Mr. Leonard used to say
and hold that there was no wrong without a legal remedy. It is this
comfortable delusion which reconciles some of the otherwise best
minds to the practice of a profession which has very few redeeming
features.
This case on Nathalia, a young lad, cannot be allowed to rest
where the Natal judges have left it. It is a national scandal that the boy
cannot be admitted to the Province in spite of his having produced
credentials which would have satisfied any but an autocratic
immigration officer who has certainly no time to bring to bear on a
case a judicial mind free from bias. His very vocation forbids it. The
fault is therefore not the individual’s but of the legislature that has
wickedly saddled a responsibility on him which no ordinary mortal
could discharge. He is legally called an “Immigration Restriction
Officer” appointed to administer a restriction law. How could he
generally decide in favour of persons whom he is expected to restrict?
1
E.M. Nathalia “was sent back to India twice, and on the last occasion had
returned with documents that were required to show that he was the son of the father he
sought to join” in Natal. The Immigration Restriction Officer was, however, not
convinced and refused the boy permission to land. The judge remarked that “the
officer never seemed to be able to believe that a boy was the son of his father”, but
would not interfere because the officer had full authority. Indian Opinion,
23-12-1911.

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

To prevent an appeal from his decisions is to deny justice. And that
the late Natal legislature succeeded in doing. We trust that the
matter will be taken to a higher court and thoroughly thrashed out. It
will be a discredit to the community to which the lad belongs if we
allow him to be sent back. The community must make it a point of
honour to protect the boy, who, we are satisfied, is the son of the
person who claims him as such.
Indian Opinion , 30-12-1911

98. THE NEW YEAR
At the close of a year we are apt to look back on the way we
have come and it is a good thing if we are able to find something over
which we can rejoice. What has happened during this year that can be
said to have affected the Indian community? The first week of
January brought the welcome news from Calcutta that the Government
of India had decided to issue a notice in April prohibiting the further
emigration of indentured Indians to Natal from July 1.1 This decision
was carried out; and now we have seen the last of indentured Indian
immigration to these shores. It is impossible at this time to say what
the effect will ultimately be, but we have good reason to believe that
many employers of Indian labour have awoke to the necessity of
treating their work people with some consideration and providing
them with decent housing accommodation. We hope to see more
improvements as time goes on, including the establishing of schools
for Indian children living on the estates. This, however, does not blind
us to the many evils of the indenture system, and we have not forsaken
our ideal of freedom for all. This will come in time when the people
themselves are ready for it. Better treatment and healthier conditions,
which are now being offered as inducements to re-indenture, will in
the course of time lead to freedom of contract between labourers and
employers.
The year opened with the Transvaal passive resistance struggle at
white heat. In March the Immigrants’ Restriction Bill2 was published
and our readers will remember its fate 3 . Then followed the lengthy
1

Vide 4th footnote “Letter to G. A. Natesan”, 31-5-1911.
Vide “Immigrants’ Restriction Bill”, 24-2-1911.
3
The Bill was dropped ; vide Appendix “Lane’s Letter to Gandhiji”,
21-4-1911.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

127

correspondence between General Smuts and Mr. Gandhi which
resulted at the end of April in an understanding1 between the Minister
of the Interior and the Indian leaders as follows: Law 3 of 19072 to be
repealed, legal equality in respect of immigration of Asiatic
immigrants with Europeans, the existing Provincial rights to be
maintained, the admission of six highly educated Asiatics to the
Transvaal, registration of passive resisters, and the release of prisoners.
It now remains for the Parliament to ratify the promise made by a
responsible Minister of the Government. Absolutely fair dealing is
expected and demanded in these matters, otherwise no permanent
settlement can be effected.
Since the understanding with the Government in April, a serious
position has been brought about by the administration of the Gold
Law3 and the Townships Act 4 . the effect of which is to ruin Asiatic
store-keepers, and the livelihood of the majority of the Transvaal
Indians, who are mainly hawkers, is brought in jeopardy.
In looking forward to the coming year the Indian community of
South Africa have reason both to hope and to fear. The Immigration
Bill, which will be brought before Parliament early in the year,5
concerns every Indian in the Union. The rights of resident Indians
must be secured at all costs, and a reasonable number of educated
men admitted to the Union. It will depend largely upon the Indian
people themselves whether they are to maintain their rights and
preserve their dignity in this land of their birth or adoption. A firm
front will have to be shown to any attempt to filch away the people’s
established rights and customs. No compromise whatever can be
allowed with matters that concern the very existence of the community. Just as the Transvaal Indians have fought a hard battle for five
years, if it be necessary, the other provinces should not shrink from
such a struggle rather than that they should forfeit their and their
children’s future position as citizens of the Union of South Africa.
There are other questions of vital importance which should be
1

Vide letters to Lane, pp. 22-4-1911 & 29-4-1911 and Appendix 22-4-1911.
Evidently, a slip for “Act 2 of 1907”
3
For Polak’s representation against these laws to the Government of India
vide Appendix “Polak’s Letter to India Government on Gold Law and Townships Act
(1908)”, 19-4-1912.
4
Ibid
5
This Bill was being re-drafted for the following session of Parliament; vide
footnote of “Telegram to Private Secretary to Minister of Interior’, 21-12-1911.
2

128

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

dealt with; for instance, the £3 annual licence on ex-indentured
Indians in Natal. Indian traders and businessmen are sometimes
accused of being so busy with those matters directly concerning themselves that they have no time for looking into their poorer brethren’s
misfortunes. If there is even a grain of truth in the accusation now is
the time to show of what stuff they are made. The abolition of this
unjust and cruel imposition offers a fine opportunity for all those who
are not directly affected by it, to show that they are capable of putting
their energy into an effort which would be entirely unselfish. In doing
so they would earn the gratitude of thosewho are not able to help
themselves, and the blessing of God would be their reward.
We wish our readers, one and all,
A HAPPY NEW YEAR

Indian Opinion , 30-12-1911

99. FAMINE
We give prominence, this week, to the report of the state of
famine which prevails in Western India at the present time1 . We have
our difficulties in South Africa, but thank God, cruel famine is not our
portion. The Indians of South Africa have shown in the past that they
could rise to the occasion in assisting their brethren in India who were
suffering from earthquake or famine 2 . A fund has been started in our
columns which has now reached over £100, but we feel that this sum
represents but an item of the amount it is possible to raise in South
Africa. The Mahomedan community are showing great sacrifice in
subscribing several thousands of pounds in aid of the sufferers in the
Italo-Turkish war. We trust that they will be none the less generous in
subscribing towards the relief of the famine-stricken people of India.
The Hindu, Parsee and Christian members of the community, having
had no such drain upon their resources as the Mahomedans
1

The report said there was great scarcity of food and fodder in the Bombay
Presidency and that the plauge had in addition broken out in the States of Kathiawar.
Nearly a third of the cattle population would need to be fed out of public charity. For
the district of Ahmedabad alone the funds required were estimated at Rs. 1 lakh. For
earlier references to the famine by Gandhiji, vide “ Famine in India”, 11-11-1911 &
9-12-1911 and also letters to Dr. Mehta, 24-9-1911, 10-10-1911 & 11-11-1911.
2
Following the 1905 earthquake in Northern India, Indian Opinion started an
Earthquake Relief Fund; vide “Earthquake in India”, 13-5-1905 & “Letter to
Kaikhushroo and Abdul Huk”, 17-5-1905.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

129

have recently had, can make it their special mission to push forward
the collection of funds for this worthy cause.
Indian Opinion , 6-1-1912

100. MR. POLAK AT THE NATIONAL CONGRESS
Mr. Polak’s strenuous work has already commenced in India.
He never knows what it is to rest when duty calls him to work. The
resolution1 about the indenture system to which he, with Messrs
Chintamani2 , Manilal Doctor and others, spoke is of the greatest
importance and a step in the right direction. It is a crown to his past
work. He shares with Mr. Gokhale the credit of bringing about a
termination of the supply of indentured labour to Natal. The Congress, no doubt inspired by him, has followed the logical result of its
policy by asking the Government of India to abolish the system of
indenture altogether. It now remains for the Government of India to
end a system which is but a form of veiled slavery.
Indian Opinion , 6-1-1912

101. JOYFUL NEWS
The announcement3 made by the Hon’ble Mr. Gokhale that he
proposes to visit South Africa during next summer will fill every
Indian heart with joy. Mr. Gokhale is no stranger to the Indians of
South Africa. By his great work in our behalf he has endeared himself
to us all. Mr. Gokhale is, therefore, assured of a royal welcome. And
we doubt not that he will be warmly received by the leaders of European society. Mr. Gokhale’s intended visit can only do good in every
respect.
Indian Opinion , 6-1-1912
1

The Indian national Congress at its Calcutta session, held in December,
1911, passed a resolution condemning the system of indentured labour and urged the
Government to introduce legislation wholly abolishing it. Indian Opinion,
6-1-1912; vide also 2nd footnote of “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 8-12-1911.
2
Sir Chiravuri Yajneshwar Chintamani (1880-1941); journalist; Editor, The
Leader, Allahabad; for some time Minister, U. P.
3
H.S.L. Polak, in the course of his speech on the South Africa Resolution of
the Indian National Congress, held in December, 1911, at Calcutta, announced that
Gokhale had expressed his desire to visit South Africa during the following year in
order to study the situation on the spot. Indian Opinion, 24-2-1912.

130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

102. CABLE TO G. K. GOKHALE
JOHANNESBURG ,

January 10, 1912
EXPRESS
HONOURABLE GOKHALE
P OONA
COMMUNITY

DELIGHTED

ASSURE

WARM

YOU

YOUR

DECISION

VISIT

US1

WE

WELCOME.

C ACHALIA
C HAIRMAN , A SSOCIATION
From a copy: File No. 45. Courtesy: National Archives of India

103. LETTER TO G.K. GOKHALE
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

January 12,1912
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

It is difficult to give you an idea as to how delighted we all were
to read the announcement2 that you were coming here very shortly.
I hope that you will give ample notice of the date of your
coming !
If it is at all possible, do you not think that it would be better if
you could come here on your way to London? You could then study
our question on the spot and materially assist us in London. And I am
vain enough to think that your stay here will result in your taking with
you to London much better health than you would otherwise Vide
also letters to Gokhale, pp. 176 & 195. Vide also letters to Gokhale 3
pp. 176 & 195.
1

Vide “Joyful News”, 6-1-1912.
Vide the preceding item.
3
Vide also letters to Gokhale, 30-10-1911 & 8-12-1911.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

131

The Union Parliament will now be sitting and the promised draft
& bill may be published any day1 .
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: G. N. 3771

104. SMALLPOX IN JOHANNESBURG
The Johannesburg papers are full of the smallpox scare. We are
sorry to have to admit that, on this occasion, we are the culprits. That
some Indian children had smallpox is not a matter for anxiety. A
spasmodic outbreak of diseases may be taken as inevitable in any
community. But our crime consists in the Indians concerned having
concealed the outbreak. The whole community will have to suffer for
the crime of an individual.
Happily the leaders are whole-heartedly co-operating with Dr.
Porter2 in stamping out the disease. But the leaders will be powerless
unless individuals are ready and willing to listen to them and help
them to help themselves.
We consider that the opposition, stubborn though it was, to the
Asiatic Registration Act, was nothing compared to the opposition that
the community must, if it is to progress, offer to its own erring
members. Passive resistance can be as effectively applied within as
without. Only, when it has to be applied within it is far more difficult.
But then a real passive resister will not—cannot flinch in the face of
difficulties, however serious they may be.
It is a common charge against us that we are an insanitary
people and without scruples when it is a matter of cheating authorities
by way of concealing diseases or misleading them. The concealment
in Johannesburg has given a handle to our enemies. Let the community beware lest it place itself in the wrong by blinking at the wrong
doing of its own members. It is being watched in South Africa as,
perhaps, it is not anywhere else. The watching may be turned to good
1

The second session of the Union Parliament was scheduled to begin on
January 26, 1912. The first reading of the Bill took place on January 30. Indian
Opinion, 13-1-1912 & 3-2-1912
2
Dr. C. Porter, Medical Officer of Health, Johannesburg

132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

account by our so behaving as to give occasion for no adverse
remarks.
Indian Opinion , 13-1-1912

105. INTERVIEW TO “THE EVENING CHRONICLE”
[JOHANNESBURG ,

January 15, 1912] 1
An Evening Chronicle man interviewed Mr. Gandhi on the questions of trading
licence, the smallpox outbreak, etc.
Asked as to the particular objections to the Municipal Ordinance2 , Mr. Gandhi
replied:

The objections we take to the draft Ordinance are to the control
being given to Municipalities over a certain class of trading licences,
without even the right to appeal;3 to the reimposition of the
disqualification as to the municipal franchise;4 and to the qualification
as to Indians and other Asiatics being engaged in bakeries, etc.5
The first and third of these are innovations; the second is an old
grievance, 6 but I think the British Indians are bound to protest against
it each time it is revived or reasserted in legislative form. Indians
naturally hope that some day or other a prejudice, which has little
justification, will die out, and having that as their goal it is felt that
they cannot allow renewed attempts to perpetuate discriminating legislation to pass by without protest.
7

[QUESTION:] And the provision for Asiatic bazaars, Mr. Gandhi—are these not
1

The Gujarati translation in Indian Opinion mentions the date, but not the
English section.
2
For sections affecting Asiatics, vide Appendix “Transvaal Draft Local
Government Ordinance, 1911: Extracts Affecting Asiatics”, 10-6-1911.
3
The reference is to Section 91 which invested the Town Council with the
power to refuse trading and hawking licences without right of appeal.
4
Section 114
5
Section 92; vide also “What to Expect from the Imperial Government”,
23-12-1911.
6
In the Transvaal, legislation to deprive Indians of the municipal franchise
was sought to be introduced as early as 1903 and again in 1904; vide “On the Position
in the Transvaal”, 18-7-1903 and “What is a Coolie”, 21-5-1904.
7
Section 66 empowered the Town council to open new Bazaars or close
existing ones; vide Appendix “Transvaal Draft Local Government Ordinance, 1911:
Extracts Affecting Asiatics”, 10-6-1911. The first legislation of this kind was
Milner’s Bazaar Notice; vide “British Indians in South Africa”, 12-4-1903.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

133

among those to which your people object?

[ GANDHI:] O yes! A protest has also been lodged against these. It
is true that the sections dealing with Bazaars are merely enabling
sections, and the British Indians cannot be compelled to reside
in these Bazaars, but the spirit is unmistakable; the desireis to relegate
Asiatics to Bazaar, and I am sure that any time any such attempt is
made, it will be opposed by them.
S MALLPOX
But how about the smallpox outbreak, Mr. Gandhi, and the hiding of victims
by Asiatics? Does not this suggest that for the protection of Europeans some such
step is necessary?1

That is a very fair question. We have undoubtedly among us
black sheep, and we pay the penalty for their wrongdoing, but the
public have the generous testimony of Dr. Porter that the leaders of
the community whole-heartedly co-operated with him in bringing to
light the cases that had been hidden, and his acknowledgment that
probably, without their assistance, he would not have been able to
unearth these case. You will perhaps recollect that, when evidence was
being laid before the Insanitary Area Expropriation Commission,
medical testimony was given to the effect that any neglect of
sanitation that existed among British Indians, or the others, was not to
be successfully dealt with by segregating them to inaccessible Bazaars,
or to places which would not lend themselves to effective supervision
of the public control. The proper method of dealing with the trouble
was to let their movements remain unfettered, but to effectively
enforce sanitation by-laws, and if the by-laws were insufficient, to
make them wide enough to cover all kinds of cases.
I can say from personal experience, extending over 18 years,
that this is the best [sic], and the only, smallpox scare. Just imagine
what would have happened if Indians were living four or five miles
away, with perfunctory supervision, such as must be when they are
living in out-of-the-way places. Every case of smallpox successfully
concealed—even from the leaders of the community—and it would
have taxed Dr. Porter to the utmost to avoid the spread of the contagion. I am quit sure that segregation will never succeed.
What I hope will happen is that the general body of Europeans
will, in time to come, take just as much interest in the welfare of their
1

134

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Indian fellow-citizens as in their own, that they will make due
allowance for any special weaknesses that may exist among them, and
will also insist upon their becoming better citizens from day to day.
IMPERIAL INTERFERENCE
Questioned as to his view of the right of the Home Government to interfere
to have the draft Municipal Ordinance revised, as Lord Emmott, in reply to a question
in the House of Lords recently indicated had been done,1 Mr. Gandhi held that they
were quite within there rights in doing so.

In fact we take the view that the attitude of the Imperial
Government has been over-cautious, and that they have erred rather
on the side of the Union Government. It must be remembered that the
Union is still very young and that the Imperial Government has a
great responsibility to the Indian peoples. I have just been reading an
extract from an English paper, which should interest you. It is stated
there that one of the principal reasons for King George’s visit to India
was to strike the imagination of the people of the self-governing
colonies so that they might realize its importance, and that it was
entitled to consideration equally with other great dominions of the
Empire.
Indian Opinion , 27-1-1912

106. THE PLAGUE
We have every reason to hope that the plague which broke out at
the Point will not spread in the Borough of Durban. There has been
no fresh case since Tuesday, and we believe that the Port Health
Officer and the Medical Officer of Health are doing their utmost to
prevent further outbreak. The deaths of one European and one
Coloured man show that it is a matter which concerns all residents, and
the Indian leaders have placed themselves in the right attitude by at
once forming a committee to work with the Public Health Department.
It is only by being perfectly straight and above-board that such
matters can be successfully dealt with, and, by a mutual understanding
between the Indian Community and the Corporation, should a serious
1

Answering a question by Lord Lamington in the House of Lords on December
6, 1911, Lord Emmott had said that the draft Municipal Ordinance had been referred to
a Select Committee of the Municipal Council whose report would not be ready until
after January the following year when they were due to meet again. Indian Opinion,
6-1-1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

135

outbreak, unfortunately, occur, the Indian residents need have no fear
but that everything humanly possible will be done for their welfare.
Indian Opinion , 20-1-1912

107. SMALLPOX IN JOHANNESBURG
More searches have been conducted this week following the
[outbreak of] smallpox. Owing to the Indians’ habit of concealing the
patients for as long as they can, the Health Department has to expend
much patient effort in carrying out the searches. A committee of
leaders, including Mr. Cachalia, Imam Saheb 1 and others, has been
working tirelessly to assist the Department. In every case that is
detected the patient is removed to hospital for treatment. Further cases
occurred in the family of the Malay whose case was the first to be
detected and who succumbed to it later. Whites who used to patronize
Indian dhobis and greengrocers now refuse to deal with them.
Business has,on the whole, suffered greatly.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion , 20-1-1912

108. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
[About January 20, 1912] 2
3

CHI. JAMNADAS ,

Your answer to Dorabji that you would reply to him only if he
addressed you as ‘gentleman’ was perfectly right. And you were also
right in not addressing him as ‘Sahebji’, though I have some doubt
1

Imam Abdul Kadir Bawazeer; an Indian of Arab Descent who settled in South
Africa; Assistant Priest of the Hamidia Mosque in Johannesburg and Chairman of the
Hamidia Islamic Society; actively participated in the satyagraha campaigns of 1908
and 1913; settled at Phoenix after Gandhiji left South Africa and later jointed him at
the Sabarmati Ashram at his invitation. For his decision to offer satyagraha in 1908,
vide “Letter to The Star”, 18-7-1908 and for his arrest for hawking without licence.
2
Jamnadas Gandhi went to South Africa in July 1911 and staying first at
Phoenix, went to the Tolstoy Farm Where he stayed upto December 14, 1912.
Gandhiji has noted in his Diary for the year 1912 that orabji arrived at Tolstoy Farm
on January 20, 1912. Probably the conversation mentioned in the letter took place
during a railway journey from Durban to Johannesburg before January 20, 1912, or
from Johannesburg to Durban after January 20, 1912.
3
The youngest of the four sons of Gandhiji’s cousin, Khushalchand Gandhi.

136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

about its propriety. Still, the spirit in which you refused to say
‘Sahebji’ was right. When such things are being discussed, it is advisable for one to run away from the place. Personally, I have found
from experience that the best course is to remain quiet and say nothing. At the time you heard that comment in the train, you would have
done well to say nothing whatever. When strangers who do not know
us, talk such things among themselves, why need we intervene?
We should keep a soft heart towards such persons and believing
that they do not know what they are saying, have compassion for
them. Even if one cannot do that, at least we should not despise them.
We should take a lesson from what they are saying and consider how
careful we must be before finding fault with the other person and how
we should remain uninterested when anyone finds fault with a person
whom we do not know. Dorabji prattled all those things under the
influence of drink. And those two Muslims said what they conscientiously believed. So why should they not have said what they did?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33814

109. LETTER TO E.F.C. LANE
[JOHANNESBURG ,]1

January 29,1912
DEAR MR. LANE,

I suppose I owe it to your usual courtesy that I am in possession
of a copy of the Gazette Extraordinary containing the Immigration
Bill2. I understand that the Central News Agency has not yet got a
supply of this number of the Gazette.
I see that the Bill has been somewhat altered from the copy that
I saw now nearly a month ago. I do not know whether it is General
Smuts’ intention to make the changes 3 I have already submitted are
1
In “Diary, 1912” (p. 366), Gandhiji mentions he was in Johannesburg on
this date.
2
The Union Immigrants’ Restriction Bill of 1911 (Vol. X, pp. 516-28) was
dropped in April,1911; vide Appendix “Lane’s Letter to Gandhiji”, 21-4-1911. This
reference is to a new Bill drafted to meet Indians’ objections; for extracts, vide
Appendix “Extracts from Immigrants’ Restriction Bill (1912) and Orange Free State
Constitution”, 3-2-1912. It was shown to Gandhiji on December 22, 1911, before
being gazetted, when he met Lane; vide “Telegram to Private Secretary to Minister of
Interior”, 21-12-1911. Further changes which were the immediate occasion for this
letter had evidently been made since.
3
Vide “Letter to E.F.C. Lane”, 7-4-1911.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

137

necessary. Sub-Sections (f)1 and (g) 2 of Section 5 are a complete
innovation, and, in my opinion, subversive of principles of justice.
That a man should prove his domicile to the satisfaction of an
Immigration Officer, who may not have a legal training or a judicial
mind, seems utterly absurd, nor can I see the slightest reason why he
should be the arbiter to decide as to whether a particular woman,
whom I claim to be my wife, and a particular child whom I claim to be
mine are my wife and child or not. This innovation disturbs the
existing legal position.
Similarly, Section 7 will debar educated Indians in the Transvaal,
for instance, from entering Natal on passing the existing education
test.3 This, again. will disturb the legal position, and will be a manifest
injustice. It is one thing to have an almost impossible education test
for checking oversea immigration, and another thing to impose that
test for interprovincial migration. I draw attention to the fact that last
year’s Bill did not disturb the existing position.
Lastly, Section 25, sub-section 2, is an improvement on the three
year rule that was laid down in the draft you were good enough to
show me. It is still an exceedingly hard requirement. I do think that
those Asiatics in South Africa who are at present domiciled should be
able to claim as a matter of right permanent certificates of domicile,
and not be at the mercy of an Immigration Officer as to whether they
1

Section 5 (f) defines persons who are not prohibited immigrants and can
enter the Union consistent with section 4 which sets out the categories of prohibited
immigrants. Every would-be immigrant would have to pass a dictation test in a
language of the immigration officer’s choice under Section 4(a) (p. 221 and Appendix
XIII) and further satisfy the official that he had not become a prohibited
immigrant—that is, if he was re-entering, having either been deported or left the
Transvaal.
2
Section 5(g) vests is the immigration officers the right to demand proof of
relationship from women and minor children who claimed right of entry on the
ground of being wives and children of Asiatics who had established this right. These
powers were vested in the officials by Act 3 of 1906 which amended the Immigrants’
Restriction Act (Act 30 of 1903). Giving judgment in the Nathalia case, Mr. Justice
Dove Wilson of the Natal Bench of the Supreme Court admitted that the Immigration
Restriction Officer had been given “apparently unfettered discretion.” Indian
Opinion, 3-2-1912. The immigration officers were further entitled to satisfy
themselves that the wives were not prohibited immigrants. Vide also “Indian wives”,
8-7-1911 and “A Shocking Case”, 23-9-1911.
3
Section 7 implicitly denied freedom of interprovincial movement to Asiatics
already residing in the Union. If they wanted to go to another province they had to
pass the stiff Union immigration education test.

138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should get such certificates or not. It is true that the clause is only
permissive, and that nobody is bound to take out certificates, but its
effect would certainly be to practically compel, especially the poorer
class of Asiatics, to go a-begging for these certificates, and then take
with them documents fixing an arbitrary period of absence.
I do hope, therefore, that these three points will be satisfactorily
settled. Whilst I have conferred with a number of my associates, I have
not taken any public action yet and I do not propose to take any until
I hear from you as to General Smuts’ intention. Will you please, if
you conveniently can, wire whether the points raised by me will be
favourably considered by General Smuts.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

PS.
After signing my letter to you, I re-read Chapter 33 of the
O.F.S. Laws. I see that sub-section 2 of Section 28 1 [of the Union
immigration bill] is somewhat differently worded from what it was
originally intended to be last year. Whilst those immigrants who by
passing the education test may enter the Free State should suffer from
the disability to have fixed property registered in their name or to
carry on a commercial business or farming, they should certainly not
have to make the sworn declaration contemlated in Section 8 2 . By
reading the latter part of Section 8, you will understand exactly what I
mean.
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5601.

1

Section 28 specifically declares that any Asiatic immigrant who had passed
the Union dictation test would still be subject to Orange Free State Laws which
required visiting Asiatics to register afresh and articles 7 and 8 of which prevented
Asiatics from settling in the Colony for purposes of farming or trade. Gandhiji’s
objection was to any endorsing reference in the Union Bill to Orange Free State Laws
which were based on colour discrimination; vide “Letter to J. J. Doke”, 17-3-1911 &
17-3-1911. He had objected to the registration requirement; vide “Letter to E.F.C.
Lane “, 7-4-1911 and “Interview to Cape Argus”, 30-3-1911.
2
This sought to prohibit any Coloured person from settling in the Orange
Free State for the purposes of farming or carrying on trade.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

139

110. TELEGRAM TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO MINISTER
OF INTERIOR 1
[LAWLEY,]

January 30,1912
TO

INTERIOR ’S P RIVATE S ECRETARY
C APE TOWN
POSTED LETTER2 YESTERDAY IMMIGRATION BILL, BUT VIEW
FACT
FIRST READING TODAY WISH DRAW URGENT ATTENTION GENERAL SMUTS
THAT SECTIONS 5, 7, 25 DISTURB LEGAL POSITION, BECAUSE THEY
MAKE
FINAL
OFFICER’S
DECISION
REGARDING
RIGHTS
DOMICILE,
WIVES AND CHILDREN,MAKE EDUCATION TEST FOR INDIANS ENTERING
CAPE OR NATAL FROM TRANSVAAL, STIFFER, AND MAKE UNCERTAIN
RIGHTS
NATAL
INDIANS
RECEIVE
PERMANENT
DOMICILE
CERTIFICATES.
MOREOVER
SECTION
283
SEEMS
CONTEMPLATE
DECLARATION
UNDER
SECTION
8,
CHAPTER
33
BY
EDUCATED
IMMIGRANT
ENTERING
FREE
STATE.
AS
I
HOPE
THESE
POINTS
WILL
RECEIVE
GENERAL
SMUTS;
FAVOURABLE
TTENTION
HAVE
DISSUADED
PUBLIC
ACTIO
AWAITING
TELEGRAPHIC
REPLY.
PLEASE
ALSO
SAY
WHEN SECOND READING.4

GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5604; also
photostat; S. N. 5619.

111. TELEGRAM TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO MINISTER OF
INTERIOR
[LAWLEY,]

February 1, 1912
WHILE
THANKING
GENERAL
SMUTS’
LONG
REPLY5 ,
REGRET
IT
IS
UNSATISFACTORY.
FEEL
SURE
INDIANS
WILL
NEVER
BE
SATISFIED
WITH
BOARD’S
CONTROL,
ESPECIALLY
VIEW
PAST
1
To this Gandhiji received the following reply: “Thirtieth January. Your
telegram recieved. Second reading of Immigration Bill is not until 8th February.
2
Vide the preceding item.
3
Vide 8th footnote”Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 29-1-1912.
4
The second reading did not take place until May 30.
5
Vide Appendix “Telegram from Secretary for Interior to Gandhiji”,
31-1-1912.

140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

EXPERIENCE
BOARDS. SURELY EXISTING
LEGAL
RIGHTS
WILL
BE
DISTURBED
BY DEPRIVING
SUBJECT
OF
RIGHT
APPEAL
JUDICIAL
TRIBUNALS.
NOR
IS
CONTENTION
REASONABLE
THAT
EXISTING
RIGHTS NOT DISTURBED UNDER SECTION 7, AS TODAY EDUCATED
INDIANS MIGRATE NATAL OR VAPE
ON
PASSING PRESENT TEST.
HOW
CAN
THEY
BE EXPECTED
EXCHANGE
THIS
LEGAL
RIGHT
FOR
ADMINISTRATIVE
DISCRETION
TEMPERED
THOUGH
IT
MAY
BE WITH JUSTICE? FOR NATAL INDIANS TO
ACCEPT TEMPORARY
PERMITS OF ABSENCE IS TO
CLEARLY
CHANGE
PRESENT LEGAL
STATUS. DOMICILE CERTIFICATES AT PRESENT ISSUED CONTAIN FULL
DESCRIPTION
HOLDER
AND
INCAPABLE
CHANGE
HOLDERS
WITHOUT
DETECTION.
FEEL
CERTAIN
GENERAL
SMUTS
DOES
NOT EXPECT DISTINGUISHED INDIANS MAKE DECLARATION UNDERSECTION 8
FREE
STATE
LAW.
THEY
WILL
BE
UNABLE
TRADE
OR
FARM
WITHOUT
DECLARATION,
WHICH
IS
MEANT
TO
BE MADE BY THOSE ONLY WHO WISH SETTLE FREE STATE FOR
DOMESTIC
SERVICE.
GIVING
DECLARATION
AGAINST
WHOLE
SPIRIT STRUGGLE UNDERTAKEN SOLELY FOR SELF-RESPECT. HOPE THESE
REASONABLE
ALTERATIONS
WILL
BE
GRANTED,
AND
AWFUL
REVIVAL
OF STRUGGLE
AVERTED.
AM
REFRAINING
PUBLIC ACTION 1 PENDING REPLY 2 .

GANDHI
From the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5608, also photostat: S. N. 5619

112. A NOTE3
[On or after February 2, 1912]
Urgent
Address of British Indian Union is Miller’s Bldgs., 67, Hanover
St., Cape Town.
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5611.

1

Gandhiji was as good as his word; these telegrams were not even published
in Indian Opinion of the time.
2
Vide footnote of “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 6-2-1912.
3
Written on a telegram which Gandhiji had received from Makadam
Woodstock, Cape Town, dated February 2, which read: “Second reading immigration
Thursday. Resolutions wanted by wire. Public meeting of Union Sunday.”
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

141

113. THE NEW IMMIGRATION BILL
The Union Immigration Bill which is partly intended to satisfy
the Transvaal Indian passive resisters is now out. It is in some respects
a better bill than that of the last year. But it does not quite fulfil the
promise made by General Smuts. General Smuts has undertaken not
to disturb the existing legal status throughout South Africa in any
general bill designed to meet passive resisters.1
The existing legal position is among other things that, at any
rate at the Cape and the Transvaal, domicile and the rights of minor
children and wives of non-prohibited immigrants are dependent on a
decision of the highest tribunal of justice; that British Indians of the
Transvaal passing the ordinary simple education test can easily enter
the Cape or Natal; and that Indians of Natal have until lately received
certificates of domicile as a matter of right upon proving domicile.
Under the New Bill the Immigration Officer constitutes the highest
court of justice to consider the rights of domiciled Asiatics and their
wives and children; educated Indians of the Transvaal have to pass the
stiffer test under the new Bill on entering the Cape or Natal and the
Natal Indians will be unable to demand certificates of domicile as a
matter of right.2 Now these are new disabilities which passive resisters
cannot be expected to accept. We hope, however, that these points
arean oversight and that General Smuts will rectify the defects in
Committee. The Free State difficulty is being met with as was
suggested last year.3 Only care will have to be taken that an Indian
finding his way to the Free State as an educated immigrant is not
called upon under Section 8 of Chapter XXXIII of the Free State
Constitution to make any declaration contemplated by it. If these
points are cleared up, we fancy that passive resisters will be completely
met.

1

Vide “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 29-4-1911.
“A Notice to Every Indian”, published in the Gujarati columns of Indian
Opinion, 3-2-1912 said: “Indians residing in Natal or the Cape who do not possess
proper certificates of domicile are advised not to leave their Provinces for the time
being”.
3
Vide “Interview to Cape Argus”, before 30-3-1911 and “Letter to E. F. C.
Lane”, 7-4-1911.
2

142

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

There still remain general objections by Natal 1 and the Cape.
They will be legitimately able to complain of the new education test,
and at least be entitled to some guarantee that a certain number of
educated Indians from India will be permitted to pass the education
test.
The Bill even then will leave many things from an Asiatic
standpoint in an unsatisfactory condition. Restriction on interstate
immigration will be a cause of great grievance.2 And the disabilities of
lawful residents as to ownership of landed property, etc., in the
Transvaal or the Free State must be a menace to the well-being of
Indians and other Asiatics, who, after all, form part of the South
African nation that is in process of formation.
Indian Opinion ,3-2-1912

114. LATE MR. ABDOOLLA HAJEE ADAM
One of the greatest figures in the Indian community of Natal is
no more. Mr. Abdoolla Hajee Adam Jhaveri3 , of the well-known firm
of Dada Abdoola and Co., breathed his last on Monday last, at the age
of 58 leaving a widow, together with the whole Indian communityand
not a few of his European friends to mourn after him. With the
deceased was linked the political as also the commercial life of the
Indians of Natal. He was one of the first independent Indian settlers of
Natal, having almost immediately followed the late Mr. Abobaker
Amod 4 . Mr. Abdoolla Hajee Adam, together with his partners,
1

A meeting of the Natal Indian Congress held on February 4 passed
resolutions protesting against: (a) the Union immigration bill and the wide powers
vested under it in the administration; (b) the discretion vested in the Immigration
Officer to decide the highly technical question of domicile and that of marriage and
parentage. The meeting demanded the right of Natal Indians to permanent domiciliary
certificates issued by the Government. It protested against the education test, the
restriction on interprovincial immigration and the rescinding of domiciliary rights of
Natal Indians who could prove three years’ residence in the Province.
2
Vide “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 29-1-1912 and telegrams to the Private
Secretary to the Minister of the Interior, 30-1-1912 & 1-2-1912.
3
He invited Gandhiji to South Africa in 1893 to represent his case to an
English lawyer.
4
Abubaker Amod Zaveri; one of the early Indian settlers in the Transvaal, a
leading merchant of “silk and fancy goods” and the only Indian to own landed
property in the Transvaal. He sent indentured Indians in distress back to India in his
ships free of charge and even helped them with food and money en route. The transfer,
on his death, of his property, which was acquired before Law 3 of 1885 came into
force, to his heirs became the subject of much controversy and legislation.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

143

probably owned the largest Indian business throughout South Africa
during the last decade of the past century. His firm had at one time
probably no fewer than fifteen branches, their transactions with
England, Germany and India running into thousands of pounds
sterling. He was the first Indian to have gone in for ship-owning in
South Africa, he having bought the Courland and the Khedive.
Mr. Abdoolla Hajee Adam’s political ability was as great as his
business talent. He was the President-founder of the Natal Indian
Congress. His oratorical powers in his own mother tongue were of no
mean order. Though his knowledge of English was all picked up, he
could carry on with ease a sustained argument in English. He used to
surprise his European friends by his resources in argument and apt
illustrations which he used to draw upon for enforcing his point.
He headed many a deputation to the Natal Government, especially
during the late Sir John Robinson’s1 premiership. Though he was
ailing, he took a most active and prominent part in the boycott of
the Coronation celebrations when he spoke to the crowds that
surrounded him with his old fire. No memoir of Mr. Abdoolla Hajee
Adam would be complete that did not refer to his religious zeal.
His greatest pleasure in life was probably to engage in a religious
and philosophical discussion. He lost no opportunity of placing
before his arguers the beauties of the religion of the holy Prophet
of Arabia.
We tender our condolences to the late Mr. Abdoolla Hajee
Adam’s family.
Indian Opinion , 3-2-1912

115. NEW IMMIGRATION BILL2
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CLAUSES AND COMMENTS

The Bill will apply to the entire Union of South Africa.
S ECTION 3

The Governor-General is empowered to appoint an Immigration
Board to help the Government.
1

(1839-1903); first Prime Minister and Colonial Secretary of Natal,

1893-7.
2

For extracts from the Bill in English, vide Appendix Extracts from
Immigrants’ Restriction Bill (1912) and Orange Free State Constitution”, 3-2-1912.

144

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

COMMENT

We may demand that our people should be represented on this
board.
S ECTION 4(A)

A person, who is unable to write out 50 words, to the satisfaction
of the Immigration Officer in the language which he chooses,will be
prohibited from entering the Union.
COMMENT

These may include the Arabic and the Sanskrit languages. Even
so the clause is severe. The Transvaal [Indians], however, cannot
protest against it; but Natal and the Cape should protest. Also, we
cannot hope that this clause will be amended. But an arrangement can
be made to ensure the entry of a specified number of educated
Indians to meet our needs.
S ECTION 4(C)

If a foreign Government sends any [adverse] information about
a person, he shall be prevented from entering [the Union]
COMMENT

This section appears to be meant for agitators.
S ECTION 5 (f) & (g)

A person who wants to enter [the Union] by virtue of his [preWar] domiciliary rights and whose wife and children also wish to enter
[by virtue of his right of entry] should prove their rights to the
satisfaction of the [Immigration] Officer.
COMMENT

Everyone should oppose this section. There is a similar section
in the Natal [law]. The Government now intends to introduce this in
the Cape and the Transvaal [laws]. Even a satyagrahi cannot accept
this section. We should certainly be given the right to appeal to courts
of law [against the official’s decisions]
S ECTION 6

A prohibited immigrant is liable to three months’ imprisonment. There is no [provision for a] fine. And he can be deported.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

145

S ECTION 7

If an Indian from one Province of the Union wishes to proceed
to another, he must pass a fresh [dictation] test.
COMMENT

Under this section it may happen that a few educated Indians
from Natal or the Cape may occasionally enter the Transvaal; but it
will be very difficult for educated Indians from the Transvaal to go
Natal or Cape. For, instead of the existing test which is relatively easy,
they will have to pass the new test which is more severe. Everyone
concerned should oppose this section. This can never be acquiesced
in. Even the satyagrahis cannot afford to remain silent [on this point]
S ECTION 8

No prohibited immigrant can carry on trade or own land in the
Province [where his residence is unlawful], or in any part of the
Union.
COMMENT

The effect of the section will be that a Cape Indian, who does
not have the right to reside in Natal, cannot own land or carry on trade
in that Province.
S ECTION 23

The onus of proving that one is not a prohibited immigrant will
lie on the [intending immigrant].
COMMENT

All such laws contain a similar section.
S ECTION 25 (I )

The Government reserves powers to issue temporary permits on
such conditions as it may choose.
COMMENT

Under this section the Government can permit the entry of
persons whose services it considers essential.

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[SECTION 25(II )]1

The [Immigration] officer, in his discretion, may issue to any
person who fears that he may forfeit his [domiciliary] right, a permit
entitling him to return [to the Province or the Union] after a specified
period.
COMMENT

A similar offensive section is contained in the Cape law, but it is
a new one for Natal. It is not obligatory on one to take out this permit;
but the poor may be [imprisoned and] sorely harassed [if, on their
return, they are unable to establish their domiciliary right]. Natal
should vehemently oppose this section. The satyagrahis may do so
too; but it cannot be asserted just yet that they should fight. One does
not forfeit one’s right if one does not take out this permit and one can
leave Natal after making [other] careful arrangements.
S ECTION 28(I ) &(II )

Act 36 of 1908 (the second Asiatic Act) will not apply to those,
who enter (the Union) after passing the [dictation] test. But they will
nevertheless be subject to Sections 7 & 8 of the Orange Free State
Laws2 .
COMMENT

Under this section, an Indian who has passed the test gets an
unqualified right to reside in all the four Provinces [of the Union]. He
will not have to register himself. He cannot, however, own land in his
own name in the Transvaal. In the Orange Free State, he cannot own
land, neither can he carry on trade or farming. Satyagrahis cannot ask
for more than this. Another campaign, and that on a big scale, should,
however, be launched to secure the rights to own land, etc. For this it is
essential that Indians should acquire the requisite strength. That will
take time. We have still much to learn and to suffer yet.
This law contains 29 sections in all, but it is unnecessary to
summarize the rest.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion , 3-2-1912
1

This power was, in fact, vested in the Minister (Appendix Extracts from
Immigrants’ Restriction Bill (1912) and Orange Free State Constitution”, 3-2-1912),
but Gandhiji here assumes that, in practice, it would be delegated to the Immigration
Officer.
2
Chapter 33 of the Orange Free State Constitution
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

147

116. TELEGRAM TO BRITISH INDIA UNION1
[LAWLEY,]

February 3, 1912
TO

BRITISH INDIAN UNION
67, H ANOVER S TREET
C APE TOWN
PASS
RESOLUTIONS
PROTESTING
AGAINST
DISCRETION
OFFICER
REGARDING
PROOF
DOMICILE
WIFE
CHILDREN
NEW
EDUCATION
TEST
FOR
PROVINCIAL
MIGRATION
ALSO
NEW
TEST
FOR
OVERSEA
IMMIGRATION
RETENTION
CAPE
PRACTICE
LIMITING
PERIOD
ABSENCE
AND
FREE
STATE
SECTION
REQUIRING
DECLARATIONS
EDUCATED
IMMIGRANTS.
SUGGEST
YOUR
SEEING
ADVOCATE ALEXANDER WHO KNOWS POINTS DIFFICULT GIVE TEXT
RESOLUTIONS WIRE. 2

GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5612

117. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI PATEL
Maha Vad 2 [February 4, 1912] 3
DEAR SHRI RAOJIBHAI,

I have your letter. I have not changed my mind but, in view of
our father’s refusal to permit you to go to Phoenix, it is my duty to
say ‘No’ to you. You have a like duty. If, however, your father wants
you to do something that is positively wrong, I can take you into
Phoenix to help your escape that. When placed in a moral dilemma,
one is bound to hold one’s peace if parents forbid one to follow a
certain line of action; if pressed, however, to do something sinful, one
should refuse to obey. Prahladji’s is the only example that can be
1

Vide “A Note”, on or after 2-2-1912.
A meeting of the Cape Indians held on February 4 passed unanimous
resolutions on the lines suggested in the telegram. Indian Opinion, 10-2-1912.
3
This letter comes after that of November 29, 1911 (pp. 191-2), to the same
addressee. Mahatma Gandhijina Patro gives the last paragraph as a separate letter,
which it assigns to Maha Vad 2 (corresponding to February 4 in 1912). It gives the
rest of the letter under Phagan Sud 2 (corresponding to February 20 in 1912). Our
source, Gandhijini Sadhna, gives the whole letter without a date. This letter is given
here under the earlier date.
2

148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cited in this connection. One may, moreover, submit to any amount of
physical suffering at the bidding of one’s father. As for suffering to
the self, there can be none.
You can conform to [the requirements of] morality while
engaged in business. That will be education for you and a preparation
for the kind of life that you wish to live. You will be, moreover,
rendering a service to others through your business if you can practise
absolute honesty in your dealings. You should accept a fixed price
from every customer, one which would permit a reasonable margin of
profit. You ought not to sell articles which you would not use
yourself. You should be civil to the customers, [though] you need not
flatter them in order to promote sales. If you have any assistance, you
should treat them as if they were your brothers. All this should be
easy enough. You should not feel that, by being in business, you will
be exposing yourself to temptations; it is not as if your took to business in order to make dishonest gains. You will be joining business
merely in deference to your father’s order, so that your should find it
quite easy to maintain uprightness. You say that you are not in love
with money. One may feel unhappy in a situation which one dislikes,
but one will not corrupted. I do not think Prahladji found it in any
way difficult to live as a devotee of Vishnu in the midst of rakshasa1 ;
for he utterly disliked the rakshasa way of life.
One can be true to one’s pledge even when made to sit on the
shuli 2 . A true pledge is the one that is kept even at such moment. If
uprightness has become natural to us, has become a part of our being,
it can certainly be kept, and it is the duty of us all to cultivate it to that
extent. I pray that your may succeed in your noble aspiration.
With due regards from

MOHANDAS
From Gandhijini Sadhana (Gujarati); Raojibhai Patel; Navajivan Publishing
House, Ahmedabad; 1939

1
2

Demons
A sharpened iron stake on which a condemned person was impaled

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

149

118. RESOLUTIONS AT MEETING OF CAPE BRITISH
INDIAN UNION1
C APE TOWN

February 4, 1912
R ESOLUTION I

That this meeting, having heard the address of the President and
other speakers, and having been informed of the contents of the
Immigration Bill, hereby endorse[s] unanimously the view taken by
the President that the rights of the Indian community are placed in
serious jeopardy. The meeting expresses its disapproval of the Bill as
it stands, and authorizes the President and Secretary, on behalf of the
whole Anglo-British Indian community, to petition Parliament, and to
take such further, or other,steps as may be necessary to bring about
the modification of the Bill in the particulars and on the lines
suggested in the President’s address, members of the meeting individually promising their strenuous support and assistance wherever
possible.
R ESOLUTION II

This meeting protests against the arbitrary nature of the new
dictation test, both for oversea immigrants, as well as for persons
domiciled in one province and wishing to enter or reside in another
province.
R ESOLUTION III

This meeting protests against the proof of being a domiciled
person or being a wife or child of an immigrant of domiciled person,
1

These resolutions were unanimously passed at “an excellently attended”
meeting of the Union held on February 4, 1912 under the chairmanship of the
President, E. Norodien, and were forwarded to the Senate and House of Assembly
along with petition containing Cape Indians’ objections to the Union Immigration
Consolidation Bill; Indian Opinion, 17-2-1912. They were presumably drafted by
Gandhiji, for, two days before the meeting was to be held, one Makadam from Cape
Town informed him by telegram of the date of the meeting and asked him to wire the
draft resolution. On this telegram as received Gandhiji made an urgent memorandum;
vide “A Note”, on or after 2-2-1912. For the text of Makadam’s telegram. vide
footnote of “A Note”, on or after 2-2-1912.

150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

being subject to the satisfaction of an immigration officer instead of
being left to the Court.
R ESOLUTION IV

This meeting protests against the retention of the Cape practice,
limiting period of absence in the case of persons desirous of
proceeding out of the Union for a temporary purpose.
R ESOLUTION V

This meeting protests against the section of the Bill requiring
declarations from educated immigrants who enter the Orange Free
State.
Indian Opinion , 17-2-1912

119. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR1
[LAWLEY,]

February 6, 1912
STILL

A

WAIT

WIRE

AS

PROMISED

YOURS

2ND

INSTANT.

From a photostat to the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5616

1

In reply to Gandhiji’s telegram of February 1, the Ministry of Interior had
said: “2 Feb. Hope to be able to reply to your wire or 1st February on Monday.” S.N.
5615. Gandhiji mentions in his “Diary, 1912” that he drafted this telegram but did
not send it. He, however, received a telegram the next day; vide Appendix “Telegram
from Secretary for Interior to Gandhiji”, 7-2-1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

151

120. TELEGRAM TO PRIVATE SECRETARY TO MINISTER OF
INTERIOR1
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY,

February 7, 1912
P RIVATE S ECRETARY
INTERIOR
C APE TOWN
BEG
THANK
GENERAL
SMUTS
WIRE 2
EVINCING
CONCILIATORY
TONE. IN CIRCUMSTANCES EXPLANATION POSSIBLE AVOID RENEWAL PAINFUL
CONFLICT
IF
BILL
AMENDED
SECUR
EXISTING
LEGAL
RIGHTS
INTER-PROVINCIAL
MIGRATION
EDUCATED
ASIATICS
AS TO
WHICH
WIRE
QUITE
SILENT.
WILL
STILL
POSTPONE
PUBLIC
ACTION
PENDING REPLY WHICH I HOPE WILL BE
SATISFACTORY.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5614; also Photostat:
S. N. 5619

121. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR
[LAWLEY,]

February 8, 1912
TO
INTERIOR
WHILST THANKING GENERAL SMUTS FOR PROMISE OF SATISFACTORY
ASSURANCES REGARDING
INTERPROVINCIAL
MIGRATION,
I
VENTURE
STATE THAT NO ASSURANCES SHORT OF RETENTION EXISTING LEGAL
POSITION
WILL
SATISFY
PASSIVE
RESISTERS.
ALSO
VENTURE
RECORD THAT MY SUBMISSION HITHERTO HAS BEEN PURELY IN TERMS
PROVISIONAL
SETTLEMENT.
RESERVE
RIGHT
CRITICIZE
BILL
AS TO MANY OTHER OBJECTIONABLE FEATURES.
GANDHI

From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5618; also photostat:
S. N. 5619
1
To this Gandhiji received the following reply the next day: “General Smuts
appreciates your reply and especially the spirit in which you have approached the
difficulties surrounding the question of immigration. He is considering the matter of
interprovincial migration to which you refer, and hopes shortly to be able to give
you satisfactory assurances regarding the Provinces of Natal and the Cape.”
S. N. 5617.
2
Vide Appendix “Telegram from Secretary for Interior to Gandhiji”, 7-2-1912.

152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

122. THE IMMIGRATION BILL
The Natal Indian Congress and the Cape British Indian Union
have lost no time in holding public meetings 1 to protest against the
Immigration Bill that was to have been read second time last
Thursday. The resolutions2 ought to command acceptance. The Bill
designed not only to carry out the policy of almost entire Asiatic
exclusion, but, if it is passed in its present form, it will very largely
interfere with vested rights, and Asiatics generally will find themselves
at the mercy of Immigration Officers.
General Botha’s declaration 3 made in England, and repeated
elsewhere: that the Union Government do not desire to molest the
resident Asiatic population of South Africa, will be falsified. It is more
an Asiatic Expulsion Bill than an Immigration Consolidation Bill, as
its authors have entitled it. The rights of residence of domiciled
Asiatics and those of their wives and children are very seriously
threatened, and the movement of educated Asiatics as between Natal
and the Cape as also the Transvaal on the one hand and the Cape and
Natal on the other, is to be considerably restricted by the new Bill. So
that not a single section of the Asiatic community has been left
untouched. Moreover Natal and the Cape have a special grievance in
that educated Indians of the status of clerks and assistants will be
practically prohibited immigrants under the arbitrary education test
now proposed. The remarks 4 of The Star in its leading article of the
1

Vide 4th footnote of “The New Immigration Bill”, 3-2-1912 and “Resolutions at Meeting of Cape British Indian Union”, 4-2-1912.
2
Ibid
3
General Botha, who was visiting England in connection with the Imperial
Conference, made a Press statement in London on May 23, 1911, expressing
gratification over the Provisional settlement of May 20. Reuter further reported that
“he was sure that the Indians would do their part to help the Government to make
things as pleasant as possible for them. They could be fully assured that the
Government entertained no hostility towards them, but must always remember that
the Government was determined not to admit more, except as provided in the
agreement. He hoped that the Indians both in Africa and in India would realize that
Mr. Smuts had great difficulty in obtaining the concessions he had already made.”
4
The Star, commending the education test prescribed under the Transvaal
Immigrants’ Restriction Act of 1907 (which judged the ability of a would-be
immigrant to write and sign, in any European language, an application for
permission to enter the Colony) condemned the Bill as going “beyond the bounds of
either equity or expediency” and said that the education test prescribed under it gave
“the most arbitrary power” to Government officials. That there was a Board of Appeal
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

153

31st ultimo on this portion of the Bill are very apposite. Let us hope
that the timely protest of the Natal Indian Congress and the British
Indian Union will receive a sympathetic hearing from the Government, and an ugly situation that must otherwise inevitably arise be
avoided.
Indian Opinion, 10-2-1912

123. FIRST INSTALMENT OF FAMINE RELIEF FUND1
We have sent Dr. Pranjivandas Mehta a cheque for £100, being
our first instalment towards the Famine Relief Fund. Any suggestions
by contributors have also been forwarded to Dr. Mehta. Dr. Mehta is
not unknown among the Indians here. His intention is to visit the
famine areas and have his own contribution expended on the spot. We
feel, therefore, it is only through him that the best use can be made of
the collections.2 Equally, the instructions which we have received or
may receive in future about the disbursement of the money received
for specific purposes or in specific areas can be best implemented
through him.
This would also seem to be the right occasion to clarify some
points which have been raised about the famine fund that is being
collected. To contribute to this fund we have started and to entrust us
with its utilization as has been done is one method. We have also
received some instructions for disbursements independently of the
Indian Opinion fund; to have the money thus sent through us is
another method. Those who intend to send money anywhere on their
own may do so. Our only aim must be to see that those who realize
the seriousness of the famine do send help to the home country.
There can be no question of anyone taking special credit to himself.
was of no use for the reversal of the decision of an “arbitrary officer—possibly with
anti-Semitic tendencies”, after many days, would be no recompense for the loss of
money and the inconvenience caused. There was no provision in the Bill that the
language selected by the immigration officials would be one of those commonly
spoken in the immigrant’s country or among his race. This, said The Star, was
“Hertzogism run riot” and enabled “a satellite Minister of Justice to exclude an
Englishman because he cannot pass a fifty words’ test in the Taal”. Indian Opinion,
10-2-1912.
1
Vide “Famine in India”, 11-11-1911 & 9-12-1911.
2
The subject of the famine figured often in Gandhiji’s letters to Dr. Mehta;
vide 24-9-1911, 10-10-1911 & 11-11-1911.

154

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

We know that ours is a modest fund. The leaders [of the
community] may, if they are prepared to assume the responsibility,
undertake collection on a larger scale; it would do them credit if they
did so. If no collection on any large scale is to be undertaken, we
believe every Indian ought to give his mite to our fund.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 10-2-1912

124. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
February 15, 1912
DEAR MR. LANE,

I am still awaiting the promised reply 1 in connection with the
Immigration Bill. I take this opportunity of reiterating what I have
briefly submitted in my telegrams
As to sub-sections (f) and (g) of Clause 5, if the interpretation is
as given in your telegram 2 , to the effect that the jurisdiction of the
courts is not ousted, it will be entirely satisfactory. In view, however, of
the decision of the Natal Bench,3 I am very nervous as to the Clause, in
spite of the assurance given in your telegram. I am, therefore, taking
legal opinion myself.4
As to Section 7, passive resisters can have nothing to complain
of, if the present legal position, namely, the ability of educated Asiatics to enter Natal or the Cape from the Transvaal by passing the
education tests provided by the respective laws of the Provinces is
retained.
As to the Free State, if the reading of your Law Officer is
correct, that the declaration under Section 8 of Chapter 33 of the
Orange Free State Constitution will not be necessary, this serious
1

To “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 8-2-1912.
Vide Appendix “Telegram from Secretary for Interior to Gandhiji”, 7-2-1912.
3
In the case of Mahomed Moosa Nathalia v. Principal Immigration Officer,
the Natal Division of the Supreme Court refused to interfere with the decision of the
Immigration Officer who had, in his discretion, ruled that the evidence produced to
show that young Nathalia was the rightful son was inadequate. Leave to appeal from
the Natal Bench of the Supreme Court was refused by an Appellate Court. Indian
Opinion, 3-2-1912, 10-2-1912 & 17-2-1912.
4
Vide the following item.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

155

difficulty will have been solved, but as it is a mater of vital importance,
we are taking legal opinion on it too.
Lastly, if domiciled Indians of Natal cannot, as a matter of right,
claim to have domicile certificates issued to them, passive resisters
cannot consistently object to Section 25(2) 1 of the Bill. Iwould,
however, take the opportunity of pointing out that, if one thousand
certificates were confiscated,2 it entirely proves my statement that the
certificates that have been issued could not be transferred without
detection. That a thousand certificates have been confiscated between,
I suppose, 1896 and now, shows that sixty Indians per year were ready
to demean themselves by using certificates of domicile not their own,
and that, being detected, they received a punishment fitting their
crime.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

EARNEST F. C. L ANE , E SQ.
C APE TOWN
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5625

125. LETTER TO R. GREGOROWSKI
JOHANNESBURG ,

February 15, 1912
DEAR MR. GREGOROWSKI,

I enclose herewith statement for your Opinion on the new Bill.
You were good enough to give me your Opinion, which, as I told you,
proved most valuable to me, on the Bill that General Smuts attempted
to carry through the House last year.3 I enclose for your assistance, in
addition to the statement for your Opinion, an extract giving the
necessary Sections from the Orange Free State laws, as also your
1

The Section required, inter alia, that Asiatics who wished to leave the Union
temporarily had to take out a domiciliary certificate and in order to return were required
to establish their identity in any manner prescribed from time to time; vide Appendix
“Extracts from Immigrants’ Restriction Bill (1912) and Orange Free State
Constitution”, 3-2-1912. The argument is that, if domiciliary certificates cannot be
demanded as a matter of right, identification as required in Section 25(2) should not be
peremptory.
2
Vide Appendix “Telegram from Secretary for Interior to Gandhiji”, 7-2-1912.
3
Vide “Letter to R. Gregorowski”, 2-3-1911.

156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Opinion given last year, the Bill and the Natal and Cape immigration
laws.
Yours sincerely,

R. GREGOROWSKI , E SQ.
P RETORIA
[ENCLOSURE]
STATEMENT FOR COUNSEL’S OPINION

Counsel’s opinion is requested on the following points arising
out of the Immigration Bill now before the Union Parliament:
1.
Section 5,1 sub-sections (f) and (g) exempt from the prohibition
clause wives and minor children of lawful immigrants and
domiciled residents, as also domiciled persons themselves, who
satisfy an Immigration Officer as to their rights whether as wives
and children or as domiciled residents.
Does this Clause remove the ordinary jurisdiction of the courts
of law? And, if it does not, to what extent, if any, is the
jurisdiction of the courts ousted [?] Will the decisions of
Immigration Officers be subject to Appeal in the same manner
as those of magistrates’ courts? Is the exemption clause in any
way affected by Section 72 ?
2.
Several British Indians are today in Natal or the Cape by reason
of their having passed the education tests under the immigration
laws of the respective Provinces.
In what way are they protected under the Bill? Do they
become both domiciled and entitled to reside in their respective
Provinces by reason of their having entered them by passing the
education test, or are they protected only because their rights
have not been taken away specifically by the Bill?
3.
What is the position of those who entered Natal or the Cape by
passing the education test, but who are at present temporarily
absent from their respective Provinces?
4.
The present laws provide for the protection of the rights of those
who are domiciled in the respective Provinces, but the Bill
protects the rights of those only who are both domiciled and
entitled to reside in the Union or any Province.
1

Vide 4th and 5th footnotes of “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 29-1-1912; also
Appendix “Extracts from Immigrants’ Restriction Bill (1912) and Orange Free State
Constitution”, 3-2-1912.
2
Vide 6th footnote of “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 29-1-1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

157

5.

6.

7.

8

What is the exact meaning of the additional, if any, restriction
imposed by the clause underlined?
Section 7 says that the person referred to therein may at any
time be required to pass that (that is, the education) test.
Could a man who has once, after the passing of the Bill, passed
the education test, be challenged again, although he may prove
that he has passed the test?
Is a person who passes the test under the Bill liable to be
examined again upon passing from one Province to another,
although he may be in a position to prove that he has already,
upon entering the Union, passed the test?
Section 25 of the Bill gives the Minister discretion to issue a
permit to any person who is lawfully resident in the Union
desiring to absent himself therefrom.1
What will be the position of those who fail to take out such
permits? Will it be enough protection for them if, rather than
take out these permits, they, for instance, appear before a Notary
Public, make a declaration as to their residence and then leave,
and, on return, submit the declaration filed in the protocol of the
Notary in proof of their right of domicile and residence?
Section 28 of the Bill, sub-section 2: those who enter the Free
State by passing the education test are subject in all respects to
the provisions of Articles 7 and 8 of Chapter 33 of the Orange
Free State Constitution.2
Now Section 8 provides, among other things, that those who are
permitted by the State President to settle in the State shall make
and sign a sworn declaration before the Landdrost to whom they
make the application in which they shall declare that they will
neither directly nor indirectly carry on a comericial business,
etc. Could such a declaration be required from immigrants
entering the Free State Province under the new Bill.
Will Counsel please generally compare the present Bill with the
laws it replaces, and state how far in other respects it is more
restrictive of the liberty of the subject?
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5626-7

1
Vide Appendix “Extracts from Immigrants’ Restriction Bill (1912) and
Orange Free State Constitution”, 3-2-1912
2
Vide 8th and 9th footnotes of “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 29-1-1912.

158

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

126. THE £3 TAX1
The judgment 2 given by a full bench of the Supreme Court,
which appears in another column, would show that every Indian who
has entered into a period of re-indenture or contract of service under
the provisions of Act 19 of 1910 is liable to pay the annual licence of
£3 for the current year. This means that all those who were induced to
re-indenture by reading the Government’s circular issued in April,
1910, have been cruelly deceived. 3 Whatever the intention of the Act
may have been, the fact remains that perhaps thousands of Indians
have entered into fresh contracts of service, fully believing that they
would be relieved thereby from both arrears and current payments.
Not only did the poor ignorant people believe this, but the
Government departments also acted upon that interpretation. Some
months ago the Law Department seems to have issued instructions to
prosecute all those who had not paid the current licence. A test case4
was brought before the Umlazi Court in which it was decided that,
during the existence of the contract of service, payment should be
1

Vide “The £3 Tax”, 11-11-1911.
On February 9, 1912, the National Division of the Supreme Court dismissed
N. Mudaly’s appeal against the Lower Tugela Divison Magistrate’s decision declaring
Mudaly liable to the payment of the ú3 tax. The appellant argued that Act 19 of 1910
protected him from this payment since he had entered into a contract of service on the
expiry of his indenture. Indian Opinion, 17-2-1912.
3
In its letter of November 18, 1911, to the Secretary for Justice, the Natal
Indian Congress had referred to the circular of April 1910, issued by the Protector of
Immigrants in a number of Indian languages (footnote 2 on p. 181) and claimed
freedom for re-indentured Indians and others who had entered into civil contracts from
payment of the current licence fee. It also proposed to agitate for the abolition of the
tax altogether. It suggested that the Government might levy a genuine revenue tax
thus compensating itself for the losses. Indian Opinion, 2-12-1911. In his reply of
February 2, 1912, the Acting Secretary for the Interior asked for more information
about the re-indentured men who had been prosecuted for non-payment of the licence
fee.
4
Vencatachale Naik was brought before the Umlazi Court some time during
November, 1911, charged with the non-payment of the £3 fee. The Magistrate decided
that the current licence fee should not be demanded from him—presumably because he
had entered into a civil contract. Following this some “forty to fifty summonses”
which had been issued were withdrawn. The Umlazi case was cited by the Natal Indian
Congress in its letter of February 17, 1912 to the Acting Secretary for the Interior.
Indian Opinion, 24-2-1912.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

159

suspended. Consequently forty or fifty summonses which had been
issued were withdrawn. The Government seems to have decided to
abide by that decision, for nothing further was heard of it. Now, it
appears, the Magistrate of Lower Tugela Division has given his
decision to the effect that the Current licence must be paid, and the
Supreme Court has upheld that decision. This brings the matter to a
head and we shall shortly see what the intention of the Government is.
If the Minister of Justice has a spark of humanity in him, he will at
once instruct the Courts not to prosecute, for he knows well enough
that many if not all of the people affected by the judgment have been
trapped into fresh contracts of service by the inducements held out in
the late Natal Government’s circular. We understand that already the
machinery of the law is being set in motion and that summonses are
being issued.
There is also an element of farce about the whole business. We
happen to know that, if a free Indian who has managed to escape
payment of the tax wishes to return to India, no one will prevent his
going, even though he may owe arrears amounting to twenty pounds.
Yet this same Government rewards the man who has been inveigled
into a contract of re-indenture by making him pay ú3 per annum so
long as he is willing to slave away for the benefit of planters and other
employers! Surely it does not need a very wise man to see both the
absurdity and injustice of such procedure?
On the same page as the judgment will be found a letter from
the Secretary for the Interior in reply to the Natal Indian Congress’s
letter of November last, which was addressed to the Minister of Justice.
The Congress requested that all those who had acted upon the words
of the circular should be relieved from payment, Now, after waiting
three months, what is the result? The Minister of Justice, whose department was responsible for the issue of summonses against these poor
Indians, ignores the request and sends the letter to the Department for
the Interior which asks of the Natal Indian Congress a question which
the Minister of Justice was better able to answer . In fact, when inquiry
was made at the Court from which the summonses were issued, the
information was refused and the advice given to obtain such
information through the Secretary for Justice!
So we have the spectacle of a great Government using its
tremendous power to tyrannize over poor defenceless Indians—men
and women who have given their very life-blood in making Natal a
160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

prosperous country. It is the duty of the Natal Indian Congress to
boldly defend these poor people. Whatever reply it chooses to send to
the Minister for the Interior, it must at all costs see to it that those who
are helpless shall not seek in vain for succour.
Indian Opinion, 17-2-1912

127. LETTER TO MILLIE GRAHAM POLAK
February 17, 1912
MY DEAR MILLIE,

What a horrid thing that you should get chicken pox! Henry
says it was due to the sin of going to Delhi even after the event. Whatever the cause, I am sorry you were not able to attend the Congress
sittings. It was quite like you to have turned your illness to good
account by reading on things Indian. I hope that the illness has not
left you weaker. These illnesses if properly treated invigorate patients
in the end.
Waldo is evidently having a good time of it here.
I hope you are not worrying about Amy. To worry where we
cannot help if possible is to render us still more helpless for future
service.
Of the bill and the prospects of the struggle, you will learn from
my letter to Henry.
Manilal, Ramdas and Devdas are with me at present. They are all
well. Manilal will be going to Phoenix shortly. Hoosen too has been
paying a visit to the Transvaal. He proposes to leave for India shortly.
I have now 25 boys on the Farm 8 Mahommedans, 2 Parsees
and the balance Hindus. Of the latter, 5 are Tamils, one Calcuttan and
the rest Gujaratis. They are divided into at least four standards. Medh,
Pragji and Jamnadas assist me at school. Gujarati, Hindi and Tamil are
being taught besides English. I shall find it somewhat difficult to
manage the school if and when Desai and Medh go to India.1 I want to
teach the boys sewing. Mrs. Vogl has been coming once a fortnight
for the purpose. Poor woman. She has her old trouble coming on
again and again. The doctor has now forbidden railway travelling. So
the class may be interrupted. But I have learnt sufficient to continue
1

Pragji Desai and Surendrarai Medh left for India in the second week of March
1912, vide “Speech at Farewell Meeting”, 9-3-1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

161

the class for some time. Sandal-making is going on regularly. I make
my own shirts now. Ramdas, Devdas and I wear shirts of my own
make. Mrs. V. is quite proud of her new pupil. But I fear she conceals
the true fact when she credits me with having turned out an excellent
shirt. I have just finished Devdas’s knickers too. During the past six
months, we must have made nearly 50 pairs of sandals ≈ mostly for
the Farm boys. Some have been made to order also. I sent one pair to
Maud and if you give me the tracing of your right foot, holding the
pen perpendicular I shall do myself the honour of making a pair for
you. Mrs. Vogl and Miss Schlesin have theirs.
I think I gave you the school hours. Rise at 6 a.m., breakfast
6.45 a.m. home-made bread toasted or fried in ghee and cereal,
coffee or milk (condensed I am sorry) and stewed peaches 7.15
manual work some hoeing, some in the kitchen, some wood-chopping and others sandal making and sewing10 a.m. bell for bathing, 11
a.m. to 12 noon, dinnerrice and curry and bread, fruits if any and
some cereal preparation for those boys who are experimenting in
saltless diet. 12 to 1 boys read for themselves. 1 to 4.30 schooling.
4.30 to 4.45 drill. 5.30 p.m. supper-wholemeal porridge, milk, stew
and coffee and bread. 7 to 8 some religious reading and hymns
Gujarati, Hindi and English. Religious reading from Mahommedan
scriptural books, Parsee and Hindu. At 8 p.m. boys are fee to go to
bed. I sleep with them on the open verandah. Mrs. Gandhi too sleeps
on the open verandah with the boys who cannot be accommodated on
the verandah where I sleep. Devdas shares Mrs. Gandhi’s bed as of
old. Boys do their own washing. On the Farm they wear nothing but
the shirts and trousers. If it is cold, they wear jerseys and jackets too if
they wish to. There is hardly any compulsion used. Appeal is always
made to their good nature for making them do anything. All boys
must be vegetarians and non-smokers at least on the Farm. No boys
may come from outside to have tuition only. Parents pay 3/- per
month for board. They pay also 10/- for books. The 10/- should last
six months. And now you have the whole picture of the school. They
are taught English, arithmetic and their own mother tongue. History,
geography, etc., are taught incidently.
With love,
BROTHER
From the original: Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

128. LETTER TO CHANCHALBEHN GANDHI
[LAWLEY, ]

Maha Vad 0 [February 18, 1912] 1
CHI. CHANCHAL,

I had a letter from you after many months. I should like you to
be less lazy about writing letters.
I can very well understand your natural desire to be with Chi.
Harilal. I do not at all wish to come in your way in this. Live, both of
you, as you wish and do what you like. I can have but one wish: you
should be happy and remain so.
Personally, I do not like your giving Kanti 2 Mellin’s Food. I
think it a sin to use any foreign goods in India, and the use of food
products is all the more distasteful to me now. I cannot help feeling
that all such products are polluted. Even when they do not contain
animal fat, alcohol, etc., I have noticed that they are not entirely free
from contamination by them, since foreigners do not object to the use
of these. We should know that our children grew well enough in the
olden days without these foreign foods; hence my advice is that we
too should do without them. Wheat, well roasted, ground fine and
mixed with a little gur and water will serve the same purpose as
Mellin’s Food. We can prepare a number of things to replace it.
It is easy to see that your presence there and that of Rami and
Kanti must be a great comfort to Chhabalbhabhi3 .
Personally I don’t se how Ba or I can get away from here just
now.
Manilal is here at present. He will leave in the middle of
Phagan4 . Jamnadas, too, is here. I am busy at present with the affairs
of the school. There are 25 pupils, eight of them Muslims, two Parsis
and the rest Hindus. Among the last, five are from Madras and one
from Calcutta, and the rest are Gujaratis. Jamnadas and others help
with the reaching.
1

This letter appears to have been written on the same day as the succeeding

one.
2

The addressee’s son
Chanchalbehn Gandhi’s mother
4
A month in the Vikram calendar corresponding to February- March in the
year 1912.
3

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

163

My loving kisses to Ramibai and Kantibhai. Ask Bali to write to
me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 9529

129. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[LAWLEY, ]

Maha Vad 0 [February 18, 1912] 1
CHI. HARILAL,

I have had a letter from you after many months, You say you
try to be regular, but you seem to have failed in your effort, and the
fresh hope you held out to me has not been fulfilled. Since you wrote
last, there have been two posts without a letter from you.
Chanchi has expressed a desire to stay on with you and asked
for my opinion. I have replied to her, 2 and given her other news as
well. She will send the letter on to you. If she does not, ask for it. I do
not therefore repeat [its contents]. I have no objection to your living
together. Do what you like and live as you deem proper.
Your staying with Sheth Miankhan is all right. Press him once
again to accept some rent. I shall speak to Chandabhai when I meet
him.
Why Chanchi [should have] the same disease as Ba. . .3
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand. S. N. 9541

1

This appears to have been written in 1912. In that Year Maha Vad 0
corresponds to February 18.
2
Vide the preceding item.
3
Further pages of this letter are missing.

164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

130. LETTER TO R. GREGOROWSKI
February 20, 1912
DEAR MR. GREGOROWSKI,

I thank you for your letter. I shall await your opinion with very
considerable interest. I quite agree that the draft is an awful humbug,
and one of the ways I can fight it successfully is to get your valuable
opinion. It would not do for me to use your last year’s opinion 1 , as
there are some new points at least in the present Bill, and as I have to
use your opinion both here and in London in support of the
contentions I have already advance, in so far, of course, as your views
are in agreement with mine. I, therefore, hope that you will give me
your opinion on all the points I have raised without referring to last
year’s opinion, except in so far as you may use it for comparing the
present Bill with last year’s draft2 .
I am,
Yours sincerely,

R. GREGOROWSKI , E SQ.
P RETORIA
From a Photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5630

1
2

Vide “Letter to R. Gregorowski”, 2-3-1911.
Vide Appendix “Immigrants’ Restriction Bill.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

165

131. TELEGRAM TO REGISTRAR OF ASIATICS
[Before February 21, 1912] 1
TO

ASIATICS
P RETORIA
SEEN
CORRESPONDENCE
REGARDING
VISITING
PERMITS
FOR
M.
SALY
KANJEE
JEEWANBHAI
LALJEE
MEGHJEEBHAI
I
THINK
YOU
HAVE
REFUSED
APPLICATION
THROUGH
NOT
KNOWING
FULL
CIRCUMSTANCES.
PARTIES
NOW
LOURENCO
MARQUES.
THEY
REPRESENT
I
UNDERSTAND
HIS
HIGHNESS
AGA
KHAN
AND ARE VISITING CENTRES . . . 2 ASIATIC KHOJAS . . . 3 TRUST YOU WILL GRANT
AUTHORIZE
YOUR
AGENT
LOURENCO
MARQUES
ISSUE
VISITORS
PERMITS THREE WEEKS UPON APPLICATION.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5659

132. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
[LAWLEY,]

February 24, 1912
DEAR MR. LANE,

I have now received Counsel’s Opinion on the Bill.4 According
to it:
(1) the Bill does oust the jurisdiction of the lower courts and also of
the superior courts, except by way of mandamus.5
1
The visit of the representatives of the Aga Khan to Johannesburg and
Tolstoy Farm is referred to in a news- item in Indian Opinion, 2-3-1912; it also
mentions that they bought a pair of sandals at the Farm.. Hussein Dwad, in a Gujarati
article entitled “A Diary of My Tour” (Indian Opinion, 27-7-1912) mentions having
met one of these persons during his travels in Zanzibar. Gandhiji, who refers to them
briefly as “ Zanzibar Memans”, records their visit in his entry for February 21 in “
Diary, 1912”, and a ten-shilling credit entry, which represented the prices of the
sandals, figures in his accounts for the day. This telegram, which seeks permission
for their entry into the Transvaal, was evidently sent, if at all, some time before that
date.
2
Some words here are illegible.
3
Ibid
4
Vide letters to Lane and Gregorowski, 15-2-1912 & 15-2-1912.
5
In the interpretation of Section 5 (f) and (g) of the Union Immigration Bill
of 1912 ; vide “Letter to R. Gregorowski”, 15-2-1912.

166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

This will certainly curtail the legal rights of the Transvaal
Indians, if not of the others.
(2) It may be that proof of domicile will be required of Transvaal
Indians before they can bring their wives or children, although
they may be duly registered, and apart from proof of
registration.1
I am sure such is not General Smuts’ intention. The matter
should, in my opinion, be placed absolutely beyond doubt.
(3) Educated Asiatic immigrants will be liable to make the
declaration required by Section 8 of Chapter XXXIII of the
Orange Free State Constitution.2
All the points referred to by me, it will be admitted, are of the
highest importance as well from the passive resistance standpoint as
from that of common justice. I trust, therefore, that the defects will be
remedied.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

ERNEST F. C. L ANE , E SQ.
C APE TOWN
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5634

133. MISREPRESENTATION
We publish in another column the reply of the Colonial Office
to the representation made by Lord Ampthill’s Committee in the
Nathalia case3 . Mr. Harcourt has been given to understand that the
new Bill now before the Union Parliament will prevent “a recurrence
of such a case”. Mr. Harcourt, therefore, declines to take any action
in the matter. Mr. Harcourt’s statement that the new Bill will preclude
a recurrence of such a case proves the hardship of the case. He has
1

The reference is to Section 25(2).
The reference is to Section 28.
3
For details of the case, vide “A Shocking Case”, 23-9-1911, “A Shameful
Act”, 30-12-1911 and 4th footnote of “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 15-2-1912. The SABI
Committee, London, wrote to the Colonial Office on January 19, 1912, regarding the
inability of the Natal Courts to interfere in Nathalia’s case. The Colonial Office
reply, dated February 5, 1912, said: “Mr. Harcourt understands that the recurrence of
such a case is precluded by the terms of the Immigration Bill now before the Union
Parliament and he does not propose to take any action in the matter.” Indian Opinion,
9-3-1912.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

167

obviously based his letter on information given to him by the Union
Ministers. Now, everybody who knows anything of the new Bill knows
that, in its present form, it does nothing of the kind. It simply
exaggerates the existing evil. The Nathalia tragedy was possible
because the Immigration Officer had autocratic powers. These are
further increased by the new Bill. If in cases such as this, wherein
misrepresentation can be easily exposed, the Union Government do
not hesitate to misrepresent matters to the Imperial Government, who
can tell what misrepresentations they have made in matters which will
never see the light of day?
Mr. Harcourt’s refusal to intervene in the individual case of the
boy Nathalia is not easy to understand. The injustice is admitted.
Surely he could, therefore, ask the Union Government, we shall not
say, to exercise mercy, but to undo the mischief done by their own
officers. Nathalia’s sacrifice on the altar of an anti-Asiatic policy will
rankle in the breast of every Indian in South Africa. If we cannot act
more decisively it does not show that we feel the injustice any the less
for it; we simply betray our weakness. But neither the Imperial
Government nor the Union Government dare trade upon our
weakness with impunity. A community that has once wielded the
weapon of passive resistance may be relied upon to do so again on
due occasion.
Indian Opinion, 9-3-1912

134. MRS. JUSSAT’S CASE
If Mrs. Jussat is deported,1 the Transvaal British Indian
Association, the Hamidia Islamic Society and, to some extent, all the
Indians in South Africa will lose face.

1

Ebrahim Mahomed Jussat, a registered Transvaal resident, had two wives,
Rasool in Standerton and Fatima in India. When Rasool left him, he wanted to bring
Fatima to South Africa. The Barberton Magistrate disallowed Fatima’s claim to entry
on the ground that, since Rasool had already acquired domicile as Jussat’s wife, his
first wife could not also claim entry. Fatima’s appeal to the Transvaal Bench of the
Supreme Court was dismissed on February 13, 1912, by Justice Wessels who, in his
judgment, referred to his earlier ruling in Adam Ismail’s case (footnote 1 on p. 120
and “Johannesburg”, pp. 122-3) that a Muslim could bring in only one wife and this,
in Jussat’s case, was Rasool whom he had not divorced. Indian Opinion, 24-2-1912.

168

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The Government’s reply 1 to Mr. Cachalia is entirely unsatisfactory. It only goes to prove that no assurance by the Government
can be relied on. The law is the last word.
General Smuts had clearly said that, notwithstanding Justice
Wessels’ judgment, he would grant relief in cases of hardship. 2 The
community can only interpret this to mean that, whenever anyone can
establish that he has contracted a second marriage in conformity with
the law of his religion and wants to bring in his second wife, he should
not be prevented from doing so.
General Smuts writes that there are no extraordinary facts about
this case [which would warrant interference by the Government]. What
extraordinary facts does he require? It is a fact important enough for
us that Mrs. Jussat is a legally married wife of Mr. Jussat.
What does Mr. Jussat propose to do? Will he let his wife be
deported and himself stay on in the Transvaal, without a word of
protest, for the sake of his wretched belly? What do his friends
propose to do? Will they look on, bangles on wrists,3 while the police
deport Mrs. Jussat, in this awful manner, for no fault of hers?
What does the Association propose to do? Does its duty end with
sending telegrams and letters? Does the Hamidia Islamic Society
intend to sit still? Will not its office-bearers realize that Islam is being
insulted?
The issue is not whether Mr. Jussat is poor or rich, good or bad.
He brought his wife in and the Government has made ready to push
her out. That is [tantamount to] pushing us all out.
Let not Natal or the Cape feel that they do not have a similar law
in those Provinces
We hope that Mrs. Jussat is a brave woman and that, if deported,
1

Both Cachalia and Bawazeer had written to Smuts on February 15, 1912
protesting against Justice Wessels’ judgment. On February 29, 1912, the British
Indian Association sent a telegraphic reminder to Smuts who, on March 2, 1912,
replied that he was unable to find “such exceptional circumstances in Mrs. Jussat’s
case as to warrant his intervention”. Indian Opinion, 24-2-1912 & 9-3-1912.
2
On July 10, 1911, Smuts had, in a letter to the British Indian Association
and the Hamidia Islamic Society, assured them that the Judge’s ruling in the case of
Adam Ismail regarding the immigration of Muslims’ wives had been noted and that
cases involving hardship brought to his notice would receive consideration. Indian
Opinion, 22-7-1911.
3
Gandhiji often used this image; vide, for instance, “Lecences in Natal”, 2-51908.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

169

she will re-cross [the frontier] to join her husband and will, if
necessary, go to gaol, for doing so.
We hope that Mr. Jussat will keep up the spirit that would be
worthy of an Indian husband and that, accepting poverty for the sake
of his wife, he will suffer whatever hardship is necessary; then, he will
secure relief.
We trust Mr. Jussat’s friends will encourage him, dip into their
pockets if need be, and come forward to secure redress from the
Government.
We trust the Association and the Hamidia Islamic Society will
remember their previous records and fight on till they have succeeded
in securing relief.
Let everyone remember that we have, first and last, only one
remedy—satyagraha and nothing else.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 9-3-1912

135. SPEECH AT FAREWELL MEETING1
JOHANNESBURG ,

Saturday, March 9, 1912
Messrs Medh and Pragji have rendered great service to the
community by especially coming over to the Transvaal from Natal
and going to gaol. Even after their release, they did not, impelledby
love of money, seek any means of making it, but stayed on at Tolstoy
Farm and helped in running the school and in its other activities.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 16-3-1912

1
The meeting was held in the Independent Church Hall, Johannesburg,
to bid farewell to Surendrarai Medh and Pragji Khandubhai Desai—both
satyagrahis—who were leaving for India; vide the following item

170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

136. LETTER TO DR. PRANJIVAN MEHTA
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

Phagan Vad 8 [March 11, 1912] 1
DEAR SHRI PRANJIVAN,

This letter will be delivered to you by Mr. Surendrarai Medh
and Mr. Pragji Desai or by either of them. They are both naturally
looking forward to the privilege of meeting you. They have heard
much about you from me. If practicable, they want to take up faminerelief work under you while they are there. Both of them are staunch
satyagrahis. Mr. Medh has taken a vow to observe brahmacharya and
devote himself to the service of the motherland for ten years. His letter
about this I have sent to you to read. Mr. Pragji also wants to take
similar vow. Everything will depend on how his mind works after he
has consulted his elders. Mr. Medh, too, will have to consider how far
he can keep to his pledge after he has reached Ahmedabad. It is
certain that his father will put the utmost pressure on him.
I should like you to send for both of them. If you do, please let
them have the railway fare. Both of them live in poverty. They are due
to return here before Professor Gokhale’s visit.
Bande Mataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: G. N. 1262

137. THE INDENTURE RESOLUTION
It would have been strange if Mr. Gokhale’s resolution in the
Imperial Legislative Council at Calcutta calling for entire stoppage of
indentured labour had been carried. 2 But it would appear that the
elected members almost solidly voted for the resolution. It is, there1

This letter was written after the announcement, made on December 29, 1911,
about the projected visit by Gokhale to South Africa and before he actually arrived on
October 22, 1912. It could therefore have been written only in 1912. Medh and Desai
left for India for a short visit on March 21. Vide also the preceding item.
2
Gokhale’s resolution was defeated by 33 votes to 22. Indian Opinion,
9-3-1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

171

fore, a great moral victory. Mr. Gokhale is not a man to leave off a
thing after he has once undertaken it. It is reasonable, therefore, to
hope that the system of indentured labour—that remnant of slavery—
would end in the near future. We congratulate Mr. Gokhale on his
great work. By this, his latest, effort on behalf of a class of his helpless
countrymen, he has added greatly to the debt due to him by us.
There seems to be some misunderstanding regarding this
resolution. It does not, as some of our readers suppose, alter the
position as it exists today in Natal. That is to say, the rejection of this
resolution does not undo what has already been done by the Indian
Government.1 Just as recruiting has been prohibited for Natal, the
Indian Government has the power, at any time, to put a stop to
recruiting for all other Colonies if the treatment of Indians is
unsatisfactory. What Mr. Gokhale’s motion would have done, if it had
been successful, was to have put a stop to recruiting under the
indenture system for all the Colonies.
Indian Opinion, 16-3-1912

138. MR. RUTHNUM PATHER
The appearance in our midst of another young Natal-born
Indian barrister, fresh from his successful career as a student in
England,2 is an indication that the rising generation of Indians are a
force to be reckoned with. Mr. Ruthnum Pather, who was born and
brought up in Durban and attended the Higher-Grade Indian School,
said, at the reception given in his honour, that he looked forward with
pride to the prospect of sharing the community’s sufferings,
prosperity and happiness. The first of these he will certainly have a
full opportunity of sharing; the second depends on what he considers
to be prosperity; and the last is an illusive phantom which, if pursued,
is never gained, but is rather found in duty faithfully done. Mr. Pather
rightly boasts of the ancient civilization of India; and it is well if he
keeps this before his mind, for, although we do not wish to disparage
1

Vide 6th footnote of “What has Satyagraha Achieved”, 3-6-1911.
While he was in England as a member of the 1906 deputation to the Imperial
Government, Gandhiji evinced much interest in Pather’s education; vide Vol. VI,
“Letter to Professor Parmanand”, 26-10-1906, “Letter to J. H. Polak”, 7-11-19-06,
“Letter to Secretary, County School”, 17-11-1906, “Letter to Minn E. J. Beck”,
27-11-1906 & “Letter to J. H. Polak”, 29-11-1906.
2

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

brilliancy in educational achievements, we fear that there is a danger
of our young men, who have received an education entirely on
Western lines, losing sight of their own nationality, their religion, and
their mother tongue which is so rich in literature and culture. We
extend a hearty welcome to our young friend, and we trust that his
return to his native place will prove a blessing to himself, to those who
come in contact with him, and to the whole Indian community.
Indian Opinion, 16-3-1912

139. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR1
[LAWLEY, ]

March 20, 1912
TO

INTERIOR
C APE TOWN
COULD
YOU
HAVE
CABLE

NOW
FROM

INFORM
ME
ABOUT
INDIA INQUIRING ABOUT

IMMIGRATION
IT.

BILL.

GANDHI
From a photostat of the office copy in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5641

140. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[LAWLEY, ]

Chaitra Sud 6 [March 24, 1912] 2
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I had a letter from Chi. Maganlal. I can make nothing of your
meeting. Nor can I gather the purport of the minutes. I do not
understand why you cannot have your original place on your return.
Let me know what the upshot of it all was. I am not writing separately
to Chi. Maganlal. I am rather busy with accounts work. In case they
do not accept you as manager, they should, it may be suggested,
decide what work to assign to you in the press. All the same, you had
better remain quiet for the present. Let me know what happens. Given
1

The Minister replied on the same day that it was “impossible to forecast
when the Immigration Bill will be dealt with . . . however, when it is possible to state
approximate date will communicate with you”. S. N. 5642.
2
The refefence to the famine fund would suggest that the letter was written in
1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

173

patience, this phantom will disappear. I should like to feel sure that
you are unperturbed.
The accompanying list of subscriptions to the famine-relief
fund sent by Chi. Abhechand 1 is to be published. 2 The cheque has
been received here.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a copy of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5638. Courtesy:
Chhaganlal Gandhi

141. LETTER TO UMIYASHANKAR MEHTA
Chaitra Sud 7, [March 25, 1912] 3
CHI. UMIYASHANKAR,

May be I could not quite explain. Condensed milk should not
be taken as it is. It should be diluted with hot water and banana should
be mashed into it. Try a quarter of a banana in four tea-spoons of
milk. Do not be scared. You may continue giving it if it agrees.
Banana is a very nutritious food. Mr. Polak’s4 Waldo used to be given
a banana and Mellin’s Food. Rami is being given bananas.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 1629. Courtesy: Gunavant Umiyashankar
Mehta

1

Son of Amritlal Gandhi, Gandhiji’s cousin. Abhechand Gandhi had his
business at Tongaat in Natal.
2
Though the list is not available, it is possibly the one published in Indian
Opinion, 30-3-1912.
3
From the contents it appears that the letter was written in 1912; vide also
“Letter to Chanchalbehn Gandhi”, 18-2-1912. Chaitra Sud 7 in 1912 corresponded to
March 25.
4
H. S. L. Polak

174

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

142. LETTER TO UMIYASHANKAR MEHTA
Monday, [Before April, 1912] 1
CHI. UMIYASHANKAR,

Received your letter. The fire in the shop thus resulted in much
damage. Fortunately, it has not affected [your] reputation. I am very
sad to read about Chhabildas. I can never be agreeable to fixing a
betrothal after taking money. Instead, the clearer way would be not to
marry at all. Your brothers should also give him the same advice.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Have you not read or not understood what you should eat with
the exception of the greens?
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 1632. Courtesy: Gunavant Umiyashankar
Mehta

143. PUBLIC LETTER TO RATAN J. TATA
[LAWLEY,]

April 1, 1912
I am ashamed to have to own that I am only now able to fulfil
the promise I made to you and to myself in my letter2 acknowledging
your second generous contribution of Rs. 25,000 towards the
expenses of the great Passive Resistance struggle that I should write a
public letter to you, in which I intended to incorporate an account of
receipts and expenditure. The reason for this long delay is that my
time has been fully occupied with one thing or another arising out of
the struggle which I could not very well postpone, and I did not care
to address the letter without giving a financial statement. However,
with the zealous assistance of Mr. Sorabjee Shapurjee, the stalwart
1
From the reference to Chhabildas Mehta’s betrothal it appears this was
written before April 1912. Gandhiji refers to his wife in his letter dated April 13,
1912; vide “Letter to Manilal Gandhi”, 13-4-1912.
2
This letter is not available. Tata’s earlier donation of Rs. 25,000 to the
Transvaal Satyagrahis’ Fund was made in November, 1909; vide “Cable to G. K.
Gokhale”, 19-12-1909. He sent a further contribution of the same value on November
18, 1910; vide “Letter to G. A. Natesan”, 9-12-1910.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

175

passive resister, I have just finished the account, of which I give you
herewith a full summary1 .
You will see, on the expenditure side, “Farm Capital Account”.
This represents the expense of erecting dwellings on Mr. Kallenbach’s
farm2 . The bulk, if not the whole, of it is returnable by Mr. Kallenbach, in terms of the grant of the use of his farm to passive resisters,
on its being vacated. The item for Indian Opinion has been explained
in the previous account rendered in my public letter3 to the hon’ble
Mr. Gokhale. The item “Relief” includes all disbursements made to
indigent families of passive resisters and all other help given to them
or to their families. All the other items speak for themselves. As to the
receipt column, all I need remark upon is that the funds received from
Rangoon and London were entirely earmarked for relief purposes,
and certain items from India were so earmarked by Mr. Petit. All these
instructions have been strictly followed. There are some items in the
receipt column included under the heading “Local” which are not,
strictly speaking, contributions, but which are either refunds or
receipts for disbursements specially made. It also includes boardingexpenses paid by the parents of the boys attending the farm school.
But for the willing assistance rendered free of charge by many a
volunteer, the timely assistance of Mr. Kallenbach, and, above all, the
readiness with which passive resisters’ families fell in with the idea of
going to the farm, the expenses would have been much greater.
Before quitting this subject of accounts, I would like to add also
that the expenditure shown in the account takes no note of hundreds
of pounds raised locally and disbursed by local committees, nor of
private collections of which our countrymen will probably never know
anything. The financial sacrifice made by the community during the
struggle which has extended over a period of four years has been very
considerable, and it has been my agreeable experience to notice that
those who have continuously gone to gaol for the sake of their and
their country’s honour have been also the men who have cheerfully
spent most in aid of the struggle.
You will observe that there is already a deficit, and I am obliged
to fall back upon such resources as are available to me to meet it. It
commenced nearly three months ago. Happily, two timely remittances
1
2
3

176

Vide enclosure.
Tolstoy Farm
Of April 25, 1910; vide “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 25-4-1910.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

were received from Mr. Petit lately. If no assistance is received from
India, and it is not possible to raise subscriptions here, it will be a
matter for consideration where the pruning-knife should be applied.
Most of the passive resisters’ families have withdrawn from the farm,
and their husbands or bread-winners have found for themselves means
of earning a livelihood, but they all understand that, in the event of a
revival of the struggle, they are to return to the farm.
Though the Union Parliament is still sitting, and the Immigration Bill, designed to give effect to the terms set forth in the correspondence 1 that passed last year between General Smuts and myself,
has been read a first time, it is difficult to say whether the struggle will
be entirely closed this year. The Bill itself is open also to certain
objections from the passive resistance standpoint, as it is also from a
general standpoint.2 In my opinion, it does not entirely carry out the
agreement3 , but I have great hope that, so far as objections in terms of
the agreement are concerned, the Bill will be amended. If it is not in
any vital particular, the struggle will most assuredly be revived. But
there is also some ground for the fear that the Bill may not be passed
during the current session at all, in which case the farm will, in all probability, have to be continued. As you know, the struggle has centred
round the racial bar in the Transvaal immigration legislation, and we
have consistently opposed it from the very commencement. So long
as the Transvaal persists in treating Asiatics as prohibited immigrants
because they are Asiatics, so long will the struggle continue. Once that
bar is removed, and details into which I need not go, are settled in
accordance with the written undertaking, passive resisters will have
achieved their purpose. How many and who will actually be able to
enter the Transvaal or the Union, as the case may be, is a matter on
which passive resisters, as such, have not laid any stress. The number
of entrants and the, manner of entry will largely depend upon the
general behaviour of the community here and the demand made by
India.
Perhaps the most substantial result of the struggle is the
1

Negotiations by correspondence began in November, 1910 and continued
up to May 20, 1911, when the Provisional Settlement was arrived at. Between April 1
and May 20, 1911, Gandhiji communicated with the Minister of the Interior or his
Private Secretary on the following dates: April 7, 8, 19, 20, 22 & 29 and May 4, 18,
19 & 20.
2
Vide letters to Lane, 29-1-1912 & 15-2-1912.
3
Of May 20, 1911
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

177

establishment of a school at the farm, which is being conducted by
me, assisted until recently by Messrs Medh and Desai, two staunch
passive resisters, and assisted at present by a cousin 1 of mine. The
pupils number twenty-five, and the desire is not to admit more than
fifty. No day-scholars are accepted, and all must remain on the farm.
The parents of most of the boys pay £1.10s. per month for their sons’
board. The amounts so received are credited in the passive resistance
account. No school fees are charged. Manual training is combined
with mental but the greatest stress is laid on character-building. No
corporal punishment is inflicted, but every endeavour is made to draw
out the best that is in the boys by an appeal to their hearts and their
reason. They are allowed to take the greatest freedom with their
teachers. Indeed, the establishment is not a school but a family, of
which all the pupils are persuaded, by example and precept, to
consider themselves a part. For three hours in the morning, the boys
perform some kind of manual labour, preferably agricultural, of the
simplest type. They do their own washing, and are taught to be
perfectly self-reliant in everything. There is, too, attached to the
school a sandal-making class, as also a sewing-class, the latter under
the supervision of Mrs. Vogl, who so successfully organized the
Indian Bazaar 2 , held under the auspices of the Indian Women’s
Association last year. I need hardly mention that Mrs. Vogl’s work is
a labour of love. No paid servants are kept on the farm in connection
either with the school or the kitchen. Mrs. Gandhi and Mrs. Sodha,
assisted by two or three of the pupils, who are changed every week,
attend to the whole of the cooking. Non-smoking, non-drinking and
vegetarianism are obligatory on the farm. Mental training is given for
three and a half hours at least, consisting of the vernaculars of the
respective scholars, English, Arithmetic, and so much of history and
geography as may arise from the lessons in English or in the
vernacular. The medium of instruction is chiefly the vernaculars,
which are Gujarati, Hindi and Tamil. The Tamil tuition, I am sorry to
say, is of a very elementary character, there being no good Tamil
teacher available. One hour in the evening is devoted to giving the
scholars some idea of their respective religions, and, to that end,
1

This was Jamnadas Gandhi who possibly taught Gujarati. After the departure
of Medh and Desai on March 21, 1912, Gandhiji got Jamnadas over to help him with
the school; vide “Letter to Chanchalbehn Gandhi”, 18-2-1912 and “Letter to Manilal
Gandhi”, 6-4-1912.
2
Vide “Address to Mrs. Vogl”, 15-11-1911.

178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

lessons are read from the Mahomedan, Hindu and Zoroastrian
Scriptures. Readings from the last have been recently suspended, as
two Parsee lads who were at the school have just left it. The
classification according to religion to the date of writing this is sixteen
Hindus and nine Mahomedans, and the classification according to
race is eighteen Gujaratis, six Tamils and one from North India. All
the boys attend throughout the hour when the respective readings are
given. An attempt is made to inculcate in them the spirit that they are
first Indians and everything else after that, and that, while they must
remain absolutely true to their own faiths, they should regard with
equal respect those of their fellow-pupils. The life on the farm is
reduced to the utmost simplicity.
The school is in the nature of an experiment. Though therefore,
it may be too sanguine to expect the boys to remain, when they grow
up, agriculturists and simple livers, it may not be too much to hope
that they will carry into their daily dealings, when they enter upon the
battle of life, some of the lessons they are now learning.
The question will be asked how the school is to be continued. It
is my desire, so long as I am in South Africa, to continue to devote
myself to this work, and not to revert to legal practice, which has been
entirely suspended for some time.1 I should still take my share in what
may be called purely political work, which here really is that of
making a desperate attempt to earn one’s livelihood with honour and
dignity.
M. K. GANDHI

[E NCLOSURE]
ACCOUNT

Receipts

£

s. d.

Subscription from
India including
Rs. 50,000 from
Mr. Ratan Tata 6723 9 3
Rangoon
972 0 0
Zanzibar
59 3 6
Mozambiqu
50 0 0
Mombasa
18 12 10
1

Expenditure

£

Relief for Resisters and their
families
2335
London Committee
1490
Indian Opinion 1200
Salaries
530
Travelling expen-

s. d.

1

3

6
0
1

2
0
3

Vide also “Letter to Dr. Pranjivan Mehta”, 8-5-1911.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

179

Receipts
Delagoa Bay
Tamakan
Navisha
Chinde
Chaichai
Blantyre
London
Local, including
the whole of S.
Africa, and
boarding fees of
scholars and
refunds

To Balance

£ s. d.
11 12 0
7 17 4
2 6 8
15 0
4 9
1 1 0
159 19 4

459 10

43

1

£ 8509 13

1

3

Expenditure
ses including
freight
Rent, etc.
Legal Expenses—
Cape Town,
Natal, Transvaal
Telegrams
Cables
Newspapers
Stamps
Stationery
Exchange on
Drafts and
Cheques
Farm Capital—
Erection Buildings, Material,
etc.
Farm Expenses
Upkeep

0

£

s. d.

482 6 11
353 19 1

371
121
191
154
65
39

1 3
18 6
9 1
12 10
12 1
13 11

31 10

9

492 11 11
659

8

0

£ 8519 13

01

Indian Opinion, 6-4-1912

144. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY,

April 4, 1912
DEAR MR. LANE,

I have to thank you for your last telegram2 regarding the Bill. I
see that it has not yet been reached. Could you not tell me whether the
Bill is at all likely to be reached this session, or whether it will be
abandoned [?] If it is to be abandoned, you will agree that some new
1
The original, however, has £8509.13.0—evidently a printing error. For
mention of the deficit, vide “Public Letter to Ratan J. Tata”, 1-4-1912.
2
Vide “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 20-3-1912.

180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

arrangement will have to be made. May I ask you to give me, if you
can, a telegraphic reply1 ?
Yours sincerely,

[M. K. GANDHI]
ERNEST F. C. L ANE , E SQ.
C APE TOWN
From the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5643

145. LOCATIONS AND DISEASE
In his evidence before the Tuberculosis Commission the other
day Dr. Thornton, Medical Officer of Health for the Cape Province, is
reported to have said: “Municipal Locations were very bad. With
some exceptions, the huts rarely passed any kind of inspection, and
very few municipalities gave anything in return for the revenue from
the Locations.” Other evidence given before the Commission goes to
prove that the “civilizing” policy of the more “enlightened” nations
has meant death and destruction to the Native people of this country.
Before the adoption by them of European habits and customs,
tuberculosis was practically unknown amongst the Natives. One
mission station is specially mentioned as being comparatively immune
from the disease, owing to the conditions of life approximating to
those in the Native Kraal. All this is a serious indictment of the system
under which a simple-living, pastoral people is brought from its
natural surroundingsinto the crowded and unhealthy conditions
prevailing in towns and Locations. It shows, so far as the health of the
people in concerned, that they suffer severely for the doubtful
privilege of becoming acquainted with modern life. We will not for
the moment discuss the wider and much more important question of
morals, except to say that we believe that the effect upon the people of
congregating in crowded areas is the worst possible.
Anyone who has visited a Location, whether Native or Indian,
must be impressed with the utter hopelessness of such places. The
shameful neglect of the roadways, the utter absence of proper
drainage, and the wretched condition of the buildings, all show at once
1
The Minister replied telegraphically on April 9: “. . . no intention of
abandoning Immigration Bill” (S. N. 5644), confirming the, same by a letter dated
April 9; S. N. 5645.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

181

that his is a Location—a place where Coloured people are condemned
to spend their days as outcasts. It is whispered that it is “dangerous”
to go there alone at night; avoid it as you would a plague-spot. The
dust-carts and scavengers of the municipality give it a wide berth and
share in the general antipathy towards such unholy places. Rents and
rates are regularly collected, but the money goes into the coffers of
the municipality. If a new Location is to be laid out, it is considered
economical to utilize ground recently used as a dumping-ground for
night-soil and dead horses. Is there any wonder that Locations are
hotbeds of tuberculosis and other dangerous diseases?
We understand that the Johannesburg Town Council had
decided to “tackle” the question of Native Location, and that they are
going to make a “big effort” to solve the question of housing the
Natives. This is how they propose to do it: All the people who are at
present living where they please are to be rounded up into a huge
compound, where they will be compelled to live, whether they like it
or not. A fence is to be erected around the Location, and the
“inmates” (suggestive term) are to enter through the gateway, which
will be under police guard. At a certain hour the gates will be closed,
and opened again in time to allow the Natives to get to work for their
European masters. A well-known Johannesburg citizen gave it as his
opinion that the scheme would be a great success, not only from a
public-health point of view, but also from a police point of view. Now,
as for the public-health point of view, we are quite certain that the
public referred to is the white public and not the public which is to
receive the special advantage of living in this municipal compound ;
and we think that Dr. Thornton will agree with us. And what, pray, is
the “police point of view”? We think we can guess, but, as there can
be no certainty about it, we will content ourselves by merely
suggesting that, by segregating all the blacks, it will then be an easy
matter to keep a watchful eye upon the white criminal class which is
known to congregate in the cities. But to return to our main point, we
would ask all fair-minded and far-seeing people not to ignore the
warning contained in the evidence given before the Tuberculosis
Commission that to increase Locations is to multiply disease and
death.
Indian Opinion, 6-4-1912

182

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

146. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[LAWLEY]

Chaitra Vad 5 [April 6, 1912] 1
CHI. MANILAL,

I have your letter. I do not mind your writing to me about Virji2
and Sam. Of course you do right to let me know whenever you notice
shortcomings. Personally, however, I would rather you noted people’s
virtues than their faults. The latter, all of us are full of, so that we
would do well to find out people’s virtues and think of only these. It
is possible to form this habit. So long, however, as you have not
succeeded in doing so, do not hesitate to tell me of whatever faults
you see [in people]. If things are what you represent them to be, I too
feel that they are both wasting their time. About the press, too, your
criticism may be justified. But turn your mind to the counsel in the
Gita: “What is apariharya—that for which one has no remedy—one
must resign oneself to.” If you do your duty, you will feel contented.
The world will go its ways in spite of our having done our duty. How
can we prevent that? Even to think that we can would be conceit. I
have with me what your Carlyle says on this. Only recently I read in it
some profound observations, which I shall reproduce for your benefit
some other time.
Mr. West and others are coming here. This may possibly make
you feel a little more nervous still. But you should not be afraid. Mr.
West’s coming here is all to the good. It was necessary for him to
meet me.
Do not let anything disturb your studies.
On Monday, we have sports for the children. We got the parents
to donate prizes. Fifty other people will also attend. I wish you were
here on an occasion like this.
1

This letter was written from Tolstoy Farm where Gandhiji lived from June,
1911 to the middle of January, 1913. A day in the Gujarati month of Chaitra Vad can
correspond to any day from April 1 to May 12 of the Gregorian calendar. The only
year in which Gandhiji spent the months of April and May on Tolstoy Farm was
1912. Furthermore West, referred to in paragraph 3, arrived at Tolstoy Farm on April
10, 1912 and stayed up to May 7, 1912 recuperating from an illness. The children’s
sports event referred to in the last paragraph was held on April 8, 1912, which was a
Monday. Indian Opinion, 13-4-1912.
2
A Gujarati compositor in the International Printing Press, Phoenix
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

183

Jamnadas has been taught book-keeping, the method being
quite easy. I get him to help me a good deal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W.
Sushilabehn Gandhi

94.

Courtesy:

147. LETTER TO E.F.C. LANE1
April 11, 1912
DEAR MR. LANE,

I have just seen a newspaper cutting containing a letter from the
Acting Secretary for the Interior addressed to the Secretary of the
Chamber of Commerce, in which the following passage occurs:
The object of the draft Bill is not to use the dictation test as a means of
permitting the entry of Asiatics into the O.F.S., but to use it to exclude them,
so that, under the provisions of the draft Bill, the territory of the Free State
will be actually better protected against the entry of Asiatics than it is under
the provisions of Chapter 33 of the Free State Law Book.2

I hope that this does not mean that those who are allowed to
enter the Union under the Immigration test are to be or can be
excluded from the Free State by being called upon to resubmit to the
test and being made to fail therein. I shall be obliged if you will
kindly reassure me on the point.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

[M. K. GANDHI]
ERNEST F. C. L ANE , E SQ.
C APE TOWN
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5646
1

In reply to this Lane wrote on April 17: “. . . the interpretation which you
put on the letter written to the Secretary to the Chamber of Commerce is quite the
correct one.” S. N. 5647.
2
In this letter, published in The Natal Mercury and reproduced in Indian
Opinion, 6-4-1912, the Acting Secretary went on to say: “. . . the existing law makes
it possible for Asiatics to enter the Free State and to reside there for a considerable
period before making application for permission to reside there permanenly, whereas
under the proposed new law it will be possible to bar their entry on the borders of the
Province”.

184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

148. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[LAWLEY, ]

Chaitra Vad 11 [April 13, 1912] 1
CHI. MANILAL,

Your letter. Since Mrs. Pywell2 and others took all that trouble
over you, it is not surprising that you should have been so deeply
moved.
Your undisciplined ways have been causing me much concern. I
should like you to make every effort to submit yourself to discipline.
I saw your photograph. Your out and out English dress is not of
a kind to please me. Even the collar starched? Certainly, you must
have clean dress. But it does not go with our way of living to dress like
a fastidious Englishman. It would even be better if you made it a rule
to wear the Indian-style cap. Do not be dismayed by criticism of you
in these matters. You may ignore what I say if it does not appeal to
you. I do not want you to change your way of life just to please me.
You need change only if my argument convinces you and you feel
you are strong enough to act on it.
It is necessary that you visit Ani oftener.
Also call on Chhabildas’s 3 wife regularly and look after her
needs.
Mr. West has been given rooms adjoining Rambhabai’s 4 . He
has his meals with us. I do not think he feels inconvenienced in any
way.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 97. Courtesy:
Sushilabehn Gandhi

1

The reference in the last paragraph to West, who arrived at Tolstoy Farm on
April 11, suggests that this letter was written in 1912.
2
West’s mother-in-law
3
Chhabildas Mehta of Durban
4
Rambhabai Sodha
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

185

149. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[LAWLEY, ]

Vaisakh Sud 8 [April 24, 1912] 1
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I have your letter. I shall pass on to West the papers meant for
him.
Print the matter on Prof. Gokhale in full. The comments that
you suggest will do. It will be excellent if all of it is brought out in
Gujarati as well as in English, with a picture of Prof. Gokhale added.
If a Tamil translation appears simultaneously—separately perhaps—
that would be fine indeed. I think 1,000 copies can sell. Print the
words “the Honourable Mr. G. K. Gokhale” in full.
Wheat should be roasted till it has browned. It will be better to
soak it overnight before roasting. The roasted wheat should then be
ground coarse into grains. This flour should be boiled to silken fine
[paste]. Add a little ghee to it, while it is still on the boil. This porridge
can be taken with milk. It is desirable to keep it boiling for an hour.
Just enough water should be added to make the dish a thick khichdilike paste at the end of the hour. The right thing would be to eat it
with honey or some home-made jam. Give as much as can be
digested.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5774(A)

1

In the second paragraph Gandhiji is referring to Press reports of and
comments on Gokhale’s second resolution on Indian indentured labour. They were
printed in Indian Opinion, 20-4-1912 & 27-4-1912. In the year 1912, Vaisakh Sud 8
corresponds to April 24.

186

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

150. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[LAWLEY, ]

Vaisakh Sud 8 [April 24, 1912] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I have kept for the present the report of the [Gujarati] Sahitya
Parishad2 and the Hindi books. The latter are being used for Budrea’s3
son who is here. The report, I myself want very much to read.
Yours was the right reaction to the Titanic report.4 Such
occurrences serve to remind us from time to time that we are no better
than fleas.
Jamnadas is extremely restless. He cannot stick to the same idea
for two days running. He and Manilal are in the same state. Jamnadas,
however, is an obedient lad. I have, therefore, no anxieties [on his
account]. Sometimes he is seized by a strong urge to renunciation and
at other times sinks into the depths of ignorance and vain desire. The
reason for this unsettled state of mind is that he has not been happy
with Ba. I have argued hard with him that this is a bitter draught he
must swallow. In any case, he has made a promise and I shall hold him
to it. When his permit was about to expire, we had a talk at the end of
which he showed himself willing to stay on, and intimation has already
been received that his permit has been extended for another six
months. I have explained to him, therefore, that he must not leave
1

The Titanic sank on April 14, 1912, in which year this letter was therefore

written.
2

Literary conference
A client of Gandhiji; vide “Letter to F. H. Tatham”, 14-3-1908.
4
Both Chhaganlal and Maganlal Gandhi often sent Gujarati leaders or articles
they had written to Gandhiji before publication; vide, for instance, “Letter to
Chhaganlal Gandhi”, 29-8-1911. The reference here is very likely to a Gujarati article
entitled “Act of the Omnipotent Creator” which was published in Indian Opinion,
27-4-1912. It said: “Our saints and bhaktas have always taught that the minutest act
cannot be performed without God’s will. Man should learn this truth from the sinking
of the Titanic . . . [The Americans and the British] worship science and man’s power
over Nature. . . . They repose so much faith in the muscle and the intellect that they
consider themselves worthy of creating anything that their conceited intellect can
think of . . .” The views expressed are similar to Gandhiji’s. For Gandhiji’s own
reactions to the fire in the Paris Metro, vide “Accident?”, 20-8-1903; to an earthquake
in Northern India, vide “Earthquake in India”, 13-5-1905 and to a famine in Central
India, vide “Five Crores Starving”, 28-3-1908.
3

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

187

during this period. Latterly, Ba too has been well disposed [towards
him]. More-over, he was recently away to Johannesburg for three or
four days. I believe therefore that he is quite at ease with himself,
though he may soon get restless again. Restlessness is a defect natural
to adolescence, and has to be tolerated. Boys who, though restless, are
obedient, can easily become their normal selves again. I am sure that it
will turn out so with Jamnadas.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
Ani should be given £4 a month.
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gadhiji’s hand: S. N. 5774a(2)

151. LETTER TO “SPORTING STAR”
[THE EDITOR
SPORTING STAR
JOHANNESBURG
SIR,]

You have been good enough to invite my opinion on the
suggestion made by “Recorder” in your issue of the 20th instant as
to some provision being made for the admission of Asiatics to the
Wanderers Ground. I offer my opinion not without some hesitation,
for I feel that Recorder’s suggestion is not practicable, to say the least
of it. I recognize the purity of his motives, but, if I may venture to
deal with his suggestion on its merits, I must say that the proposed
division between higher and lower class Asiatics is, or should be,
totally unacceptable, if only because it is impossible to make such
distinctions in matters such as those to which “Recorder” refers. I
hardly think that it is character or education that counts in
determining the question of admission to a sporting-ground. I should
not suppose that any such distinction is made in respect of Europeans.
All that can be reasonably expected is that those who apply for
admission be suitably and cleanly dressed. Nor will the suggestion that
a portion of certain stands be set aside for Asiatics meet with general
favour. It is one thing to put us on our honour, and expect us to
occupy certain parts only; it is quite another to say that we may go to
certain parts, and to no other. I am not blind to the unfortunate
prejudice that exists in South Africa against Asiatics and Coloured
188

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

people. But I do feel that, as long as that preju-dice is allowed to
influence the deliberations of a Sporting Committee, so long it is
better that we do not have any right of entry at all, than that such right
should be recognized in a limited and niggardly spirit.
M. K. GANDHI

Indian Opinion, 4-5-1912

152. WHAT IS A WIFE?
Mr. Jordan1 , the Johannesburg Magistrate, has presented us with
a clear-cut issue. In the case of an Indian wife who entered the
Transvaal together with her husband, he has decided that she is a
prohibited immigrant, as her marriage cannot be recognized by the
Courts of South Africa by reason of her husband having married
more than one wife.2 Mr. Jordan has gone further than Sir John
Wessels. The latter left us in a state of suspense. Under the learned
Judge’s decision in Mrs. Jussat’s case 3 , it was just possible that one
wife of a Mahomedan who had married more than one wife could
come. But Mr. Jordan lays it down clearly that, if a man was married
to more than one wife whilst the first wife was alive, all the wives
become prohibited immigrants. Indeed, we consider Mr. Jordan’s
judgment to be more honest, if it is also more drastic. If this
magisterial decision is allowed to stand unchallenged, the position of
Indians with more wives than one will become most precarious. Those
concerned are bound to obtain the decision of the highest tribunal of
justice. Indeed, the matter cannot even rest with the Supreme Court. In
the event of an adverse decision by that august body, the community
will have to seek a clear declaration from the Imperial Government as
to their attitude. The question is one of honour, and it will have to be
1
H. H. Jordan; a Johannesburg Magistrate, in whose Court Gandhiji was
sentenced for the first time on December 28, 1907.
2
The reference is to the case of Hassin Mahomed’s wife. Hassin Mahomed, a
registered Asiatic, had married in India in 1895. In 1905, Hassin Mahomed took a
second wife as sanctioned by Muslim law but later divorced her. His first wife was
prohibited entry into the Transvaal by Magistrate Jordan who disallowed her claim to
enter as a domiciled Asiatic’s wife on the ground that polygamous marriages were not
valid in South Africa. He declared her a prohibited immigrant as she could not pass the
education test under the Transvaal Immigrants’ Restriction Act. Indian Opinion,
4-5-1912.
3
Vide “Mrs. Jussat’s Case”, 9-3-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

189

thrashed out sooner or later. Mr. Jordan’s decision challenges us to
have it settled sooner.
Indian Opinion, 11-5-1912

153. THE JOHANNESBURG SCHOOL
So the Executive of the Provincial Council has decided not to
give the Indian community a separate school for the education of
Indian children. In the absence of any valid reason why such a school
should not have been sanctioned, we are constrained to ascribe the
refusal to anti-Asiatic prejudice on the part of the Executive. The
School Board had recommended the establishment of the school.
There was ample precedent for granting the Indian request. The
promoters had guaranteed the rent of the school and guaranteed a
large attendance too. In our opinion the fact that the Coloured schools
of Johannesburg did not provide any facility for teaching the children
their vernaculars was sufficient justification for granting the Indian
demand. The state could make little use of Indian youths who did not
know their own vernaculars. But we know that the self-styled state
does but want its Indian population, whom it regards as an evil, to be
got rid of at the first opportunity.
However, we must frankly confess that we do not mind this
decision—we rather welcome it; we are now put upon our mettle. A
community that jealously guards its will not allow them to be
neglected because an outside body refuses to help it. The English
speaking section of the Free State population answered General
Hertzog’s intention to starve the English education of their children
by opening private schools or finding other facilities for educating
their children in a manner they considered best. We have no real
schools of our own in Johannesburg where a good education may be
given to our children. We hold that it is the duty of the promoters not
to sit still but to open the school and manage it without the help of the
state. Indeed, if a strong board of management can be formed, we feel
sure that the school will better supply our wants by reason of the
absence of state interference.
(At the time of going to press, we have received further correspondence from Johannesburg which somewhat alters the case. But we
consider that our main argument still holds good.)
Indian Opinion, 18-5-1912
190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

154. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
LAWLEY,

May 21, 1912
DEAR MR. LANE,

I have your letter1 of the 14th instant for which I thank you.
I think that the alternative clause is satisfactory if it means that
the declaration2 referred to in our correspondence will be unnecessary
in the case of educated Asiatics. May I suggest that the clause provides
definitely that the declaration mentioned in Schedule 2 will not be
required.
I beg to thank General Smuts for meeting the difficulty regarding domicile.
I hope too that the other difficulties raised in my letters3 will be
dealt with during the committee stage. They arise out of the
provisional settlement as read it.
I remain,
Your sincerely,
From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5653

155. INDIAN EDUCATION IN NATAL
“The Indian schools have made much progress during the last
few years,” says the Minister of Education for the Natal Province in
his Annual Report. And that is all he has to say about the education of
Indian children. He is evidently satisfied at the present condition of
affairs where considerably more than £100,000 is spent annually on
the education of European children and only a paltry £6,761 on
Indian education. Anyone not aware of the position which Indians
hold in South Africa would naturally ask the reason for such a wide
difference between the educational facilities offered to Europeans and
Indians. The population of Indians exceeds that of Europeans. Is it
not the duty of the Government to educate its people, to whatever race
1

Vide Appendix “Lane’s Letter to Gandhiji”, 14-5-1912.
Required of Asiatics entering the Orange Free State to the effect that they had
no intention of settling there to trade or to farm; vide Appendix “Extracts from
Immigrants’ Restriction Bill (1912) and Orange Free State Constitution”, 3-2-1912.
3
Vide letters to Lane, 29-1-1912, 15-2-1912, 4-4-1912 & 11-4-1912.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

191

they may belong? What of the thousands of Indians brought here to
exploit the agricultural resources of the Province? Surely there is a
heavy responsibility resting upon those in authority. Then, again, we
notice that the cost of educating a European is £5. 12s. 2_ d. and an
Indian £1.14s. 5d. So even the education which a few Indian children
receive is given in a niggardly manner, and under conditions which
would not be tolerated for Europeans. Out of a total of 570 Indian
pupils attending Government schools in Durban and Pietermaritzburg,
only 25 are girls. This is due, largely, to the refusal of the Government
to separate the sexes in the schools. At one time there was a fair
number of girls attending the Higher-Grade Indian School, but the
parents withdrew their children and now there are only three attending
that school. The reason for the parents’ action may be described as
sentimental but sentiment carries weight with many people, and the
authorities have no right to disregard those sentiments and ride
roughshod over them.
But we are not disposed to blame the Superintendent of Education for the lack of educational facilities for Indians, nor is it of any
use blaming the Government. The Indian community itself is negligent in these mattters. After all, we get very largely what we deserve.
The Natives already are receiving nearly double the amount of public
money that Indians receive for education, and they are showing, by
their present activity, that they intend to demand their share of
Government assistance in educating their children. But the Natives do
not depend solely on the Government. They have already a great
many very fine institutions in different parts of the country, built up
by missionaries and by their own energies, and these are increasing in
number and in usefulness.
The Government spent, last year, £9,000 on technical education
for Europeans. This is provided because there is the demand for it.
Even Europeans do not get anything without demanding it. A new
technical institute has just been erected in Durban at a cost of £28,000.
This is the result of strenuous efforts on the part of several European
gentlemen who have worked away for years, sacrificing both time and
money in their determination to give to their children an institution
wherein they may receive instruction in scientific, artistic and practical
work. One may well ask whether such institutions are not open to all.
In theory, it is true, they belong to the whole of the people, but we
know that, in practice, no Indian would be allowed to take a course of
192

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

study there. This is undoubtedly, a great shame, but we must not lose
sight of the fact that we have not demanded technical education for
our children as Europeans have. When we are prepared to make a
united demandfor a school wherein our children may receive manual
training and scientific instruction we may reasonably hope to get it.
We would gladly see our Indian youths eager to receive a practical
training in some useful professions. But manual work is not in favour.
We may well apply to ourselves the words of the Minister of
Education, spoken at the Pretoria Conference:“We have a growing
number of children . . . with a bookish education, afraid to work, and
thinking that manual labour is ‘Kaffir’s work’. The result is that for
these men there is no room in South Africa, and South Africa is
bound to suffer unless we seriously set ourselves to solve the
problem.”
Indian Opinion, 25-5-1912

156. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
TOLSTOY F ARM,

Jeth Sud 12 [May 27, 1912] 1
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

Dhoribhai is not the kind of man to fit into the scheme. This is
West’s view. This contention is based on conversation with him and is
justified. Our functioning is so different at present that it is doubtful if
we should admit only labourers. Dhoribhai will not understand that he
is not qualified. Hence, there is no need to tell him the reasons. I shall
tell him myself. What seems clear is that we cannot admit him at the
moment. But is it right to tell him why? West had asked me in his last
letter and so I am discussing the matter with you. This is my attitude.
Now you can do whatever you think proper.
Miss Molteno writes: “Your sweet Phoenix is a poem—a dream
of loveliness.”2 Strangers are bound to think that way. We cannot take
pride in her comment because we have known its bitterness too.
Nevertheless we should cherish the aspiration that the future may
justify Miss Molteno’s belief. In order to realize that, I feel that we
cannot admit an utterly worldly man like Dhoribhai. A time may
1
The year has been inferred from the reference to the arrival of kotwal, who
joined the Tolstoy Farm in 1912.
2
Quoted in English

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

193

come when only two or three of us can continue to stay there to
realize that ideal. May it be so. We shall not be cowards from fear of
it.
Jamnadas1 has been there for a long time now. I have reprimanded him for what Kashi has written in her letter. Please do not
hurt his feelings. He has many admirable qualities. His physique is
such that he can make it hard as steel. It is best to engage him in all
activities. Send him here whenever he feels inclined. I do not think he
would feel comfortable there for long. I feel that if you engage him in
the press it would be beneficial to you as well as to him. But you must
be needing all the help there right now. Nevertheless, do only what all
of you consider proper. It is enough if you give thought to my
suggestions. Do not insist on putting them into practice.
Kotwal2 can wear the dress he chooses. I shall not interfere or
force him regarding this. Those of us who have established Phoenix
and those whom we specially invite cannot suddenly wear that kind of
dress. I see the usefulness of trousers, etc., for the carrying on of our
tasks. If trousers imply anything immoral, we should not wear them
whether or not our task is accomplished. Kotwal has come to meet us.
Moreover, Doctor3 has made certain recommendations about him. It is
possible that he possesses such a character that we may have more to
learn from him than he from us. Hence, I do not propose to discuss
with him the matter of his dress unless an occasion arises. We can
exercise greater freedom regarding dress, etc., at the Farm. In certain
matters, there was opportunity for this Farm to rise superior to
Phoenix in its way of living. Meat, etc., have got to be given up here
and that is no small matter. Everyone must eat in the common kitchen,
and that too is a big thing.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1164. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi

1
2
3

194

Addressee’s Younger brother
P. K. Kotwal
Dr. Pranjivandas Mehta
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

157. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE
LAWLEY,

May 31, 1912
DEAR MR. LANE,

General Smuts’ speech1 on the second reading of the Bill leaves,
I fear, the question of interprovincial migration in a somewhat unsatisfactory state. General Smuts appears to meet the objection raised on
this point by lax administration rather than by amending the section
as it appears in the measure now before Parliament. As I have already
remarked, this will not satisfy passive resisters. I therefore, hope that
the measure will be so amended as to leave the rights of Asiatics
residing in the other provinces to enter Natal and the Cape in status
quo ante.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5654

158. “AN UNFORTUNATE CASE”
Under the above sub-heading, the following report of a case
brought before Mr. J. Y. Gibson, in the First Criminal Court, Durban,
appears, in the Natal Advertiser:
Jadubansi, an Indian woman, was charged with refusing to return to her
lawful employer, she being an indentured servant. The accused pleaded guilty.
It was stated that the circumstances of this case were that the woman had served
continuous sentences amounting to six months, for a steadfast refusal to return
to her employer. She had been working on an estate at Stanger, and, in some
accident, her baby had been burnt. She had come to Durban to make complaint
to the Protector and had since refused on every occasion to comply with her
indenture. Argument arose as to whether continual successive punishment
could be awarded for the same offence, and it was pointed out by Mr. Gibson
that section governing such cases provided that each successive refusal to
comply with an order of the Court was separately punishable. His Worship
said that it seemed an unfortunate thing that a woman could thus be punished
time after time for a matter wherein she had shown a particular aversion from
some especial place of employment. It was stated that the woman was willing
1

Vide Appendix “Smuts’ Speech on I. R. Bill (1912) in Union Parliament”,
30-5-1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

195

to work elsewhere, if she could get a transfer, and Mr. Gibson adjourned the
case for a week, Jadubansi meanwhile being sent to the Protector to see what
could be arranged.

We have something to add to the above report, as we have
been brought into close touch with the woman concerned who, early
in April, came to Phoenix and related her story in detail. In the first
place, the woman had not been working on an estate, at Stanger, but
was indentured to a farmer down the South coast whose name it is not
necessary to mention for the moment. We learn from the report that
Jadubansi’s child had been burnt. It was not only burnt, but burnt so
severely that it died; and the woman accuses her employer of deliberately refusing to attend to the wounds, after having first put on bandages, with the result that they stank. The woman’s duties in her
master’s house kept her away from the child from 5 a.m. to 7 p.m.,
with the exception of two short intervals for breakfast and dinner.
Consequently the child had to be left alone. After a fortnight’s
terrible sufferings, the child was sent to the hospital where it died a few
days afterwards. After the death of her child, Jadubansi tells of great
hardships, including the refusal of her employer to give her food for
three days, forcing her to grind mealies in a hand mill, ill-treatmentby
kicking, and the withholding of wages. The total wages received in the
course of a year, she states, was nine shillings.
We took Jadubansi to the Protector of Indian Immigrants, laid
the information before him, and left her in his charge, pending
inquiries into her grievances. The matter was referred to the employer
who flatly denied that he neglected the child, and accused the mother
of neglect. The doctor at the hospital reported the death of the child,
but did not consider its condition to be so bad as to warrant special
mention.
We have these conflicting statements and we lay them before the
public for them to judge which is the more likely: that a mother,
whose child gets accidentally burnt, should wilfully neglect it, and
refuse to nurse it, or that the employer should seek to shield himself
from the consequences of serious charge. And what is the position of
the doctors in such matters? They are employed by the Indian
Immigration Trust Board, which consists of planters and farmers,1 and
1

Indian Opinion editorials had more than once demanded that Indians should
be represented on such boards and in the SABI Committee’s representation of June
17, 1911 to the Colonial Office, Polak had made a similar request; vide Appendix
“S. A. B. I. Committee’s Letter to Colonial Office”, 17-6-1911.

196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

one can easily imagine that the doctors are not over-anxious to report
cases which reflect upon employers. So we must not place much
importance on the non-report of the bad condition of the child. It is a
crying scandal that these medical men are not under the control of the
Government. We are very much afraid that many a gruesome tragedy
lies hidden because of this. And what of the employer? Jadubansi
states that, in one room which is a part of stable, four Indians—two
men and two women—and four Natives had to cook their food
together. Of the Indians, two were married and the others not. But
they all had to sleep in the same room. Some months before, inspector
Waller, of the Protector’s Department, visited the place and saw these
conditions. He ordered the employer to make alterations, which
instructions, evidently, were not carried out. Thus we see that the
employer is not a man who is careful over the welfare of his Indians
and that is putting it very mildly.
Well, to continue the story, the Protector tried to persuade the
employer to transfer the woman elsewhere as it was clear that, for
some reason, she did not wish to remain with him. But the employer
refused, and it seems that it was not possible for the Protector to carry
his protection any further, and the officers of the law arrested Jadubansi and she was sent to prison for desertion. After serving a month
in prison and again refusing to return to her employer, the latter
seems to have given up all hope of getting her to return and so he has
given his consent to her being shipped back to India where she wished
to go and from whence, she alleges, she was forcibly brought against
her will, a recruiting agent in India having deceived her.
If half of this woman’s story be true, it is indeed “an unfortunate case”. It must be considered unfortunate, too, by supporters of
the indenture system, that such cases are brought to light. Even one
such case condemns the whole system, because it shows what horrible
things are possible in the outlying districts. We have to thank the
Magistrate, Mr. Gibson, for having prevented the further punishment
of this poor woman.
Indian Opinion, 1-6-1912

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

197

159. HEALTH OF INDENTURED INDIANS
The evidence of the Protector of Indian Immigrants, given
before the Tuberculosis Commission, brings to mind once again the
fact that, in matters of health, as in some other matters, he is powerless
to protect the people under his charge. The Protector is a Government
servant, independent of the Immigration Trust Board and is therefore
in a position to act independently without interference by its members. Not so the sanitary inspectors and medical officers, appointed to
look after the conditions of the barracks and the health of the
occupants. They are employed by the Trust Board, and, therefore, and
under the thumb of the employers. We maintain that it is impossible
for these officers to do their duty under such conditions. In answer to
questions by the Tuberculosis Commission regarding the ground
surrounding some of the Indian barracks, which was in filthy
condition with slop water and refuse lying about, Mr. Polkinghorne 1
said that there was a sanitary inspector who was supposed to look after
these things. Of course, we can quite understand that a sanitary
inspector, at any time, is looked upon by employers as a troublesome
nuisance. His faultfindings mean increased expenses and less profits.
The consequence is, in many cases, that the much needed
improvements are not even suggested by these officers because they
know that it will only bring a hornet’s nest about their ears. Naturally,
they will let matters slide rather than create trouble for themselves and
make their position untenable. So far back as 1908, Protector, in his
annual report, called attention to this matter.He said that, in his
opinion, the high death-rate among indentured Indians working in the
coast districts of Natal was due in no small measure to this state of
affairs, and as a kind of protest against the scandal, he asked for no
reports from, the medical officers.
The Immigration Trust Board consists of seven members elected
by employers of indentured Indians, with the Protector and one other
member nominated by the Government. Referring to the constitution
of the Board, the protector said in his report:“In no other Colony,
introducing Indian immigrants, is there any such Board of Employers,
and I am strongly of opinion that such a constituted Board should not
in any way have any power to deal with, or in any way influence, the
1

198

J. A. Polkinghorne, Protector of Indian Immigrants, Natal
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

treatment of the indentured Indians in the Colony.” We quite agree
with Mr. Polkinghorne, and we think that he might have brought this
matter a little more forcibly to the notice of the Tuberculosis
Commission.
Indian Opinion, 22-6-1912

160. MRS. VOGL’S BAZAAR 1
Mrs. Vogl, whose name and work our readers have now become
thoroughly acquainted with, has an insatiable ambition. As will be
seen from Miss Schlesin’s letter2 to the ladies in India, Mrs. Vogl is
organizing, under the auspices of the Indian Women’s Association,
another Bazaar larger scale than before. The last Bazaar was
successful, both financially and socially. But Mrs. Vogl, thinks that the
funds should be considerably augmented if the Nagappen memorial is
to be worthy of the cause to which the lamented lad gave his life. She
thinks, too, that the education work of the Association will receive
greater encouragement if Bazaars are held periodically. We are sure
that the ladies in India will return a liberal response to Miss Schlesin’s
appeal, and we hope that those, both here and in England, who are at
all interested in Indians in this subcontinent, will take note of the
appeal and help the great movement inaugurated by Mrs. Vogl.
Indian Opinion, 22-6-1912

1

Vide “Address to Mrs. Vogl”, 15-11-1911.
Miss Schlesin, who was the Honorary Secretary of the Transvaal Indian
Women’s Association, in this letter of June 14, had requested that fancy goods and
specimens of Indian hand-work be sent for the Bazaar to be held towards the end of
1913. She also appealed to all willing Associations in India for help. Indian
Opinion, 22-6-1912.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

199

161. TELEGRAM TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR1
June 25, 1912
TO

INTERIOR
P RETORIA & C APE TOWN
VIEW
PROROGATION
PARLIAMENT
MAY
I
KNOW
GOVERNMENT’S
INTENTION REGARDING IMMIGRATION BILL AND FUTURE WORKING
SETTLEMENT. 2

GANDHI
From Indian Opinion, 20-7-1912; also photostat of handwritten office copy:
S. N. 5656

1

In reply, the Acting Secretary for the Interior said in his letter of July 16:
“. . . I have the honour, by direction of the Minister, to inform you that the
Government was most anxious to secure the passage of the Bill and that it was with
regret that it was found eventually impossible to carry the matter to a conclusion. . . .
an amended measure will be introduced during the course of the next Session, and that
in the meanwhile, it will be necessary to continue the administration of the existing
legislation on the subject as in the Past.” Indian Opinion, 20-7-1912. On July 16,
Lord Gladstone in a memorandum informed Secretary Harcourt of the Imperial
Government that there was no prospect of the bill being passed that session. Harcourt
wired back expressing “regret and disappointment” and hoping that “the bill would be
re-introduced at the earliest opportunity and pressed through”. In reply the South
African Minister explained that the bill had to be abandoned due to “strenuous
opposition to it and the pressure of other business”. On July 17, they sent a further
telegram stating that they “would re-introduce the bill at the earliest possible date the
next session”. From a White Paper published following Lord Ampthill’s questions
(Appendix XVIII ) in the House of Lords. India, 13-9-1912.
2
Gandhiji had written to Lane on April 21 (the letter itself is not available)
presumably asking him when the Union Parliament was likely to be prorogued. Lane
replied on April 25 saying that while “I am unable to give you any fixed date . . . in
my own opinion, I should say on the 12th of June”. S. N. 5648. The Union
Parliament was prorogued on June 24 without having considered the new draft
immigration Bill and was not due to meet until September 23.

200

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

162. LETTER TO KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
Ashadha Sud 11 [June 25/July 24, 1912] 1
BHAISHRI KHUSHAL JIVAN,

Herewith the accounts of Phulibehn received from Revashankerbhai. From these it would seem that there is nothing owing to her by
Revashankerbhai. .. I don’t know what her claim is. Please inquire and
write to me in detail. I judge from Meghjibhai’s letter that he may
have been to Ahmedabad also. There was a letter from him but it gave
no details.
Does not Phulibehn live and eat with Raliatbehn? Meghjibhai’s
letter gives the impression that she has her meals separately and lives
at her own expense.
Chi. Jamnadas is with me. He is a priceless jewel. I want him to
stay with me for a long time. He has altogether changed in
appearance. I think he will become stronger yet.
Manilal, Ramdas and Devdas are also with me. My humble
greetings to my sister-in-law.
Humble greetings form

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11275

163. CABLE TO S.A.B.I. COMMITTEE
[JOHANNESBURG ,]

June 26, 1912
THE S OUTH AFRICA BRITISH INDIAN C OMMITTEE
231-2, STRAND
[LONDON] W.C.
EUROPEAN
OWNERS
OF STANDS AT
VREDEDORP
HAVE
RECEIVED
PEREMPTORY NOTICES 2 TO REMOVE ASIATIC TENANTS WITHIN THREE MONTHS’
1
From the contents the letter appears to have been written in 1912 when
Jamnadas had gone to Lawley to stay with Gandhiji; vide “Letter to Chanchalbehn
Gandhi”, 18-2-1912. Ashadha Sud 11, however, corresponded to two dates in 1912 as
another month was intercalated in Ashadha that year.
2
There were served on June 6, 1912 under Section 4 of the Vrededorp Stands
Act of 1907 on those Stand-owners on whose premises Asiatics, Natives or Coloured
persons were residing. The Vrededorp Stands Ordinance, which prohibited leasing or

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

201

TIME.
FAILURE
IN
COMPLIANCE
WITH
NOTICE
INVOLVES
FORFEITURE
OF
STANDS,
SOME
OF
WHICH
ARE
EQUITABLY
OWNED
BY INDIANS.
ELEVEN
INDIAN
STORE-KEEPERS
AT VREDEDORP ARE FACED WITH RUIN IF DISPOSSESSED.

M. K. GANDHI
Colonial Office Records: C. O. 551/35

164. LORD AMPTHILL’S COMMITTEE
Owing to a shortage of funds for defraying the expenses of our
Committee in England and of public work in Johannesburg, a
collection has recently been started in the Transvaal. It is Sorabji in
fact, who has taken this work upon himself. Mr. Cachalia also accompanies him sometimes. Dulabhbhai Kalyanji, Dayal Parbhu, Manchha
Gosai, G. K. Patel, Bhikhubhai Karsanji and Jeram Gosai also go out
[with them]. Mr. Sodha, too, goes round for the collection. A sum of
about £350 has been collected, including £27.12s. received from
Vereeniging towards the expenses [of the SABI Committee]. Soon
they will visit other towns for collection.
But the entire [burden of the] expenses of Lord Ampthill’s
Committee should not devolve on the Transvaal alone. Natal and the
Cape ought to share in them. The Committee functions in the interests
of all parts of South Africa, and all the Indians should share in its
expenses.1
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 29-6-1912
subletting of land to Asiatics and Coloured persons and even their residence in
premises erected there except as domestic servants, was published in the Government
Gazette on September 28, 1906 before the Transvaal had attained responsible
government, and on October 8, 1906 the British Indian Association represented to
Lord Elgin against this measure asking that Royal assent be withheld; vide “Petition
to Lord Elgin”, 8-10-1906. Consequent upon this and further efforts by the SABI
Committee (Vol. VI, pp. 342-3 & 347-8) a new bill which envisaged a notice period
of four years and compensation in respect of buildings constructed by Indian was
passed in 1907; vide “Johannesburg Letter”, 17-8-1907.
1
For earlier appeals for funds for the SABI Committee, Vide “South Africa
British Indian Committee” 9-2-1907 & “South Africa British Indian Committee”
23-3-1907, Vol. VII “Association in Cape”, 5-10-1907, “South Africa British Indian
Committee” 12-10-1907 & “Johannesburg Letter”, 26-10-1907 and “Johannesburg
Letter”, 21-3-1908.

202

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

165. SPEECH AT DURBAN FAREWELL TO PILGRIMS
[June 29, 1912]
. . . The Ottoman Cricket Club organized a function on Saturday [June 29]
night at the same place [Mr. Rustomjee’s residence]. About 200 to 300 persons were
present. Mr. Gandhi was requested to take the chair and he said:

I came here to honour the Haj Pilgrims. I had no intention of
presiding over this function. However, two of the office-bearers of the
Club urged me to take the chair. I gladly complied after they had
promised, in return, to join in the satyagraha movement if it were
started again. It has indeed become my sole occupation to seek out
people willing to go to goal for the country’s sake. I wish the members of this club, too, would equip themselves to become satyagrahis
and be ready to go to goal when the occasion arises. Why should we
fight shy of goal? Students of the school attached to Tolstoy Farm
walked to Wightrust seven miles away. On the way, they came upon
streams and bathed in them. When they were arrested [for trespassing],
they admitted to having done wrong. On being told that they could be
sent to gaol, they said that they would prefer going to gaol to being let
off. At this, the authorities responsible for arresting them released
them. The point is that, instead of being afraid of gaol, we should
become courageous and learn to fight in defence of truth. This kind
of education is necessary for the Indian community.
Mr. Gandhi then expressed his heart-left happiness at having been able to
attend this function to bid farewell to Mr. Dawad Mahomed and other pilgrims
and then commenced the business of the meeting.
In his concluding remarks as chairman, he said:

I offer my hearty congratulations to Dawad Mahomed,
Mahomed Coovadia1 Dawad Seedat and Moola on their Undertakin
the Haj pilgrimage. As a Hindu I am glad of their decision to go on
the pilgrimage. A true Muslim cannot do Hindus harm. A true Hindu
cannot do harm Muslims. Those who are capable of harming their
won Indian brethren are neither true Muslims nor true Hindus. I
consider any selfless work done in the service of the community as a
religious and not a worldly act. I accordingly believe the services
1

Mahomed Cassim Coovadia; merchant; President of the Durban Anjuman and
a trustee of the West Street Mosque
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

203

rendered by Mr. Dawad Mahomed by going to gaol 1 will be acknowledged in the court of God. On the other hand, I believe that and
ostensibly religious act is not a godly one if not done with a pure
heart. Secondly, it is repeatedly asserted that there is no unity among
Indians.2 But one should not believe that this is really so. At the same
time we should not shut our eyes to the disunity among us and say
that there is none. In any case it should be remembered that the cause
of our sufferings in South Africa in no disunity but lack of courage. I
do not wish to say that we are wholly wanting in courage. When the
Imam Saheb came forward to court imprisonment, who could have
predicted that he would be able to bear up with [life in] gaol? His
offer to go to gaol was a courageous act and it was again due to his
courage that he could remain steadfast till the end. Our chief need is
to be truthful. Our motto should be Truth and nothing but the Truth.
With the aid to Truth we shall be able to cross even oceans of misery.
No action undertaken with a sincere motive ever goes unrewarded.
Therefore, work for the community with purity of motive. It is not
difficult to preserve unity. As long as the Muslims do not want to
quarrel, Hindus by themselves cannot do so. If the Hindus are not
spoiling for a fight, Muslims alone cannot bring about one. Even if
there are a hundred people out to create dissensions as against one
who comes forward to promote unity, the hundred will lose and the
one will win. If that were not so, God’s divinity would be at an end.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 13-7-1912

1

In August 1908, he crossed over into the Transvaal to assist the satyagraha
campaign on behalf of Natal and to test his pre-war rights of domicile in that Colony;
vide 1st footnote of “Comments on Transvaal Indfian Campaign”, 28-8-1908.
2
For Gandhiji’s earlier remarks on Hindu-Muslim unity, vide “The World’s
Religion”, 26-8-1905, “Divide and Rule”, 4-11-1905 &:Agreement between Hindus
and Muslims”, 23-12-1905, “Speech at Reception”, 26-12-1906 & “Reply to
Mahomedan Association’s Address”, 3-1-1907, “Johannesburg Letter”, before 10-11908, “A Brief Explanation”, 22-2-1908, “Further Considerations”, 29-2-1908,
“Lord Selborne’s View”, 4-4-1908, “Speech at Mass Meeting”, 23-7-1908 &
“Parliament for Turkey”, 1-8-1908, “Letter to Indian Opinion”, 19-1-1909, “Letter to
Maganlal Gandhi”, 29-1-1909 & “Letter to Habib Motan”, 21-6-1909 and, “Indian
National Congress and Muslims”, 8-1-1910, “Muslim League Meeting”, 12-2-1910
& “Hindus and Muslims”, 21-5-1910.

204

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

166. DAWAD MAHOMED
The community has honoured itself by honouring Mr. Dawad
Mahomed. A person of his ability, presence of mind and good spirits
is rarely come by among Indians. There is, likewise, hardly another
Indian who commands the same influence among Europeans which
he has come to acquire.
Mr. Dawad Mahomed’s part in the satyagraha campaign has
made his name resound through South Africa . We wish him and his
companions success in their cherished ambition.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 6-7-1912

167. LETTER TO E. F. C. LANE1
July 6, 1912
DEAR MR. LANE,

I see that you are in Pretoria now. As the matter was rather
urgent, I sent a telegram2 on the 25th ultimo, addressed both at Cape
Town and Pretoria, inquiring about the Immigration Bill . Whilst I am
anxious not to worry General Smuts, I think that I am bound to satisfy
the many inquirers who have been asking me about the measure. Is it
now possible to let me know what the Government’s intentions are
regarding the Bill and the future working of the provisional settlement?
I remain,
Yours sincerely,

[M. K. GANDHI]
ERNEST F. C. LANE , ESQ.
P RETORIA
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5660

1
For the reply to this letter, vide 1st footnote of “Telegram to Minister of
Interior”, 25-6-1912.
2
Vide “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 25-6-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

205

168. DR. MURISON’S CHARGE
Dr. Murison is reported to have said before the Tuberculosis
Commission that Indians were given to lying and that “it was difficult
to find out much of their private life, owing to their habits”. In his
opinion, “Indians should be put into Locations as well as Natives.”
We awaited a public contradiction by Dr. Murison with reference to
the charge of lying, and in order to make assurance doubly sure, we
wrote, too, to the worthy Doctor, asking whether he had been correctly
reported. Not having seen any contradiction and not having received a
reply from him we assume that he is correctly reported. Dr. Murison
has proved a conscientious medical officer, and we have often had
occasion to congratulate him on his even-handed treatment1 of all
classes of the community that came under his notice. It is, therefore,
not without pain that we are constrained to take exception to the
sweeping charge of lying laid by him against a community, which
prejudice has already terribly misrepresented in South Africa. In the
first place, Dr. Murison, as medical officer, would come into contact
with the unhealthy rather than with the healthy, and to impute the
faults of the unhealthy to a whole body of people is, to say the least of
it, highly illogical. But is it proper even to charge Indians suspected of
suffering from tuberculosis with lying? We are quite free to admit that
such Indians, like all other classes of patients, in order to avoid
segregation and special treatment which they might not understand,
would minimize their trouble, or fail to give notice or even mislead
officials, but, we trust that, upon reflection, Dr. Murison will find that
to charge these people with lying and then, too, to base upon that
charge a recommendation for their compulsory segregation in Locations is not the proper thing. We may remind him that Lord Curzon,
when he was Viceroy of India, at a lecture before University students,
committed a similar indiscretion,2 for which he suffered heavily. 3 He
1

Vide “The Plague”, 7-1-1905.
This was at a Convocation address to an Indian University in 1905. While
on the subject of the low place assigned to truth in the moral systems of the East, he
had said that “craftiness and diplomatic wile have always been held in much repute” in
Eastern countries. Gandhiji had answered this at length at the time; vide “Oriental
Ideal of Truth”, 1-4-1905.
3
The reference is to his resignation following a controversy with Lord
Kitchener; vide, however, “Lord Curzon”, 26-8-1905.
2

206

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

lost all the prestige in India that he had previously enjoyed and laid
himself open to the justifiable taunt of himself not having hesitated to
lie when he thought that the occasion demanded it. Zangwill 1 once
said that if a Jew committed a crime it was the whole race that
committed it; if a Gentile committed a crime, it was the individual
only.
Replace the word “Jew” by “Indian”, and we have the whole
ugly truth in nutshell. Whenever an Indian does anything that is
considered reprehensible, the newspapers do not hesitate to publish it
in black type, and some public men do not hesitate to speak from
platforms against the whole body of Indians residing in this country.
We do hope that Dr. Murison will not wish to belong to the category
of public men above referred to, and that he will not forfeit the esteem
in which he is at present justly held by the Indian community.
Indian Opinion, 13-7-1912

169. THE NEW BROOM
Mr. Cousins, who has been appointed Acting Immigration
Officer for Natal, has signalized his advent by issuing what purports to
be a circular—which we give elsewhere—as to the evidence he would
require to satisfy him as to the wives of domiciled Indians who might
intend to enter the Province of Natal. We can only hope that the
circular is not dictated from headquarters. Nothing could be better
calculated to deeply wound Indian susceptibilities than this circular. In
rejecting the ordinary evidence that was submitted to him, Mr. Cousins
stated that he would want unmistakable proof that the husband had no
other wife, and that he should have a marriage certificate, which, too,
would be accepted only when it was accompanied by proof of
identity, 2 and that, if such a certificate were not produced, he would
want the certificate of a superior European magistrate bearing the
1
Israel Zangwill (1864-1926); Jewish teacher, novelist and playwright; was
born and brought up in England; founded and edited Ariel and The London Puck; his
works deal mostly with Jewish life and serious social problems; had earlier advocated
settlement for Jews within the British Empire and later became a Zionist leader.
2
The circular, “addressed to applicants for the admission of their wives”, also
stated that the applicant would have to satisfy Cousins that he was lawful resident.
Indian Opinion, 13-7-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

207

thumb-marks of the wife, and to the effect that she was the wife of the
applicant, whose identity also must be established by unmistakable
means, that the superior officer had personally held an inquiry upon
oath as to the date of the marriage, etc.1 , and that he was to forward all
the original statements declared before him, accompanied by means
of identification of both the husband and the wife, and much more
along the same lines. Thus in a single circular Mr. Cousins has
insulted Indian women, has impugned the honesty of Indian
magistrates and even judges (for, we presume, he will not accept the
testimony of even High Court judges, if they are Indian), and has
insulted even European officials because he wants certificates from
superior European officers, who, in turn, are insulted by being called
upon to send all the records on which they issued the certificate
required. We should hope that to this extraordinary circular the
Government of India will have something to say, that the people of
India will not sit still under the unwarranted affront offered to them,
and that the Indians of Natal will treat the circular letter as it deserves
and will decline to allow their wives to give thumb or any other impressions. It was one thing to require Indian males to identify themselves
when there was a charge2 of personation and surreptitious entry
levelled against them. It is another to wantonly insult Indian womanhood. Let us hope that the Union Government will have the circular
recalled, and that the practice of taking ordinary evidence will be continued, and may we suggest to Mr. Cousins that the quality that is
required in a public officer is not over-zeal in the direction of
browbeating those members of the public with whom he comes into
contact but that of showing kindly courtesy to all without in any way
interfering with the administration of the particular laws which he may
have been appointed to administer. We cannot believe that the circular
in question is required in the interests of the administration, and it
1
The circular added that the Magistrate should also declare that: (a) the “facts
declared to” by him were correct; and (b) that he had “caused a police inquiry to be
made”. He was also required to attach a copy of the police report of the inquiry which
“should embrace various independent parties”, and to state that he was satisfied as to
the relationship alleged.
2
The charge of surreptitious entry and impersonation had been made
repeatedly against Indians since 1906; vide “Influx of Asiatics”, 10-3-1906 & “The
Mass Meeting”, 11-9-1906, “Interview to The Tribune”, 20-10-1906 &
“Representation to Lord Elgin”, 31-10-1906, “Johannesburg Letter”, 12-10-1907
and Vol. VIII, “Interview to The Star”, 6-1-1908, “Extracts from Blue Book”,
7-3-1908 & “Cape Town Indians”, 11-4-1908.

208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

certainly shows a lamentable want of tact.
Indian Opinion, 13-7-1912

170. INDIAN INTERPRETERS
Our attention has been drawn to the fact that there is only one
interpreter for three Indian languages (Hindustani, Tamil and Telugu)
in the Supreme Court (Natal Division). This gentleman may be
qualified to interpret in these different languages, as it is stated he is,
but we contend that it is not possible for one man to give satisfaction
when he is called upon to interpret in all these languages with their
various dialects in one breath, so to speak. The Supreme Court has to
decide questions of life and death, and upon the true interpretation of
the evidence rests the fate of a prisoner. When invited to ask questions,
the prisoner is unable to do so as he cannot understand the languages
in which the evidence is given. Take the case of two Indians, speaking
Tamil and Hindustani, tried under one charge. A Telugu witness goes
into the box and gives his evidence against the two accused. The
prisoners, not being represented by Counsel, are given the opportunity
of cross-examining the witness. The Tamil man puts a question to the
Telugu witness through the interpreter, who gives the answer in Tamil
and to the Court in English. Although it is desirable that the
Hindustani man shall also understand what is going on, we believe,
under the present circumstances, the evidence is not interpreted to
him. The interpreter is supposed to remember the proceedings and
give a summary to the accused. Even with one language, much will
necessarily be missed, but with two prisoners and three Indian
languages, the chances of both men being properly informed by the
same interpreter are very small. One can easily imagine that a man
might be condemned to death wrongly in the midst of such a maze.
We have before called attention to the want of Gujarati interpreters, the large community speaking this language having always to
speak in Hindustani before the Court, a language which they have
never learnt and which has only been picked up in South Africa.
The whole question is one of stinginess on the part of the
Government. Whilst the authorities strain at the gnat of spending a few
hundred pounds a year in providing sufficient competent interpreters
for the courts, they swallow the camel of spending a million and a
quarter over the Union Buildings, an expenditure which has been so
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

209

severely criticized by Mr. Merriman and other members of Parliament. Not until there are competent interpreters for all the Indian
languages can it be said that substantial justice is done to Indians.
Indian Opinion, 13-7-1912

171. DOMICILE CERTIFICATES IN NATAL
Natal Indians are no longer issued fresh domicile certificates.
Even worse, old certificates, whoever is found to possess them, are
taken away and exchanged for new ones only on the production of
fresh affidavits. This causes the poor Indians much hardship. We
believe the Congress should fight out the case regarding domicile as it
had intended to. Meanwhile, those who have old certificates need not
surrender them in order to obtain new ones. Even if they want new
ones, it is unnecessary to produce fresh proof before the official.
Those who do not have any certificates can leave the country without
their having filed affidavits and [generally] strengthened the proofs of
residence. No one is obliged to keep domicile certificates. There
should be no difficulty, therefore, in leaving the country after collecting the proofs [of residence, etc. ].
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 13-7-1912

172. LETTER TO MINISTER OF INTERIOR1
[LAWLEY, ]

July 17, 1912
THE HON ’BLE THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR
P RETORIA
SIR,

I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter2 of the
16th instant, in answer to my communications regarding the Immi1
In reply to this, the Acting Secretary for the Interior wrote on July 19:
“I have to confirm the following wire sent to you today, viz: . . . provisional
settlement last year will continue pending passage legislation. Six educated Indians
will therefore be admitted this year not subject to registration. . . With reference to
the above wire I have to request you to furnish me with the names of the 6 educated
Asiatics whom you wish admitted for this year.” S.N. 5667.
2
Vide 1st footnote of “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 25-6-1912.

210

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

gration Restriction Bill, for which I beg to thank you.
I understand your letter to mean that the provisional settlement
of last year is to continue, pending passage of satisfactory legislation
contemplated by the settlement. I take it, therefore, that a certain
number of educated Asiatics will be admitted for this year in anticipation, as was done last year. On receipt of your letter, names of
educated Asiatics for entry into the Province will be submitted to the
Government for permits.
I have, etc.,

[M. K. GANDHI]
From Indian Opinion, 20-7-1912; also photostat of typewritten office copy:
S.N. 5663

173. MORE OF THE NEW BROOM1
Mr. Cousins is still “going strong”. He is not satisfied with
insulting our womanhood—though that was the utmost he could have
attempted. He wishes to touch us at every point. The latest is that those
who return from India must not only identify themselves with the
documents they produce, but Mr. Cousins must go behind those
documents. He insists on reopening the evidence which secured those
documents to the holders. In other words, he rejects the very titledeeds. This is exactly what the late Transvaal Government attempted
to do and burnt its fingers over. 2 Mr. Cousins can fare no better.
Holders of certificates of domicile will certainly decline to let their
1

Vide also “The New Broom”, 13-7-1912.
Lord Milner had demanded in 1903 that Indians should exchange the receipts
for £3 paid to the Boer Government as proof of pre-War residence and their right of
domicile in the Transvaal. Most Indians voluntarily exchanged these for Peace
Preservation Ordinance permits at the instance of Lord Milner who promised that,
“once on the Register, their position is established and no further registration is
necessary, nor is a fresh permit required”; Vide Vol. III. “The British Indian
Association and Lord Milner”, 11-6-1903 & “Position in the Transvaal”, 24-5-1903
and “Representation to Lord Elgin”, 31-10-1906. Again in 1905, the Indians were
required under the Asiatic Law Amendment Ordinance to establish the genuineness of
their PPO permits as well as of those £3 Dutch certificates which had not been
exchanged for the former; vide “Criminal”, 8-9-1906. In 1908 Indians offered to reregister in return for repeal of the Asiatic Registration Act (which was only a
variation of the Asiatic Ordinance of 1905) and by May 9, 1908, 8,700 had
voluntarily registered ; of these over 6,000 registrations had been accepted by the
Government ; vide Vol. VIII, “Johannesburg Letter”, 9-5-1908.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

211

title-deeds be treated as of no effect. They will demand entry on the
strength of their certificates, if they are theirs.
This is a matter essentially for the Congress to take up, and
that without a moment’s delay. The situation is becoming intolerable.
It is the poor who are suffering. And the Congress will justify its
existence only if the voice of the poor does not go unheard with it.
The responsibility will be its if a single honest but poor Indian, having
rights of domicile, is turned away from the shores of Natal.
Indian Opinion, 20-7-1912

174. DR. MURISON’S LETTER
We print elsewhere Dr. Murison’s reply1 to our letter2 referred to
in our columns last week. We sympathize with Dr. Murison in his
troubles. But we venture to think that the worthy Doctor unconsciously exaggerates the incidents that have come under his notice. We
take leave to say that the other classes give him much the same trouble
that Indian patients do. We suggest to Dr. Murison that his work will
be no smoother by his flinging charges of lying against a whole
community. The only remedy is gentle yet firm handling of patients
who want to evade his department. If Indians suffering from small
pox concealed their disease, other Indians helped him to combat the
disease. No one can deplore more than we do the fact that there
should be any disease at all among Indians, or that, having contracted
an infectious disease, Indians should, in their ignorance or fear,
attempt to conceal it. But a serious charge, such as that of lying, cannot be sustained because of the painful experiences related by Dr.
Murison.
However, the community must feel thankful to Dr. Murison for
his frankness and for his evident desire to serve Indians as well as the
others. Those of us who claim to be responsible persons must see to it
that Dr. Murison receives all the help he may need in order to keep
the Borough free from disease and danger, from careless or timid
person disregarding or concealing any disease that may be suspected
1
Dr. Murison, Medical Officer of Health for the Borough of Durban, in the
course of his evidence before the Tuberculosis Commission, had stated that Indians
were given to lying. On this Gandhiji wrote to Dr. Murison on June 28, 1912, to
which the latter replied on July 10, 1912. He maintained that, in matters dealing with
public health and sanitation, “it is impossible to obtain truthful replies from this
race”. Indian Opinion, 20-7-1912. Vide also “Dr. Murison’s Charge”, 13-7-1912.
2
This letter by Gandhiji and also the others in the series are not available.

212

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to be infectious. It is no consolation to be able to refute a general
charge of lying. The real consolation can only be derived from efforts
being made to remove the smallest ground for making such a charge.
Indian Opinion, 20-7-1912

175. DR . MURISON’S CHARGE
Dr. Murison’s reply to our letter seeking his explanation
regarding the charge of lying he had brought against Durban Indians
deserves careful study. His explanation certainly does not substantiate
the charge of lying against the entire community. But we cannot just
sit back having put forward this defence. We must admit the
[individual] instances Dr. Murison has cited. For it is true that some
Indians habitually conceal [the incidence of infectious] diseases and
give false replies to the [inquiries of] officials. This habit must go.
Often men lie out of fear, and fear is the consequence of ignorance. If
ignorance goes, so will fear. And with the passing of fear [the habit
of] lying will vanish. For instance, if a case of smallpox is declared we
might be threatened with we know not what or we might be harassed
in hospital; so we conceal [the incidence of] the disease due to
ignorance of this kind and the fear arising from it. In fect, nobody is
going to hang us for it, and if we are spirited enough nobody can
harass us in the hospital either. Why then should we be afraid? Moreover, by lying we cannot [successfully] conceal a case of smallpox. If
anything, we should be afraid of telling a lie. Suppose we tell a lie and
conceal a patient and the matter comes to be known, we may be put to
shame, charged and even punished. Moreover, if we have concealed a
patient, we are likely [afterwards] to be harassed even at the hospital
and our relatives may also become involved. If we learn to view the
matter thus, there should be no cause for fear.
However, many of those who deceive the authorities are unlikely
to read these comments of ours. Thus, the responsibility rests solely
on the leaders. If we are truthful and remain so, and if we wish others
also to act; likewise, we can do much. It is the duty of the leaders to
keep in touch with the poorer section of the community, to point the
right path to them now and again and themselves follow it. If we do
this, there should be no occasion for a single charge against us.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 20-7-1912
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

213

176. LETTER TO REGISTRAR OF ASIATICS1
July 22, 1912
[THE R EGISTRAR OF ASIATICS
P RETORIA
SIR,]

I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the
13th instant. In reply, I beg to state that the inconvenience felt by
Indians who are waiting in the street outside your office is very
considerable. As you are aware, many have to wait for a long time,
and, apart from anything else, to be standing in the street indefinitely
must be extremely fatiguing, as, indeed, those who have been obliged
to wait there have so often complained to the British Indian Association. Moreover, they have no protection from the wind, sun or rain,
and often, when they are in any considerable number, it is difficult for
them to know where they should stand—on the pavement or in the
street—as, wherever they stood, they would be causing an obstruction.
In my humble opinion, as part of the public having to do business in a
public office, they are entitled to the same respectable accommodation
as is provided in all other public offices.2
M. K. GANDHI

Indian Opinion, 3-8-1912

1

This was sent in reply to a letter from M. Chamney, Registrar of Asiaitics,
dated July 13, which read: “With reference to the interview I had with you on the 11th
instant, I shall be obliged if you will put in a written statement regarding the
inconvenience to which Indians are put while waiting in the streets outside my office,
and setting forth what it is they desire.” Indian Opinion, 3-8-1912.
2
In reply to this, Chamney wrote on July 26: “. . . there is no special
accommodation available for the convenience of Asiatics who attend at my Office,
nor are there any funds available by which such special accommodation could be
furnished at the present time. With regard to the sentence which closes your
communication. I have the honour to state that I have ascertained that there are many
offices attended by the general public, including Europeans, where no special
accommodation is provided.” Indian Opinion, 3-8-1912.

214

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

177. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR
July 22, 1912
THE S ECRETARY FOR THE INTERIOR
P RETORIA
SIR,

I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your telegram and
letter of the 19th instant1 , for which I thank you.
I shall submit the names of six educated Indians for entry for
this year, in due course.2
I have, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From Indian Opinion, 27-7-1912; also typewritten office copy: S.N.5668

178. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR3
July 22, 1912
THE S ECRETARY FOR THE INTERIOR
P RETORIA
SIR,

Mr. R. M. Sodha is one of the British Indians admitted last year
in virtue of the settlement. As was mentioned by me last year, Mr.
Sodha intended to do business in the Transvaal for a living, but, as it
was thought legislation would be passed during the last session, Mr.
Sodha was publicly supported. But he naturally does not wish to
remain idle, and is anxious to take out a licence to trade. I take it that,
on the strength of the permit issued to him, he will be unable to take
out a licence. Will the Government, therefore, be pleased to authorize
1

Vide 1st footnote of “Letter to Minister of Interior”, 17-7-1912.
If Gandhiji did propose the names in a letter, it is not available.
3
M. Chamney, the Registrar of Asiatics, replied to this on August 1, saying,
“.. the settlement, as I understood it, was meant to allow six educated Asiatics per
annum to enter the Transvaal for the good and benefit of their compatriots, who had
not similar advantages of education . I do not think it was ever intended that the six
Indians should be allowed in here for their individual benefit . I shall be glad to have
your views.” S.N. 5682.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

215

the Receiver of Revenue to issue a licence to Mr. Sodha without production of a registration certificate.
I have, etc.,

[M. K. GANDHI]
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5669

179. THE SETTLEMENT PROLONGED
The correspondence1 between the Union Government and Mr.
Gandhi forms interesting reading. According to it, the Provisional
Settlement of last year2 continues pending the passing of satisfactory
legislation which the Government again intend introducing during the
next session. Meanwhile, six educated British Indians will be permitted
to enter the Transvaal Province as if the legislation had already been
passed. 3 This is all good . The correspondence avoids recrudescence
of passive resistance on the points in dispute.
But the indictment of Lord Ampthill, who has been, with tireless
zeal, championing our cause, remains unanswered.4 The gravamen of
His Lordship’s charge is that, though the letter of the settlement is
being kept, the spirit of it— indeed, General Botha’s public
declarations5 —require that the resident Indian population is allowed to
1

Between January 29 and July 17, 1912
Of May 20, 1911
3
Vide “Letter to Minister of Interior”, 17-7-1912.
4
For Lord Ampthill’s question on July 17, 1912 in the House of Lords
regarding the implementation of the Provisional Settlement, vide Appendix “Lord
Ampthill on Provisional Settlement in House of Lords”, 17-7-1912.
5
As early as 1909, Botha had assured Lord Curzon that he would treat British
Indians with liberality and justice; vide “Letter to Lord Curzon”, 27-1-1909.
Commenting on the Provisional Settlement on May 23, 1911, General Botha
declared that he was very satisfied with it and that it had come about at an opportune
time. While warning that only those Indians covered by the Settlement could enter
the country in future he promised he would make every effort to make the living
conditions of Asiatics as bearable as possible. Indeed, he said, he had no hostility
against them. Again, speaking at Rietfontein on September 26, 1911, having
returned from the Imperial Conference at London, he said that General Smuts “had
wasted away to a shadow” trying to settle the Asiatic question. In answer to a petition
which he claimed he had received and which demanded that all Indians be deported
from the country, he said the difficulty was “that under the British flag they had to act
according to British principles”.
2

216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

remain in South Africa in peace. But there can be no peace so long as
wives, recognized by Indian laws, are turned away, the Gold law1 and
the Townships Act 2 are administered so as to bring virtual ruin to
Indian merchants, residents of long standing are being forced out of
Locations pointed out to them, residential title-deeds are disregarded,
impossible proofs demanded as to marriages or domicile,3 and trade
made well-nigh impracticable by a tyrannical administration of
licensing legislation.4
Indian Opinion, 27-7-1912

1

Vide “Extract from Letter to Maud Polak”, 5-4-1911 and Appendix “Polak’s
Letter to India Government on Gold Law and Townships Act (1908)”, 19-4-1912.
2
Indians living in “proclaimed areas” or other places where they had built up
flourishing businesses were being forced into Locations either by virtue of the Gold
Law or the Townships Act. The areas immediately affected were Klerksdorp (“Extract
from Letter to Maud Polak”, 5-4-1911), Krugersdorp (“The Storm Gathering”,
12-8-1911), Roodepoort and Germiston (“Germiston Indians”, 23-9-1911).
3
As far as the Transvaal is concerned Gandhiji is referring to the sweeping
powers proposed in the 1912 Union legislation for Immigration officials who would
have rights unlimited by the jurisdiction of courts in determining who would have
rights unlimited by the jurisdiction of courts in determining the domiciliary rights of
would-be Indian immigrants. As for proof of marriage, although it was from the
Transvaal that Mrs. Sodha, Bai Rasul and Mrs. Jussat were turned away by virtue of
very stringent judicial interpretations on the sanctity of marriages contracted under
the law of other religions, Gandhiji here seems to have in mind the Natal circular
issued only a few days previously by Cousins and referred to in 1st and 2nd footnote
of “The New Broom”, 13-7-1912.
4
While concurring in changes proposed by General Smuts, consequent on
Indians’ opposition, in the Union immigration legislation of 1911 and 1912,
Gandhiji reserved the right of Indians to agitate about their other grievances (this
article is a fairly exhaustive list of these); vide “Telegram to Minister of Interior”,
8-2-1912, also “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 7-4-1911 and “At Last”, 27-5-1911.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

217

180. THE GERMISTON INDIANS
The Germiston Municipality has evidently succeeded in ruining
the Indians living in its Location. After the case of Kalasing v. the
Municipality, several Indian buildings have been pulled down by the
Municipality. And now the following characteristic notice has been
served upon several Indians suspected of trading in the Location:
It has been reported that you are selling groceries, etc., at premises on
Stand—, at Georgetown Location. Now I am instructed to obtain evidence in
support of this report. An attempt will be made to trap you, which, if
successful, you will know what to expect.

What they are to expect is virtual confiscation of their buildings.
And thus the Municipality expects to send the Indians, by a process of
slow starvation, to the dung-heaps they have chosen for the new Location. Law 3 of 1885 specially authorizes Indian trade in Locations.
But now, even this is being successfully prevented by the Germiston
Municipality.
Indian Opinion, 27-7-1912

218

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

181. THE BOKSBURG CASE1
The result of the judgment2 in Mr. Bhyat’s case is that trade of
1

Amod Moosa Bhyat, a well-known Heidelberg merchant who had earlier
suffered arrests and financial privation as a passive resister, opened a store in
Boksburg on November 6, 1911, in premises registered in L. W. Ritch’s name. The
Europeans of Boksburg, an East Rand centre which had hitherto allowed no Asiatic to
trade in the town, called a meeting on November 8, and protested against the advent
of Asiatic competition. A few days earlier the East Rand Express had styled Bhyat as
an “astute invader” who, with the help of Ritch and his “influential European friends
in England”, was forcing a test case and promised that the local whites would fight “to
the last ditch”. An editorial in Indian Opinion, 4-11-1911, agreed that the “clear-cut
issue” was whether British Indians could trade or pursue their crafts outside “coolie
Locations”. The Transvaal leader, too, took up the cry of white self-preservation and
the European Press spoke of an “Asiatic invasion” and declared that European traders
could never compete with the Asiatics with their “primitive mode of existence”,
“Oriental ingenuity” and “inferior standard of civilization”. This meeting passed
three resolutions, demanding that: (a) action should be taken against Bhyat under
Section 131 of the Gold Law; (b) the condition under which the leasehold of Ritch’s
property was converted into a freehold—that no Coloured person should reside
thereon or trade therein—should be enforced; and (c) municipal facilities be denied to
Bhyat by the Town Council. The Town Council, in its meeting of November 22,
1911, was faced with more extreme amendments to these resolutions and was called
upon to instruct the Receiver of Revenue to cancel all existing Asiatic trade licences.
In its meeting of December 8, the Town Council, however, rescinded its amendments
having meanwhile taken legal advice and forwarded the resolutions to the
Government. Meanwhile, the Mayor and the Chairman of the Committee of the Town
Council had met General Smuts in deputation and he assured them that the
Government would take immediate steps regarding the stands occupied by Coloured
persons in Boksburg. On January 12, 1912 the Government served a notice on Ritch
through their lawyers asking him to surrender the crown Grant of August 21, 1911
which gave him freehold of the Stands since he had “violated the conditions of Grant
by permitting Coloured persons... to reside on the Stands”. On February 12, 1912,
the Supreme Court (Transvaal Division) issued summonses against Ritch and Bhyat
following an application by the Government and hearing commenced on June 7. The
Minister of Justice had moved the Supreme Court for a declaration that the plaintiff
was entitled to the ownership of the said Stand since the defendant had refused to
cancel the transfer deed and to deliver up the possession of the Stand. Indian Opinion,
4-11-1911 to 13-7-1912.
2
In his judgment Justice Moson declared that Ritch was bound by the
conditions under which the Deed of Transfer of Crown land was effected, that is, by
the relevant provisions of the Townships Act and the Gold Law. The Union of South
Africa were therefore entitled to cancel the Deed of Transfer of these 3 Stands and to
order Ritch to deliver up possession of all these. They were furthermore entitled to
eject Bhyat, the second defendant. The plaintiff was entitled to the costs of the
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

219

British Indian merchants, living within the gold areas, has been
rendered not worth a day’s purchase. The East Rand Express has
already advised the other municipalities to take action similar to thatof
Boksburg and force the hand of the Government. It is certainly now
open to the latter to institute proceedings in respect of landed
property in gold areas occupied by British Indian merchants. It is,
therefore, of the greatest importance that the Bhyat case should be
fought to a finish. The Union Government assured the Imperial
Government that the Town-ships Act was not directly aimed at British
Indians or other Asiatics, and that there was no clause in it specially
affecting them.1 We now see that, if the judgment given by the
Transvaal Bench remains unreversed, the Townships Act has to be
read in conjunction with the Gold Law,2 and the combined effect of
action. Ritch had contended that the original lease, taken out in 1896, contained no
provision against Coloured persons occupying the land. As for the conditions in
which leasehold was converted into freehold (that is, that the Stand should not be
transferred to any Coloured person), they had been promulgated by Regulation and
could not be enforced against persons of non-European descent for, being a
differential provision operating against Asiatics only and not Europeans (that is to
say, since it was “class legislation”), it required the “previous instruction” of His
Majesty under Section 39(a) of the Letters Patent (Transvaal). Indian Opinion, 13-71912. Vide also Appendix “Union Ministers’ Minutes for Union Government
Regarding Townships Amendment Act (1908)”, 16-6-1911 in which Smuts had argued
in 1911 that the Townships Act did not bear on such cases.
1
Vide Appendix “Union Ministers’ Minutes for Union Government Regarding
Townships Amendment Act (1908)”, 16-6-1911.
2
While Law 3 of 1885 did prohibit a Transvaal Asiatic from owning landed
property outside Locations, it did not prevent a European from doing so on his behalf
whether in perpetual leasehold or freehold. In 1905, the Transvaal Supreme Court
“definitely recognized these equitable trusts as between nominal European owners and
Asiatic virtual owners” (case of Syed Ismail and Another v. Jacobs cited by Maud
Polak). The effect of the Townships Amendment Act and the Gold Law of 1908 was to
annul these confirmed rights. Under the Townships Act, Part II, Chapter 3, Section
9(1), leaseholds of all Stands in Stands Townships were automatically converted into
freehold on the payment of a licence fee. The lessor or owner was admittedly not
obliged to take out a freehold title. If he did so, Section 130 of the Gold Law of 1908,
prohibiting the subletting of premises or the residence of Asiatics thereon, came into
force. Obviously, in cases where the property was held in trust, the Indian could not
himself take out a freehold owing to the prohibition on “Coloured ownership”. If the
nominal European owner did so, he became liable under the Townships Act, Chapter
3, Section 3(1), to criminal prosecution, and his property would become forfeit to the
Government, under Sections 130 and 131 of the Gold Law of 1908, which was
brought into operation in such cases. It happened in cases where the laws were read
together. That is, he could not then allow a Coloured person other than a domestic
servant to reside on Township properties. Moreover, when such property passed at

220

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the two Acts is such that the Township Act virtually becomes class
legislation1 . Whilst, therefore, it is necessary to take the matter to the
highest court of appeal, it is equally necessary for the British Indians
in the Transvaal to realize and understand that the courts of justice in
matters of this character cannot possibly finally decide the position. In
the event of the highest court of appeal upholding the decision, they
will have to move in order to secure an amendment of both these laws.
Mr. Bhyat cannot be expected to undertake the burden of
appealing. The whole community is in duty bound to come to the
rescue. The decision in this case is of general application. We hope,
therefore, that British Indians of means will not hesitate to support the
proceedings now being taken by giving donations towards the
expenses.
Indian Opinion, 27-7-1912

the death of the owner to the heirs the conversion of a leasehold into a freehold was
made compulsory. So much so that, at the death of a nominal European owner, the
property of the equitable owner would pass out of his hands. As Lord Ampthill said,
this was how the Townships Amendment Act (Act 34 of 1908) and the Transvaal Gold
Law (Act 35 of 1908) provided “in a subtle and indirect manner” that the same
prohibitions and penalties as were prescribed by the Gold Law in ‘proclaimed areas’
shall apply in the case of public Townships also. The effect of both these laws was to
force, after January 1, 1909, the entire Transvaal Indian population, whether in
Townships or in “proclaimed areas”, into Locations. The British Government had
opposed this policy before and after the Boer War, but had assented to it in 1908.
(Lord Ampthill’s letter to the British Press, Indian Opinion, 28-10-1911, Maud
Polak’s letter on behalf of the SABI Committee to the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, July 29, 1911, C. O. 551/22 and “Mr. Polak’s Statement”, Indian Opinion,
9-12-1911 & 16-12-1911).
1
Gandhiji had always objected to class legislation, that is, legislation which
sought to place differential restrictions on any minority among British subjects
which did not have political franchise. As Indians had become members of the Empire
by virtue of Queen Victoria’s Proclamation, the constitutions of Natal and the
Transvaal (which became self-governing in 1893 and 1908, respectively) contained a
special provision to the effect that any discriminatory legislation directed against
British Indians as a class would require special royal assent. For Gandhiji’s references
to class legislation, vide, for instance, Vol. VI, “Interview to The Morning Leader”,
20-10-1906 & “A Retrospect”, 29-12-1906.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

221

182. LETTER TO MANSUKH1
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

Ashadh Shukla 14 [July 27, 1912] 2
DEAR SHRI MANSUKH,

I have your letter, I sent you a cable 3 regarding Mr. Manila
Doctor. As there was no reply, I concluded that you were not willing
to release him. For some other reasons also, Manilalji decided to go to
Fiji. He left the Cape on last Friday. A cable4 was sent to you. He will
go there via Australia.
I hope you will all be happy about it and will make Manilalji
quite comfortable. The arrangements for his board and lodging
should, for the time being, be made by the people there.
If all the friends there encourage him, Manilalji will certainly
settle there.
If you feel like writing again, please do.
With due regards from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi original in Gandhiji’s hand: G.N. 2553

183. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

July 28, 1912
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

I was delighted to receive you cable 5 . Everybody has been
enquiring about the date of your arrival. I hope that you will be able
to give us at least a month. Indian Associations from all the principal
1

This is the first Hindi letter of Gandhiji’s to appear in The Collected Works.
Manilal Doctor, referred to in the letter, left for Fiji from Cape Town on July
26, 1912. The letter was therefore written in 1912.
3
Not available
4
Not available
5
Of July 25, 1912; he had said he was sailing on October 5.
2

222

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

towns are most eager to have you in their midst.
If you are accompanied by your secretary or anyone else, I
take it you will kindly inform me of the fact.
Need I say that yours will be a royal progress through S. A.
I hope that you have greatly benefited by the change. I was
rather anxious when I heard from Miss Polak that you were for some
days under medical orders not to receive anybody.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
[G. K. GOKHALE
ENGLAND]
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: G.N. 3772

184. LETTER TO REGISTRAR OF ASIATICS
[LAWLEY, ]

July 29, 1912
[SIR,]

I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter1 of the
26th instant. In my humble opinion, want of funds cannot be
considered a sufficient answer by a great Government to the request
of a section of the public for some reasonable accommodation in a
public office.
I am afraid that the closing part of my letter has not been
understood. I did not wish to convey that there was any special, that is,
extraordinary, accommodation for the general public in the other
public offices, but is was submitted, as it is submitted now, that there is
always sufficient accommodation for the public in other public
offices. I certainly know of no offices where the public are compelled
to wait on the foot-paths or public roads, as they have to in connection
with your office.
M. K. GANDHI

Indian Opinion, 3-8-1912

1

Vide 2nd footnote of “Letter to Registrar of Asiatics”, 22-7-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

223

185. SPEECH AT JOHANNESBURG BANQUET TO
V. A. CHETTIAR 1
August 1, 1912
The worst days of the Indian passive resistance struggle in the Transvaal were
recalled last night [August 1], and a warning was given by Mr. Gandhi to the people
who voluntarily underwent imprisonment with hard labour at the time, to be in
readiness for a possible repetition of their sufferings.
It was at a banquet given in honour of Mr. V. A. Chettiar, ... who is now on the
eve of returning to Madras.
Mr. Gandhi, called upon by Mr. Hosken, as the teacher and prophet of passive
resistance, warned his hearers that the great struggle in South Africa was by no means
ended. It was, he said, only in suspense, and it might be that the community might
again be called upon to undergo much suffering.
Proceeding to propose “The Guests”, Mr. Gandhi paid a warm tribute to Mr.
Hosken and other Europeans present, and said it was due largely to them that they
were all gathered at that table on terms—might he say—of equality. To his mind
equality should be a matter of course in every civilized country, and especially in
every Christian community; but, labouring as they did under terrible difficulties and
terrible prejudices, it was a matter for congratulations when any sort of equality could
be attained.

The Transvaal Leader, 2-8-1912

186. THE GERMISTON LOCATION
We publish elsewhere the report of Dr. F. Arnold, the Acting
Medical Officer of Health for the Union, on the proposed site for a
new Asiatic Bazaar in Germiston. The report, in our opinion, is a
special pleading for the site chosen by the Town Council. Dr.
Macnab’s strong remarks have been brushed aside. It is true that some
of the objections have been withdrawn by Dr. Machab. But the main
objection—that the Location is to be near a depositing site and a site
where anthrax animals have been buried—remains. The fact of Dr.
1

The banquet was arranged by the Tamil community of Johannesburg on the
occasion of Chettiar’s departure for India and was attended by about 300 guests
including a number of Europeans sympathetic to the Indian cause. Rev. Dr. Ross,
Rev. Doke and Hosken also spoke.

224

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Arnold having laid down certain conditions under which only the site
can be passed medically shows, too, that Dr. Macnab’s strictures were
quite justified. It must not, again, be forgotten that even the very
ground where night-soil has been deposited is part of the site chosen
by the Germiston Municipality. No doubt, from a purely scientific
standpoint, it is a consolation that this portion of the Location is not to
be used for building purposes for some time to come, but, in matters
of this character, a favourable medical report cannot become a
conclusive answer to the various objections raised. An old cemetery,
form a medical standpoint, may be a good enough site for habitation,
but, from other perfectly justifiable points of view, it may be a totally
undesirable site. As we have already pointed out, it is a curious
circumstance that, for Asiatic Bazaars and Native Locations, Municipalities always succeed in finding the most favourable spots near
depositing sites. All we can say is that the Indians of Germiston
decline to remove to this wretched spot, notwithstanding the
favourable report given by Dr. Arnold. We are aware that they will
require to have more than ordinary grit in refusing to remove to this
site. The Municipality has made it well-nigh impossible for them to
remain in the old Location, because all trade there is entirely stopped.
Several buildings have been razed to the ground, and the Municipality
have threatened to do likewise with the other buildings, if their owners
are caught is the act of trading in the Location. We hope that, no
matter what difficulties they have to face, the Indians in Germiston will
take up a firm stand and decline to fall into the trap prepared by the
Municipality.
Indian Opinion, 3-8-1912

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

225

187. LETTER TO SECRETARY TO MINISTER OF
INTERIOR1
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

August 3, 1912
[TO

THE ] S ECRETARY TO THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR
C APE TOWN
SIR,

I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 1st instant No. 34/E/15330. I have not before me the letter of the
22nd ultimo referred to by you, but I believe it is my letter2 addressed
to the Secretary for the Interior regarding Mr. Sodha and I am
replying from the farm as the matter is rather urgent.
In my humble opinion there was no question as to whether the
educated Indians who might enter did so for their individual benefit
or otherwise; they were to be highly educated men required for the
wants of the community. I imagine that after the legislation is passed
such men up to the number understood will enter on their own merits.
Those who have fought for the principle of legal equality have
assumed that highly educated Indians would certainly serve their
community while serving themselves. The cases of those who are
admitted last year were specially discussed by me with Mr. Lane. I
then expressed the hope that while I could give no guarantee that they
would not trade—all but Mr.Sodha would not, I told him—that Mr.
Sodha was a pre-war resident,—of three years’ standing and that he
certainly intended to trade, but Mr. Sodha’s trading does not by any
means imply that he will be lost to the community; it was certainly
expected that all who entered the Transvaal as educated men would
earn their living by following some independent calling among their
1
To this the Registrar of Asiatics replied on August 16: “. . . until legislation
has been passed validating the residence here of the specially exempted educated
Asiatics, it will not be lawful for Receivers of Revenue to issue General Dealers
Licences in their favour. I regret that I am unable in consequence to issue orders to any
Receiver of Revenue to issue a trading licence to Mr. Sodha, who is meanwhile only
residing in the Transvaal on a temporary permit.” S. N. 5696.
2
Vide “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 22-7-1912.

226

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

own compatriots. I hope that an early decision will be arrived at regarding Mr. Sodha. May I trouble you to send me a copy of this letter as
I have not been able to copy it myself.
I have etc.,

[M. K. GANDHI]
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy: S. N. 5697

188. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO BALEBEHN VORA AND
CHANCHALBEHN GANDHI
[After August 3, 1912] 1
CHI. BALI AND CHANCHI,

I have letters from you both.
A part of the blame at least for Rami’s fractured hand should, I
think, go to you. But such accidents always occur. If we are destined
to survive, God saves us even from these.
Chi. Veni2 writes to me to say that Chanchi now wants to come
over here. She should know that she is free to come whenever she
likes. I allowed her to go, believing as I did, and as I still do, that she
would feel she was happier there and that Harilal too would feel
likewise. That is why she is there. As to when I shall be able to go
there, it is impossible at present to say. I do not think I can leave
before the Act is passed at any rate.
It is good news that Kanti is growing stronger. My advice is that
no foreign foods be brought into the house. My experience of them
has been bad. I am more convinced each day that almost all these
foods are objectionable.
Bali has done well in taking up the study of Sanskrit. If ever it is
my good fortune to go to India and I have to take up my work there, I
intend to use Bali’s services fully.
Manilal, Ramdas and Devdas are on the farm. Jayakunvar, Dr.
Mehta’s daughter, is also with me. She is a great help to me in
teaching the children. You must have read in Indian Opinion that her
1

Manilal Doctor, referred to in the last paragraph, sailed for Fiji from Cape
Town on July 26, 1912, but the information was published only in Indian Opinion of
3-8-1911. (The news-item because of a printing error mentions the 20th as the date of
the departure.) This letter must, therefore, have been written some time after August 3.
2
Wife of Jayashanker Vyas, a Pretoria Indian
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

227

husband has gone to Fiji. 1 Chi. Jamnadas, too, is with me. Ani is
likewise on the Farm. Devibehn2 . . .3
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S.N. 9530

189. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
TOLSTOY F ARM,

August 4, 1912
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

Many thanks for your long letter 4 . I would not dream of
having you here at the cost of your after-cure. But I assume that you
would be able to complete your cure before sailing for S.A. Roughly
this is likely to be the programme, subject to your consent: 22nd &
23rd Oct. at Cape Town, 25th & 26th at Kimberley, 27th at
Johannesburg. I take it that most of the time will be passed in Jo’burg.
Two days may be given to Pretoria. Unless you cable to the contrary I
propose to ask General Botha & Mr. Fischer5 to receive you. If Lord
Gladstone returns by that time I propose asking him also. I shall ask

1

In his “Letter to Dr. Pranjivan Mehta”, pp. 169-71, Gandhiji discussed his
views on Manilal Doctor’s plans for the future—whether he should return to his
public work in Mauritius or stay on in the Transvaal. On April 29, Gandhiji wrote to
Lane presumably asking him if Manilal Doctor could be admitted to the Transvaal as
one of the six educated Asiatics who were to be permitted to enter the Colony each
year under the Provisional Settlement: but this letter is not available. In his reply of
May 3 (S.N.5649), Lane said that, pending legalization of the Settlement, he could
only issue Manilal Doctor a temporary permit. On July 8, Gandhiji wrote in his
“Diary, 1912” that M. Doctor did not really want to go to Fiji but added a few days
later that he had sailed for Fiji on July 26.
2
Ada West
3
The rest of the letter is missing.
4
Of July 27, 1912; vide Appendix “Gokhale’s Letter to Gandhiji”, 27-7-1912.
5
Abraham Fischer; Premier of the Orange River Colony, December 1907-May
1910, he became Union Minister for Lands following the formation of the Union of
1910. Some time in June 1912, after the Defence Bill (Act 13 of 1912) had been
passed, Smuts relinquished charge of the Ministry of Interior and took over Finance
while still retaining the portfolios of Defence and Mines. On this Eric Walker (A
History of South Africa, p. 542) remarks “... Botha had to rearrange the portfolios in
a way which detracted from his ministry’s efficiency and enhanced the power of his
two Free State colleagues.” These were Hertzog and Abraham Fischer and the latter
took over the Ministry of Interior from Smuts. These cabinet changes were not
noticed in the columns of Indian Opinion. Fischer piloted the 1913 Immigration Bill
through the Union Parliament.

228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Mr. Merriman1 to receive you. He is the greatest statesman of
S.A.Addresses will be presented at all the places named by me. It is
also the intention to have a mixed banquet in Johannesburg. Probably
the Mayor will preside. The last week of your stay will be in Durban
and Phoenix. You will sail from Durban. Your passage for India may
conveniently be booked after your arrival.
I have first sketched the programme so that if you wished to
propose any change you could do so by cable as also by letter.
It would be no calamity if Mr. Fischer goes back upon Gen.
Smuts’ promise. It can only strengthen our cause. But I hardly think
it is possible for the Union Government to do so. What is quite likely
is that the Parliament (local) may not pass the Govt. Bill. The Govt.
May not make it a point of honour and simply tell us as also the
Imperial Govt. that they are helpless. In that event the struggle will be
bitter and fierce; but it will go on so long as some of us have a spark
of life left in us.
Mr. Sorabji is now there and I dare say he has already paid his
respects to you.
How very nice of Mr. Tata to have given Rs. 25,000 again. 2 I
know that I owe it all to you. Each time the donations have arrived in
the nick of time. It was becoming a difficult question to conduct the
farm.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: G.N. 3773
1

John Xavier Merriman ; English-born farmer, “South African by adoption”,
he was according to Eric Walker (op. cit. p. 535), “the Cape Parliament with all its
honourable traditions in the flesh” and “cultured, eloquent, imposing” “with a great
knowledge of men and of affairs”; Treasurer in Rhodes’ first cabinet, 1890-93, and
Premier of the Cape Colony, February, 1908-May, 1910, he was the only serious
rival to Botha for the Union premiership in 1910. In 1901, he accompanied Sauer to
England to urge on the Imperial Government the case for a South African federation;
went again in 1909 to discuss the formation of the Union, travelling on board s.s.
Kenilworth Castle as a fellow-passenger of the Indian Deputation. Gandhiji, who met
him during the voyage, found him “full of sympathy for the satyagrahi prisoners”,
but later he regretted his inability to keep his promise to Gandhiji about helping with
the Transvaal Indian problem; vide Vol. IX, “Deputation’s Voyage (I)”, after 23-61909, “Deputation’s Voyage (II)”, before 9-7-1909, & “Letter to H. S. L. Polak”, 227-1909. Indian Opinion (Golden Number, 1906-14) describes him as “a consistent
champion of fair play to Indians”.
2
For earlier donations by Tata, vide 1st footnote of “Public Letter to Ratan J.
Tata”, 1-4-1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

229

190. MR. TATA’S MUNIFICENCE
Mr. Ratan Tata has outdone himself. At the Sheriff’s meeting 1
held at Bombay on the 31st ultimo and presided over by Sir Jamsetji,
it was announced that Mr. Tata had given a third contribution of
Rs. 25,000 to the Transvaal passive resistance fund. The total given by
Mr. Tata there fore amounts to £5,000—a fortune in itself. Mr Petit
has already cabled to Mr. Gandhi £1,500. Mr. Tata’s munificence
shows not only his large-heartedness, but also his keen appreciation of
the struggle. Mr. Tata has laid the passive resisters, as also the whole
Indian community of South Africa, under deep obligation. He has
made the lot of passive resisters easy; and the fact that there are at the
back of the struggle such distinguished Indians, encourages those who
are engaged in it, and probably brings them nearer their goal. The
moral effect of such help on those who, from prejudice, are opposed
to us, is also obvious.
Indian Opinion, 10-8-1912

191. THE SHERIFF’S MEETING
A meeting called by a Sheriff in India is equivalent to a meeting
called, say, by the Mayor in Durban. The term Sheriff has a meaning
different from what we understand by it in South Africa. The
Sheriff’s position is honorary and it is conferred upon the most
distinguished citizens in India. Those of our readers who do not know
India much, will now understand what the public meeting recently
held in Bombay and called by the Sheriff means. The meeting
naturally represented the voice of all the sections of the Bombay
public. Its resolutions must, therefore, carry weight. The meeting very
properly took up the whole question of the status of our countrymen
settled in the British Colonies. East African Europeans want to hound
our countrymen out of the British East African Protectorate. They
donot even realize that, if Indians withdrew from it, the country would
soon become a howling wilderness. Canada will not allow the wives of
1

This meeting, held on August 1, protested against the treatment of Indians
in the colonies, particularly in South Africa, East Africa and Canada; approved a
memorandum to the Indian government for transmission to the Marquess of Crewe,
condemning the continuance of the indentured labour system; and sent a message of
encouragement to South African Indians, strongly approving the forthcoming visit
of Gokhale to that country.

230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

domiciled Indians to join their husbands, thus disregarding every
canon of decency and fair play. It is possible to understand prejudice
against successful rivals, but it is impossible to appreciate selfishness
run mad, as it has in Canada—the oldest and most civilized among
British Colonies.
The meeting presided over by the Parsee Baronet dealt with all
these questions. We, who are living in far-off lands, have a right to
look up to the motherland for help. As time goes [by] and knowledge
of the condition of the emigrant spreads more generally in India, the
volume of sympathy there increases.
For all this great work of education, we have, primarily, to thank
Mr. Polak for his persistent and tactful advocacy. There is hardly a
town of importance which Mr. Polak has not visited, hardly a public
man he has not seen; hardly a newspaper he has not instructed. The
Sheriff’s meeting was by no means the most important result of his
work. It is fortunate that we have a worker of Mr. Polak’s stamp in
our ranks.
Indian Opinion, 10-8-1912

192. INVALID REGULATIONS
A Boksburg Indian1 was defended by Mr. Ritch the other day in
the Magistrate’s Court for a breach of municipal regulations, in that
he was conducting a compound where Natives were kept as tenants.
The accused was convicted. Mr. Ritch appealed. Mr. Gregorowski
argued the appeal and the conviction has been set aside, the Court
holding that the regulations were ultra vires. This is an important
decision. Many Indians would have been seriously affected if the
regulations had been held to be valid.
Indian Opinion, 10-8-1912

1

Moses. He was convicted for contravening Section 38 of the Boksburg
Public Health Bye-laws. On appeal being preferred, the judge declared that the bye-law
was not valid inasmuch as it discriminated as between Europeans and Coloured
persons, for which there was no authority in the enabling law, and he set aside the
conviction. Indian Opinion, 10-8-1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911- 8 MARCH, 1913

231

193. THE HON. MR. GOKHALE
It is for the first time that an Indian such as the Hon. Mr.
Gokhale is visiting this country. He has helped us much. We can never
thank him enough for his work in regard to the abolition of
indenture. It was again through his efforts that we received substantial
contributions for the satyagraha fund. He has strong sympathy for the
satyagrahis. He has helped Mr. Polak considerably. He wields much
influence in the Indian Legislative Council.
Mr. Gokhale is visiting this country specifically to study the
conditions of Indians here and he will meet local officials. He will be
President of the forthcoming session of the [Indian National]
Congress.
For these reasons, even from the standpoint of self-interest, it is
but fitting that
(1) we should give him a big welcome;
(2) in doing so we should raise no issues about Hindus and Muslims;
(3) individual associations, welcome though they are to give
receptions in his honour, should bear in mind that he is an Indian
above all;
(4) he should [therefore] be treated as the guest of the entire
[Indian] community in South Africa.
(5) If we want it to appear that he is a Hindu, Muslims should take
the lead in honouring him, that being the only way to promote
fraternal relations between the two sections [of the community];
(6) For welcoming Mr. Gokhale we need to raise a large sum of
money.
(7) In the interest of our prestige, and for the sake of the work for
which he is coming here, we would do well to put him up in a
decent place.
(8) Even where there is disunity and public bodies refuse to come
together on the same platform, unity should prevail on this
occasion.
An occasion such as this will not recur. The efforts we make and
the unity we display on this occasion will stand us in good stead
forever.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 10-8-1912
232

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

194. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
Shravan Sud 4 [August 16, 1912] 1
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

Ba has been seriously ill 2 , Ani is passing through a crisis and
Kisan has been none too well. All the three are practically bedridden. Being occupied with this, I can do nothing else. At night,
Kisan and Nagin 4 share the bed with me, so that I don’t get much
sleep either. Gokuldas5 , who is here, has his bed beside Ani’s. All the
three patients, I think, are on the way to recovery, though not
completely out of danger yet.
The error in the figure for the Famine [Relief Fund] has been
found. It now remains for me to go through the thing. I shall send the
figure by and by. I got Popat’s letter. I have got everything that you
sent. Your letter is not with me at the moment and hence I cannot
recollect the items in the list you sent.
The booklet6 about Prof. Gokhale should be as good as you can
make it. I can only ask you to do what we ourselves do here. Saturdays and Sundays may be availed of for this work. Anyone who wants
to may help. Here, Devibehn and Mr. Kotwal have been of invaluable
assistance. Devibehn starts work at seven [in the morning] and goes on
till nine at night. She cooks her own meals and eats them hurriedly,
standing. Mr. Kotwal gets up at three in the morning to cook for those
keeping the roza 7 . Jeki has greatly improved in health now. She too,
therefore, makes herself quite useful. All of you having joined in
spoiling Jamnadas’s health, he cannot give of his best, though he is
3

1

Kasturba Gandhi and Ani Desai’s illness referred to in the letter are both
mentioned in “Diary, 1912”. Moreover it was during 1912 that Kotwal worked as a
member of the Tolstoy Farm. In that year Shravan Sud 4 corresponds to August 16.
2
She and Ani fell ill on the 11th.
3
Son of Ani and Purshottamdas Desai.
4
Son of Ani and Purshottamdas Desai
5
Son of Parmananddas Gandhi, Gandhiji’s cousin
6
The Hon. Mr. Gokhale and the Indenture System, which contained a brief
sketch of Gokhale’s public career and a full report of the debate on the resolution
moved by him in the Viceroy’s Legislative Council, Calcutta. The booklet was being
published by Phoenix to mark the occasion of Gokhale’s proposed visit to South
Africa.
7
The fast that Muslims keep during Ramzan.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

233

willing enough. He is always suffering from one ailment or another.
While there, he let himself go in the matter of food, and all of you, in
your affection, allowed him this liberty. He is suffering the consequences now, as he himself admits. He has, on his own, described [to
me] all the liberties he took. It is possible that I may be able to go
there in September.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
I have Devibehn’s help, but that has not reduced my work. I
have to be careful still, because of fear on Ba’s account. I shall have
some time to myself only after she has got used to things. However,
about sending the account, I have it on my mind all the time. I shall
send along with it the papers about Devibehn also.
Lallubhai simply wants to get the most he can out of his book.
By all means let him. Why did you publish the matter advertising it in
the news columns?
Remember that we are not to publish anything relating to the
Hindu Conference. Not even its advertisement material, if received.
You must have seen that the whole thing is a humbug.
I am not in a position to leave immediately to look into the
affairs of the [Natal Indian] Congress.
Mr. West’s statement of expenses on fare, etc., is all right. He is
not to be asked to reimburse the amount. He has drawn nothing here.
Manilal Doctor may be going to Fiji to keep his promise. He is
in no position to start legal practice immediately. He can do so only
after the new law has been passed.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S.N. 5710

195. SMALLPOX IN JOHANNESBURG
We invite the attention of the Johannesburg Indians to the
extracts 1 we give from the Sunday Post in connection with the second
1

Dr. Porter, Medical Officer of Health, said in the course of an interview:
“Judging by past experience, the remedy for such outbreaks lies in the segregation of
white and Coloured in the city. . . .What is wanted by the Council is the power to
force all Coloured people—Malays, Indians, Cape Coloureds and Chinese[—] to
reside in fixed Locations. At present the Council has no such power, while the
Provincial Council...is also powerless.” Indian Opinion, 17-8-1912.

234

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

outbreak of smallpox in Johannesburg. So far, Indians appear to have
remained immune, but it is none the less their duty to help the
authorities by removing all causes that might lead to an outbreak
among themselves. There is, in that article, the suggestion that we do
not conform to the laws of sanitation. The best way to meet this
charge is, without doubt, that we put our houses in perfect order. We
ought not to wait for prosecutions or notices before we observe the
ordinary rules of sanitation. Dr. Porter is reported to have said to an
interviewer that some houses in the heart of Johannesburg deserve
nothing but total destruction, and that they are being inhabited by
Indians, as also others including many Europeans. We feel that
Indians residing within that area should at once set about vacating
such houses, where they are not capable of proper repair, and they will
find that, although it may cost them a little more in rent, the extra cost
would be more than made up for in times of panic and by the people
themselves keeping better health. Dr. Porter deserves, and is entitled to
all the help that can be given to him in his war against the dreaded
disease.
Indian Opinion, 17-8-1912

196. SMALLPOX IN JOHANNESBURG
Smallpox has again broken out in Johannesburg. Once the
disease appears in a large and crowded city like Johannesburg, It is
difficult to stamp it out quickly or [even] to check it. The
news of the outbreak has therefore created a panic and thousands
of people rush to get themselves vaccinated against smallpox. In
order to control the epidemic, however, the chief thing is to prevent
the contagion from spreading. Stress has therefore been laid on
segregating the various communities, and the question of obtaining
the necessary powers is also being considered. When segregation is
being considered, the proposal, needless to say, is bound to include
the Indians. It will be impossible to raise the issue of racial
discrimination if it is proposed to segregate Indians in Locations
because of the epidemic. It cannot also be denied that our people,
more than others, withhold information about [the incidence of] the
disease with the result that the contagion spreads further. Thus, the
outbreak of the epidemic will provide an occasion for some serious
suggestions to be made which, we want the Indians to note, it will be
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

235

almost impossible to oppose. Though the epidemic did not originate
this time with Indians and though only a few cases appear to have
occurred among them, they should not be any the less careful in the
matter. Dr. Porter has stated that some of the houses in the central part
[of the city], occupied by Indians and others, are so dirty that they
should really be burnt down. It is the duty of the Indians [concerned]
to vacate the houses forthwith and take up residence elsewhere. And
they should maintain the utmost cleanliness in the new houses. Even if
this means their having to incur some expenditure, it will be worth
while doing so. The community should extend its full co-operation to
the Medical Officer. If it shows itself to be negligent, the severest
possible measures will be taken against it in the name of the epidemic.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 17-8-1912

197. LETTER TO REGISTRAR OF ASIATICS
[LAWLEY, ]

August 19, 1912
THE R EGISTRAR OF ASIATICS
P RETORIA
SIR,

I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter1 of the
18th instant. I hope to be able to forward the list of six British Indians
at an early date. Consultations are now being held as to the names, the
fittest to be submitted out of the many received.
I have, etc.,
From the typewritten office copy: S.N. 5699

1

This letter is not available; vide, however, 1st footnote “Letter to Minister
of Interior”, 17-7-1912.

236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

198. INTERVIEW TO “THE TRANSVAAL LEADER”
JOHANNESBURG ,

August 22, 1912
Although Mr. M. K. Gandhi is not resident in Johannesburg at the present
time, he continues to keep in close touch with public affairs, in so far as they affect
his own people. Yesterday morning [August 22] a Leader representative had a chat
with the one-time passive resister, who had trudged in from the farm Tolstoy, where
he is now living in comparative retirement.
When asked whether he had read the various articles published during the past
few weeks in connection with the outbreak of smallpox, Mr. Gandhi replied in the
affirmative. In regard to the suggestion that the Coloured races should be segregated
he stated that, although he approved of voluntary segregation, he was opposed to
compulsion in any shape or form.

Segregation would in any case be totally ineffective. Even if you
kept the Indians in one district, the Eurafricans in another, you could
not prevent them intermixing outside in the ordinary course of their
business. Segregation would not remove the danger of infection. You
would find that the Indian fruit-hawker would, if he came from an
area infected with smallpox, carry the disease into other areas. During
the present outbreak there have been very few Indian cases, and the
health officials cannot blame us on this occasion. We are only too
anxious to help the authorities, but we are opposed to compulsory
segregation. Dr. Murray gave some very valuable evidence on the
point some years ago, when he appeared before the Insanitary Area
Expropriation Commission, . He stated that any neglect of sanitation
that existed among British Indians or the others would not be dealt
with successfully by relegating them to inaccessible Bazaars or to
places which would not lend themselves to effective control by the
Health officials.
DRASTIC BY-LAWS APPROVED

I fully approve of drastic by-laws where the health of the
community is concerned. I would show no mercy to offenders against
such measures.
[Question ;] Do you approve of the action of the Public Health Committee in
applying for the powers of demolition in the case of in sanitary dwellings?

Yes, I would enforce the law in this respect with the utmost
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

237

rigour. The proper way of dealing with all classes of the community,
European, Asiatic, Eurafrican and Native, is to allow them freedom of
movement, subject to a strict supervision as regards health conditions.
I’ve had close on 20 years’ experience in such matters, and if you
were to segregate the Indians and force them to live in Bazaars, say 4
or 5 miles out of town, you would run a big risk of the spread of such
diseases as smallpox.
We as a community have been accused of a desire to hide the
outbreak of any disease. What would happen if the Indians were cut
off for residential purposes from the rest of the population? I can
assure you that the danger of contagion would be far greater. In any
case, I am convinced that the Imperial Government would not sanction
any class legislation such as a policy of segregation would entail. As a
race we are only too anxious to obey the laws, and trust that the
sanitary by-laws which will come into force under the new Municipal
Ordinance will be enforced in a firm and just manner.
The Transvaal Leader, 23-8-1912

199. A SPLENDID RECORD
The subject of this sketch is so well known that it is almost
superfluous to explain who and what Mr. Gokhale is. South African
Indian remember with deep gratitude his continued advocacy of their
cause and his sympathy with them in their troubles. He will be always
remembered as the man who largely brought about the stoppage of
recruiting indentured labour in India for Natal. Mr.Gokhale’s energies have been recently thrown into the introduction of a Bill in the
Viceroy’s Council to provide free and compulsory education for
every child in India. Although unsuccessful, Mr. Gokhale is not the
man to be discouraged by failure. When he knew that the fate of his
Bill was sealed, he made no complaint. In his speech before the Council he said: “I know too well the story of the preliminary efforts that
were required even in England before the Act of 1870 was passed,
either to complain or to feel depressed. Moreover, I have always felt
and have often said that we of the present generation in India can only
hope to serve our country by our failures.” Such is the man as he is
today. His life has been spent in serving the Motherland, and it is the
prayer of millions in India and elsewhere that he may be spared many
more years to continue the work he loves so well.
238

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Gopal Krishna Gokhale was born in 1866 at Kolhapur, India.
His parents were poor, but they sent him to the local college to be
educated. He was a successful student and took his B. A. course
principally at the Eliphinstone College, Bombay, and partly at the
Deccan College, Poona. After taking his degree, in 1884, he was
admitted to membership of the Deccan Education Society. The lifemembers of this Society bind themselves to serve in the Fergusson
College and in the schools of the Society for a period of twenty years
on a monthly salary of 75 rupees. For some time Mr. Gokhale
lectured on English Literature and Mathematics, but for the greater
part of his term of service he filled the chair of History and Political
Economy, subjects which he has so thoroughly mastered that he is
acknowledged to be an authority on them. Such was his devotion and
love for the work that, for several years, he devoted all his holidays to
the work of collecting funds, travelling incessantly, bearing hardships,
and submitting to indignities. Mr. Gokhale, though never occupying
the position of Principal, was a man of great influence in the conduct
of its affairs. About the time that he entered the Fergusson College,
Mr. Gokhale came under the influence of the late Mr. Justice Ranade1 ,
and for many years they studied together great world problems, and
especially those concerning India. In 1887, in compliance with Mr.
Ranade’s wish, Mr. Gokhale became the editor of the Quarterly
Journal of the Poona Sarvajanik Sabha. Subsequently he became
Honorary Secretary of the Deccan Sabha. He was also for four years
one of the editors of the Sudharak, an Anglo-Marathi weekly of
Poona. He was Secretary of the Bombay Provincial Council for a
similar period, and when, in 1895, the Indian National Congress held
its eleventh session in Poona, Mr. Gokhale was elected as one of its
Secretaries. In 1897 he was selected, along with other prominent
public men of Bombay, to go to England and give evidence before
the Welby Commission of Indian Expenditure. There, thanks to his
excellent training, he was able to stand the severe heckling to which
the expert Commissions subjected him, and showed a thorough grasp
of principles and mastery of details. The character of the man was
brought out in connection with some letters which he addressed to the
British Press on the plague administration in India. When he returned
1
1. Mahadev Govind Ranade (1842-1901) ; economist, historian and social
reformer; became judge of Bombay High Court in 1893 ; author of Rise of the Maratha
Power, Essays in Indian Economics and other books.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

239

to India, he was called upon to substantiate his charges, and, on his
friends, who had furnished him with the information, failing to come
forward to support him, Mr. Gokhale acted in accordance with the
best traditions of public life and offered a generous apology. For this
gentlemanly act, Mr. Gokhale suffered a great deal of unpopularity in
some quarters. During 1900 and 1901, Mr. Gokhale was an elected
member of the Bombay Legislative Council where he did most useful
work. In 1902, he was elected a member of the Supreme Legislative
Council, which is presided over by the Viceroy of India. His first
Budget speech came as a revelation to the public. Ever since, his
speech on the occasion of the Budget has been looked forward to with
eager interest. His mastery of facts and figures and his detailed
knowledge of administrative problems, together with his command of
simple, clear, vigorous expression and earnestness of purpose, call
forth the admiration of even his opponents. Some of the most highly
placed officials in India are his personal friends, and even Lord
Curzon recognized in Mr. Gokhale ‘a foeman not unworthy of his
steel”. The Viceroy is reported to have said that it was a pleasure to
cross swords with Mr. Gokhale and that Mr. Gokhale was the ablest
Indian he had come across, and., in token of his admiration for his
ability and character, decorated him with the title of C.I.E.
The Servants of India Society was formed by Mr. Gokhale in
1905. Mr. Gokhale believes that the Motherland is greatly in need of
men who will devote their lives to willing service, and it is through the
medium of this Society that he is training men for the noble work of
educating the people of India in matters concerning their physical and
moral welfare. In the same year Mr. Gokhale went on a mission to
England, on behalf of the Bombay Public, and, just before leaving
again for India, he received a pressing invitation to become the
President of the forthcoming Congress at Benares. Mr. Gokhale was
not at all well at the time, and would have been excused from the
arduous duties, but he at last yielded to the public demand. The
speech delivered by Mr. Gokhale as President dealt in a masterly
manner with Lord Curzon’s administration, the Partition of Bengal,
the Swadeshi movement, and the demand of the Indian people for a
greater share in the Government of their own country. It is not
possible this brief outline of Mr. Gokhale’s career, to go further into
this and other speeches, but we would recommend readers to obtain a
copy of Mr. Gokhale’s published speeches and study them. We
cannot do better than conclude by quoting the closing lines of the
240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

excellent introduction to Mr. Natesan’s publication, The Speeches of
the Hon. Mr. G. K. Gokhale, from which we have gleaned the facts for
this sketch ;
Magnanimous by nature, he seldom wounds the feelings of his adversary
even when he hits the hardest. Identified as he is with the moderate school of
political thought, he is far from being a party man. Scorning all mere strife,
his great anxiety is to unite all parties by the common tie of patriotism.
Brought up in a school of severe self- examination, he is always on the guard
against the insidious influences of the partisan spirit, and will not allow his
love of his fellow-countrymen to be affected by irrelevance distinction.
Chaste in thought, word and deed, a master of lucid exposition, a speaker who
inspires without inflaming, a citizen who is not afraid of strife but loves
amity, a worker who can obey as well as command, a solider of progress with
invincible faith in his cause—Mr, Gokhale is indeed a perfect Servant of India.

Indian Opinion, 24-8-1912

200. SPEECH AT MEETING OF BRITISH INDIAN
ASSOCIATION
JOHANNESBURG ,

August 25, 1912
In accordance with the notice issued by the British Indian Association, a
general meeting was held at the Hamidia Islamic Society’s Hall on the 25th instant,
Mr. Cachalia presiding . . . .
Mr. Cachalia, in opening the proceedings, said that it would be a great day for
the Indians in South Africa when the Hon. Mr. Gokhale arrived . . . . He then called
upon Mr Gandhi to explain the programme to be recommended to the meeting.
Mr. Gandhi said that Mr. Gokhale would land on the 22nd October, at Cape
Town, and would not be able to prolong his stay in South Africa beyond three weeks.1
He would have to reach India at the beginning of December, as he was President Elect
of the Indian National Congress, and had also been appointed a member of the Public
Service Commission. So far as he could see, therefore, Mr. Gokhale would be able to
give two days to Cape Town, one day to Kimberly, from which place an invitation
had already been received, and would reach Johannesburg about the 27th October. He
could give the Transvaal about ten days, most of which time could be passed in
Johannesburg. A suitable address should be presented from the Association on the day
of Mr. Gokhale’s arrival, and, if the various section of the community desired also to
emphasize their sentiments beyond a general expression thereof in the Association
1

Vide Appendix “Gokhale’s Letter to Gandhiji”, 27-7-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

241

address, their addresses should be presented at the same time. They were bound to
recognize that the hon. Gentleman did not enjoy the best of health, and they would
have to bear that in mind in considering the programme. On the day following, the
speaker suggested, there should be a banquet, attended by about 1, 000 persons. Both
the functions should take place, if it were possible, at the Wanderers’, and the Mayor
should be requested to preside.There should be also an arch erected, if permitted, at the
railway station or at the place where the addresses would be presented; otherwise, at
the residence that would be hired. The speaker said that no honour that could be paid
to Mr.Gokhale could be considered too much. If he had been born in Europe—in
France—he would probably have been the President of the Republic; in England, the
Prime Minister; such were his moral and mental attainment! His special work for
south Africa was know to everyone . In estimating the cost of the celebration, Mr.
Gandhi suggested, £1,000 would be necessary. He suggested, too, that volunteers
from all sections of the community should be ready to give the whole of their time
during Mr. Gokhale’s stay here, and for some days before. Mr. Gandhi also announced
to the meeting that there was a cablegram to the effect that His Highness the Aga
Khan intended to visit South Africa and East Africa in the near future, and suggested
that a cablegram should be sent expressing the pleasure, of the community at the
news and inviting His Highness.
Mr. Hajee Habib, Pretoria, then moved that a Comittee with all the necessary
powers be appointed to make collections, to arrange the programme and to do all
things necessary for honouring Mr. Gokhale on his arrival, and that the Committee
should also appoint delegates to proceed to Cape Town to receive the hon.
Gentleman. He moved, too, that the suggested cablegram should be sent to His
Highness the Aga Khan.1
Imam Saheb Abdul Kadir Bazeer, the Chairman of the Hamidia Islamic Society,
seconded the resolution and said that there was no doubt that it was the duty of the
whole Indian community to give a royal welcome to Mr. Gokhale. The Community
would simply be honouring itself by honouring such a distinguished visitor. . . . .

Indian Opinion, 31-8-1912

1

The following cable was sent to His Highness the Aga Khan: “British Indian
Association read with pleasure cable announcing your intention visit south Africa.
Community gladly welcomes Your Highness. Could you time your arrival with Mr.
Gokhale’s? Cachalia.”

242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

201. SPEECH AT MEETING OF BRITISH INDIAN
ASSOCIATION1
JOHANNESBURG ,

August 25, 1912
In response to an invitation, Mr. Gandhi, speaking in the matter of the
school 2 , said that it had always been their desire, as a result of the passive resistance
movement, to build what might be called a Federation Hall3 . This certainly was a very
suitable opportunity. If a building worthy of the community were erected, combining
a meeting hall, a public school, residential quarters for pupils, residential quarters for
guests, etc, it would certainly be a most proper step. It might cost £10, 000, but that
sum ought not to be beyond the power of the Indian residents of the Transvaal. . . .4

Indian Opinion, 31-8-1912

202. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[LAWLEY, ]

Shravan Vad 2 [August 29, 1912] 5
CHI. HARILAL,

It would seem you have made up your mind not to write.
I enclose a letter from uncle Karsandas 6 . I just do not understand this debt. I do not know how the expenditure on Gokul-das’s 7
marriage came to be incurred, and by whom. If you remember anything, however, let me know what expenditure I had agreed to. It is
unlikely that I agreed to so large an amount. All the same, tell me
what you know.
At present, preparations for Professor Gokhale’s visit are going
on. Mr. Kotwal has been working hard on the Farm. Jekibehn has also
1
2
3

This as well as the preceding speech was made at the same meting.
At Tolstoy Farm
Vide “Johannesburg Letter”, 15-2-1908 & “Letter to Indian Opinion”, 3-3-

1908.
4
A Committee was then nominated including Bawazeer, Cachalia, Ebrahim
Coovadia, Fancy and Sonja Schlesin, presumably for the purpose of collecting funds.
5
This letter was written in 1912 as is clear from the reference to Gokhale’s
forthcoming visit.
6
Gandhiji’s elder brother.
7
Gokuldas died in 1908 ; vide “Letter to Meghjibhai Gandhi and Khushalchand Gandhi”, 14-5-1908 & “Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”, 21-5-1908.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

243

been helping. Manilal is occupied with his studies. Ramdas and
Devdas, too, study regularly, and work on the farm as well.
Anibehn is also on the Farm.
I shall be going to Durban in a day or two to receive Mr. Polak1 .
Ba and Devdas will go with me and stay in Phoenix for some time.
Chanchi can come over here whenever she feels like it. I should
like you to send me some news from your end.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S.N. 9536

203. DEATH OF MR. HUME
By the last English mail comes the news of the death of Mr.
A.O. Hume 2 , who was known as the “Father of the Indian National
Congress”. We give elsewhere tributes to his memory reprinted from
India. Real friends of India are so rare that we feel specially grateful
to those who have taken pains to understand the peculiar and in many
ways unfortunate position of India in the British Empire. Too often
we find that retired Civil Servants of India are out of sympathy with
the Indian people. This was not the case with the late Mr. Hume. He
believed that it was not beneath his dignity to meet Indians on an
equal footing. He worked side by side with the leaders of the people,
encouraging them with his kindly sympathy and urging them on to
higher and nobler things. We learn that, even though his strength
failed him, his enthusiasm never flagged. The memory of such noble
men renews again our drooping faith in the righteousness of the
British people. We still hope and trust that England can produce men
of the stamp of Mr. Hume—men who will stand up for justice, cost
what it may. By the death of Mr. A.O. Hume, India has lost a true
friend.
Indian Opinion, 31-8-1912
1

He arrived in Durban from India with Mrs. Polak on September 4.
Allen Octavian Hume; one of Sir George Trevelyan’s “Competition
Wallahs”, was Magistrate of Etawah during the Mutiny; became Secretary to the
Government of India in 1870 and did commendable work organizing the Revenue,
Agricultural and Commercial departments; author of Old Man’s Hope, The Star in the
East, The Rising Tide, etc., the last being on political activity in India.
2

244

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

204. RAILWAY TRAVELLING IN THE TRANSVAAL
We publish in another column the correspondence that has
passed between Miss Schlesin and the Railway Administration.1 The
question raised by Miss Schlesin is undoubtedly one of very great
delicacy, and requires, on her part, a great deal of tact and carefulness.
It is equally necessary, on the part of the Administration, to use tact
and discretion. We consider that, in her capacity as Honorary Secretary of the Indian Women’s Association, Miss Schlesin could take up
no other position, consistently with her dignity and with the interests
that are under her charge. She could not properly leave her coworkers, who are travelling with her in a common mission and
separate herself from them during the railway journey. That would be
carrying too far the doctrine of concession to popular prejudice,
unreasonable and unreasoned as it is; and we think that Miss Schlesin,
in spite of her natural desire to conciliate the Railway Department, is
in no way bound by an administration of regulations which is not at
all required for the purpose for which the Regulations are intended.
Indian Opinion, 31-8-1912

205. A “DISTINCT HARDSHIP”
The administration of the immigration laws of South Africa is a
disgrace to a civilized country. Could anything be more heartless and
cruel than to send away from their homes men whose only fault was
that the ship in which they had travelled from India had been delayed
by storms. That is exactly what happened the other day to five Indians
at Cape Town.2 Mr. Justice Searle, who heard the application of the
Indians, said that the case was one of distinct hardship, but he was
obliged to carry out the plain meaning of the law, having no
discretion. All we can say is that there is something very seriously
1

The correspondence was concerning two incidents in which Sonja Schlesin,
while travelling with Indian friends in compartments reserved for Coloured persons,
was asked to remove to other compartments. On both occasions she refused to
comply, challenging the Railway Administration to prosecute her.
2
Four Indians, previously resident in South Africa, had gone to India on
temporary permits and were returning to Cape Town, one of them accompanied by his
son. They were refused permission to enter as the time allowed in the permits had
expired. Their counsel argued that, but for the delay caused by bad weather, they would
have arrived 12 days earlier. The judge conceded this but had to “carry out the plain
meaning of the law” which allowed no exception. Indian Opinion, 31-8-1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

245

wrong with the law. We do not envy the Judge who has to make the
humiliating admission that he is powerless to deal out justice, but we
do not blame him either. Judges cannot make or alter laws; they can
only interpret them. The Immigration Restriction Acts of the Cape
and Natal must be either amended or ended. At Durban, Indians who
are domiciled in this Province are being turned away almost daily at
the caprice of a man 1 who, being a servant of the Government and
therefore of the people, has not the common sense or tact of a
schoolboy. The Supreme Court has to confess that it is unable to
interfere with the Immigration Officer’s autocratic powers. He alone
must be satisfied and no one can say him nay. Are the Indians of
South Africa going to sit down and accept such an intolerable
situation? If they do, they will deserve to suffer.
Indian Opinion, 31-8-1912

206. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[PHOENIX,]

Shravan Vad 9 [September 5, 1912] 2
CHI. HARILAL,

I have your letter. I am surprised. I cannot recall a single month
during which I did not write to you. I am certain that my letters to you
have miscarried. You complain that there has been no letter from me
and say you are sad on that account. We, in the absence of letters from
you.... 3 let us see what happens at the address. Ba, Devdas and I have
come over to Phoenix. I brought Ba over because she was very ill.
Devdas [, too, ] was very keen [to come here]. The understanding with
him is that he should continue at Phoenix till my next visit, learn
composing while still attending to studies and live on a salt-free diet
for 28 days in the month. For the present at least, he does all this.
I have made further changes in my way of life, which I hope to
describe when I have the time.
Mr. and Mrs. Polak will stay in Durban for the present. I have
advised Mr. Polak to start practice. Let us see what happens.
1

Cousins; vide also “The New Broom”, 13-7-1912 and “More of the New
Broom”, 20-7-1912.
2
The references to Kasturba Gandhi’s illness and her stay at the Farm and to
Kotwal later in the letter would suggest that it was written in 1912.
3
A page here is missing.

246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Since the Immigration Officer here is strict nowadays, Mr.
Pragji 1 has not landed as yet. He will probably do so tomorrow.
Mr. Sorabji continues to write.
Manilal is busy with his studies. Ramdas, Mr. Kotwal, Jekibehn,
Ani etc., are on the Farm.
Mr. Kotwal and I also live on one meal a day. After hearing
from Chanchi about your one-meal practice, I, too, felt strongly
inclined to adopt it. Mr. Kotwal offering to join me, the idea was
immediately put into practice. Follow any course that you like, so
long as you are mindful of your health. I shall not forgive you if you
ruin your health. I cannot help feeling that the time and money spent
on French are being wasted. I can give you no idea of how much
better it would have been if you had spent this valuable time on
Sanskrit. The atmosphere, however, in which you move nowadays
being corrupt, you thought of French. What a good thing it would
have been if you had taken up Sanskrit! Though that might have
delayed your passing the examination by a year. Knowledge of Sanskrit opens the doors to all the Indian languages. These doors, you
went out of your way to shut. I make these observations, since you
opened the subject of French again. I should be happier if you would
reconsider the matter even now and start on Sanskrit, sacrificing a year
and spending Rs.8 instead of Rs.7 on private coaching. Do as you will,
however; I do not wish to stand in the way of your joining any
standard you choose. Treat my advice as no more than that of a close
friend.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
I have not been able to understand why Chanchi did not come.
Cable when you send her so that I can arrange for her landing. It was
Chanchi who gave the news about Rami.2
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S.N. 9542

1

Pragji Khandubhai Desai, who had gone to India on a short visit; vide “Letter
to Dr. Pranjivan Mehta”, 11-3-1912. Gandhiji mentions, however, in his “Diary,
1912” that Pragji visited him on September 4. It is possible Gandhiji started writing
the letter on September 3 and posted it on September 5.
2
Vide “Fragment of Letter to Balibehn Vora and Chanchalbehn Gandhi”, after
3-8-1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

247

207. MR. AND MRS. POLAK
Mr. and Mrs. Polak received a hearty welcome from the Indians
of Durban on their return from India. Perhaps this is not the place,
owing to Mr. Polak’s intimate connection with this journal, to review
his work1 . But, before he takes the editorial reins in his own hands
again, it may not be considered out of place to remark upon his
public work, apart from his editorial activity which, as our readers are
aware, is a labour of love with him.
Mr. Polak, by his tact, ability and perseverance, has been able to
rouse public opinion in India in such a manner that, probably, there is
no question which occupies so much attention and commands such
unanimous advocacy as the South African Indian. His persistent effort
has enabled the Hon’ble Mr. Gokhale to achieve the brilliant result he
did on the indenture question. His advocacy filled the exhausted
passive resistance chest 2 and, thanks to his unremitting zeal, the
Government of India is posted up with the fullest particulars about our
1

Polak arrived in India towards the middle of November, 1911, primarily as a
representative of the Transvaal British Indian Association to lay the problems of
African Indians before the Indian public. Soon after his arrival he received a cable
from the Natal Indian Congress authorizing him to represent that body in his dealings
with the Indian Government and public organizations. He was instructed to lay great
stress on the abolition of the £3 Tax. Polak addressed many letters and petitions on
the subject to the Secretary, Department of Commerce and Industry. His other
communications to the Government of India dealt with the Transvaal Townships
Amendment Act of 1908, the Gold Law, and the Transvaal Government’s refusal to
recognize “polygamous marriages” contracted under Muslim Law. He also addressed
the Calcutta session of the Indian National Congress held between December 26 and
29 on the Indian situation in South Africa (“Mr. Polak at the National Congress”,
p.207) and his speech was received with great ovation. He also surveyed the South
African situation in a speech delivered at the sixth session of the All-India Muslim
League. Other meetings he addressed passed resolutions condemning the treatment of
Indians in South Africa and demanded that the Indian Government take steps to end
their grievances and abolish the system of indentured labour. The memorial that the
Sheriff’s meeting (pp. 299-300) addressed to the Viceroy was the outcome of Polak’s
“stirring speech”. Sir Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy, the chairman of this meeting,
entertained Polak at a banquet on August 7 and warmly praised Polak’s services to the
African Indians’ cause. Vide also “Polak’s Work”, 1-7-1911.
2
While Polak may generally have collected money for the Passive Resistance
fund during his tour of India, the reference here is perhaps specifically to the donation
of Rs. 25,000 by Ratan Tata announced at the Sheriff’s meeting in Bombay; vide
“The Sheriff’s Meeting”, 10-8-1912.

248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

grievances.
Mr. Polak could have done little but for the zealous support
ungrudgingly given to him by Mrs. Polak. Nor has Mrs. Polak’s work
been of a neutral character. She herself moved freely among our
women folk and enlightened them on our position. Mrs. Polak
believes, and rightly, that no reform or movement can succeed completely which does not command the attention of the other half of
humanity. She, therefore, lost no opportunity, whether by speaking or
writing, of helping her husband in his work. And we know, too, that
she did not consider it beneath her dignity to do for Mr. Polak much
of his clerical work. Well may the community honour such workers
and friends.
Indian Opinion, 7-9-1912

208. HIS HIGHNESS THE AGA KHAN
The community has every reason to congratulate itself on the
reported decision of His Highness the Aga Khan to visit South Africa.
His Highness is the High Priest of one of the most important sections
of the Mahomedans of India. He is the undisputed political leader of
Indian Mahomedans, and is a cultured Indian, taking an active and
intelligent part in all that concerns the welfare of India. As a politician
of broad views, he is striving to bring Mahomedans and Hindus more
closely together. It is said to be due to his efforts that the London
Branch of the All-India Muslim League has suggested more intimate
co-operation with the Indian National Congress. What is perhaps of
most importance to us is, that His Highness has always espoused our
cause and spoken out fearlessly on more than one occasion on our
behalf. It was well, therefore, that the prominent Indian Associations
of South Africa should have sent invitations to him and suggested that
his visit may synchronize with the Hon’ble Mr. Gokhale’s.1 It would,
undoubtedly, be a great thing in every way if we could have both
these distinguished visitors at the same time. But, whenever His
Highness comes, we know that he is sure of a royal welcome from the
whole of the Indian community throughout South Africa.
Indian Opinion, 7-9-1912

1
The request for timing his visit with Gokhale’s was cabled to the Aga Khan
at Gandhiji’s suggestion; vide “Speech at Meeting of British Indian Association”,
25-8-1912

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

249

209. THOU, TOO, BRUTUS!
Elsewhere our readers will peruse with pain, horror and, no
doubt, indignation, the remarks that a Judge of the Natal Bench
deemed it necessary to make in the course of his address to the Jury in
an Indian murder case. His Lordship allowed himself quite gratuitously to argue from the particular to the general. In the case in
question, it appears that the murdered woman, who was employed on a
sugar estate, had two “husbands”. In rightly calling such a state of
affairs an abomination, the Judge said “it was a common form of
abomination amongst these Indians”. The context shows that the
word “these” is not used to specialize Indians but it is used to emphasize the Judge’s opinion that it is Indians he is thinking of and no
others in this connection. So that the Judge’s sweeping condemnation
includes the whole Indian community. Evidently, the Jury, being men
of the world, knew better. In their rider to the verdict of guilty, they
drew attention to the fact that on sugar estates “thousands of men
were congregated with a very small percentage of women”. Those
who know the conditions of life on estates wonder that there is any
purity of life left among their inmates, and that vio-lent crimes are as
rare as they are.
We take leave to say that the Judge does not know the Indian
community at all. We doubt if he has met with even half a dozen
Indian cases of the kind mentioned by him. The Judge, in failing even
to distinguish between Indians actually undergoing indenture and free
Indians, has shown a hastiness of judgment which one rarely associates
with the High Court Judge. If the learned Judge had cared to probe
the truth, he would have found that such cases are not to be found in
any numbers among the free Indian population, that they are not of
frequent occurrence even among indentured Indians, that, where they
do exist, they are really not marriages at all, but that the women, living
in such circumstances, are nothing but helpless prostitutes who have
fallen a prey to the lust of men; and these consider the few women,
whom the law requires to be brought as a sop to conventional morality, as their natural prey. If the Judge had gone still deeper, he would
have discovered that the men were not mere animals when they left
India, and that most men, living in their position would have lived like

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

them; and that, therefore, it was the system that was at fault. 1 If the
Judge had taken pains to make the inquiry we have suggested, he
could have, with advantage, drawn attention to the evil of the system
rather than unnecessarily hunt the feelings of Indians by his illconceived remarks.
Here there is scope for the activity of our Colonial-born friends,
and also, though not to the same extent, for the Congress. The former
can investigate the matter and make a detailed protest showing how
utterly baseless the remarks are. The latter should promptly address
the Department of Justice, drawing attention to the extraordinary
summing-up of the Judge and courting an inquiry.
Indian Opinion, 7-9-1912

210. THE PHOENIX TRUST DEED
THIS INDENTURE MADE BY AND BETWEEN

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi of Phoenix, in the Province of
Natal, South Africa, of the one part, and Omar Hajee Amod Johari2 of
Durban, Merchant, Parsee Rustomjee Jeewanjee Ghorcoodoo, of
Durban, Merchant, Hermann Kallenback, of Johannesburg, Architect
and Farmer, Lewis Walter Ritch, of Johannesburg, Barrister-at-Law,
and Pranjivandas Jugjivan Mehta, of Rangoon, Barrister-at-Law, all of
the other part,
WITNESSETH

1. Whereas the said party of the one part is the owner of a
certain piece of land situate in Phoenix aforesaid and comprising one
1

In this case, heard in the Durban Circuit Court on August 27, 1912, the
Defence Counsel had argued that “these Indians behaved like animals” and
had “invited” the jury to judge them as such but Justice Carter in his judgment
observed that he did not know that “such [an extenuating] view could be taken”, for
Indians enjoyed the same law as the Europeans. They were entitled to the protection
of the law and they must have it and they must also be amenable to its punishment.
Indian Opinion, 7-9-1912.
2
Omar Hajee Amod Zaveri; prominent Durban businessman, who contributed
much money for financing public activities of Indians and many books to Durban
Library; a founder of the Memon Committee; became honorary Secretary of the
Durban Anjuman-e-Islam, 1897; Joint Secretary, Natal Indian Congress, 1907,
resigned from that office to go abroad and qualify as a barrister vide also “Omar Haji
Amod Zaveri”, 11-5-1907 & “Farewell to Omar Haji Amod Zaveri”, 11-5-1907.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

251

hundred acres in extent and containing thereon certain buildings and
machinery particulars of which are more fully set out in the Schedule
hereunto annexed and marked A,
2. And whereas the said party of the one part is also the sole
proprietor of the weekly newspaper called Indian Opinion which said
newspaper is printed and published at Phoenix aforesaid,1 and of the
International Printing Press situated thereat,
3. And whereas the said party of the one part did in the year
1904 establish a settlement at Phoenix aforesaid for the accomplishment of the objects herein after mentioned,
4. And whereas certain persons are at the date of the signing of
these Presents living at or connected with2 the settlement at Phoenix
aforesaid and are employed in various capacities at or in connection
with the Printing Works of the said newspaper Indian Opinion, (Which
said persons and any others who hereafter may join the said
settlement, and sign the Schedule B hereto3 are hereinafter styled “the
settlers”),
5. And Whereas the majority of the settlers at present established
on the said settlement joined the said settlement for the following
objects and purposes and under the following conditions, namely,
(1) So far as possible to order their lives4 so as to be able ultimately to
earn their living by handicraft5 or agriculture carried on without the
aid so far as possible of machinery;
(2) To work publicly so as to promote a better understanding
between the Europeans and British Indians established in South
Africa, 6 and to voice and work to remove the grievances of the latter;
(3) To follow and promote7 the ideals set forth by Tolstoy and
Ruskin 8 in their lives and works;
(4) To promote purity of private life in individuals by living pure
1

The rest of this clause is not found in the earlier draft.
The words “connected with” and “in connection with” have been added in
this version evidently to cover the executors and trustees none of whom was living at
the Phoenix settlement at that time.
3
“And sign the Schedule B hereto” not found in the earlier draft. Schedule B is
not available.
4
The earlier version has “to so order their lives” instead.
5
“Handicraft” added later
6
The rest of the sub-clause is not found in the earlier version.
7
The draft has “advertise” instead of “promote”.
8
The rest of this sub-clause was added in this version.
2

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

lives themselves;
(5) To establish 1 a school for the education principally of Indian
children mainly through their own vernaculars;
(6) To establish a sanatorium and hygienic institute, with a view to the
prevention of disease2 by methods generally known as “nature
treatment”;
(7) To train themselves generally for the service of humanity;
(8) To conduct the said Indian Opinion for the advancement of the
ideals mentioned in the foregoing paragraphs;
6. And whereas the said party of the one part now desires to
assign, transfer and make over the said land, buildings, machinery,
newspaper and all other the [sic] appurtenances, stock-in-trade, bookdebts 3 , fixtures, fittings and other things connected therewith and with
the said settlement, including the business of the International Printing
Press, 4 unto and in favour of the said parties of the other part together
with himself the said party of the one part IN TRUST for the use of the
said settlement and for the fuller carrying out of the objects and
purposes set forth in paragraph 5 thereof,
7. And whereas the said parties of the other part have each and
all of them agreed to the assignment to them and to the party of the
one part of the said land, buildings, et cetera, hereinbefore mentioned
and together with the said party of the one part to accept the said trust
on the terms and conditions herein before and herein after mentioned,
NOW THEREFORE THESE PRESENTS WITNESS

8. That the said party of the one part does hereby transfer,
assign and make over unto the said parties of the other part and to
himself as Trustees, all his right, title and interest in and to the said
land at Phoenix, Natal, and to the said buildings, machinery,
newspaper, fittings, fixtures, stock-in-trade, book-debts5 and appurtenances, et cetera, aforesaid, to hold the same for themselves and their
successors in trust and to the uses herein before enumerated as being
the objects, purposes and conditions of the said settlement, and subject
to the following further conditions, namely,
1
2
3
4
5

The draft here has “at Phoenix” in parenthesis.
The rest of this sub-clause was added later in this version.
“Book-debts”added later
“including the business of the International Printing Press” added later
“book-debts” added later

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

253

(a) The said Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi shall be Manager of
the Trust during his lifetime, subject to the control of the said Trustees
for the due fulfillment of the objects of the Trust;
(b) In the absence from Sluth Africa or at the death of 1 the said
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, the Trustees may appoint from
among themselves a Manager for the time being 2 or permanently, as
the case may be;
(c) The said Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi or any other Manager
shall be responsible to the remaining Trustees for due and proper
management of the said Trust;
(d) A majority of the said Trustees shall bind the minority in all
matters falling within their authority in virtue hereof,3 and, in the event
of the Trustees being equally divided, they shall be bound by a
majority vote of the settlers;
(e) An account to be known as the Phoenix Trust Account shall be
opened at a Bank and shall be operated upon by the Manager of the
Trust or his substitute or substitutes to be by him appointed;4
(f) In the event of the death or resignation of any of the Trustees,
the remaining Trustees shall be competent to carry out the Trust. The
settlers may, however, nominate, by a decision of the majority of them
at the time residing in South Africa,5 Trustees to fill vacancies, which
nomination shall be accepted by the remaining Trustees;
(g) The Trustees, with the consent of the settlers, shall have the
power to add to their numbers;6
(h) In their deliberations the Trustees shall be guided by and
accept 7 the decision of the settlers; but the settlers shall not be competent to impose upon the Trustees any change of policy or ideals;
(I) The Trustees may, subject to the consent of the settlers, but not
otherwise, expand the objects of the Trust;
(j)
The Trustees may, subject to the consent of the settlers,
1

The words “from South Africa or at the death of” are not found in the draft.
The rest of this sub-clause was a later addition.
3
The rest of this sub-clause has been added in this version.
4
This sub-clause read as follows in the earlier version: “The account at present conducted at the Natal Bank Ltd., Durban, shall be altered to the Phoenix Trust
Account and shall be operated upon by the Manager of the Trust.”
5
“At the time residing in South Africa” added later
6
This entire sub-clause was added later in this version.
7
The words “and accept” not found in the draft.
2

254

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

introduce new settlers or temporary workers, and, subject to such
consent, dis-miss any settlers or temporary workers. No settler may,
however, be dismissed except for dishonesty, gross misconduct or
gross neglect of duty assigned to him;
(k) The Trustees shall respect and ratify all existing arrangements or
contracts;
(l)
The said Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi reserves to himself the
use of1 the two acres of land and buildings at present used by him and
his family on the same terms as the other settlers, and the right to draw
sustenance money from the income of the Press or other undertakings, not exceeding five pounds (£5) per month.
(m) On the death of the said Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, his
wife, should she survive him, shall draw from the income of the
settlement not more than five pounds (£5) per month for herself and
the two minor sons, Ramdas and Devdas, during her lifetime2 and the
same amount shall be paid to the guardian of the minor sons or son
after her death until the younger or the survivor of them attains the
age of twenty-one years; the use of the said two acre of land and
buildings thereon to be similarly reserved to the wife and minor
children of the said Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi;
(n) The Trustees may part with the ownership of Indian Opinion in
favour of the settlers or any number of them 3 and may lease to them
the printing-press, type and other necessary appurtenances;
(o) The Trustees shall have the right to amend or alter the terms of
the Trust from time to time, subject always to the consent of the
settlers;
(p) The Trustees shall have the right, subject to the consent of the
settlers, to sell or mortgage the assets described in the said Schedule A
and any assets hereafter acquired, and to purchase more land, build
more building and buy more machinery or stock;
(q) The term “settlers” shall mean and include all those at present
residing at or connected with the said settlement, and who have signed
the schedule attached hereto, marked B4 or who hereafter may be
residing at or connected with said settlement and who shall subscribe
1

The words “the use of” were added later.
The rest of this sub-clause read as follows in the draft: “or until the reaching
of the age of majority by devdas, whichever event happens last”.
3
The rest of this sub-clauses was a later addition.
4
Not available
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

255

to the objects and conditions herein set forth and sign schedule B.1
9. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, this
Indenture shall come into force as and from the date of registration
hereof, and shall be registrable without the signature of the said
Pranjivandas Jugjivan Mehta, whose signature shall be incorporated so
soon as it is received from India.2
In witness whereof the respective parties have hereunto set their
hands in the presence of the subscribing witnesses.
S CHEDULE A

Land
Buildings
Plant and Machinery
Stock
Book Debts
Library and School Books

£
1, 087
1,535
1,548
307
600
50

s.
10
14
1
7
18
13

d.
3
1
0
10
3
0

£5,130

4

5

Indian Opinion, 14-9-1912

211. OURSELVES
The Trust Deed3 which we publish in this issue, and which is in
course of registration, marks a step forward in our work. Mr. Gandhi
ceases to be the sole legal owner of the concern known as the
International Printing Press, where this journal is printed. Nearly eight
years ago we migrated to Phoenix, the idea being that the workers
might be able to look more to the land for their sustenance than to the
proceeds of the sale of Indian Opinion and the advertisements
inserted in it. During this period we have not given that attention to
the land which it was thought we should be able to give, and we have
certainly not been able to pay our way by means of agriculture. That
1

The earlier version makes no reference to Schedule B.
Clause 9 and Schedule A were added later.
3
Vide the preceding item.
2

256

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the journal itself has not been self-supporting is a widely known fact.1
The assistance received by it from Mr. Tata’s gift of 1909 enabled it
to tide over a crisis in its career.2
We have also come to the conclusion that, consistently with our
ideals, we could not accept advertisements for paying our way. We
believe that the system of advertisement is bad in itself, in that it sets
up insidious competition, to which we are opposed, 3 and often lends
itself to misrepresentation on a large scale; and that, if we may not use
this journal for the purpose of supporting us entirely, we have no right
to cater for and use our time in setting up advertisements. We have
always used our discrimination and rejected many advertisements
which we could not conscientiously take. Our friends and well-wishers,
who have hitherto extended their support to us, will not, we hope, take
it amiss if we discontinue the practice of inserting advertisements. The
object of issuing this paper is twofold4 : to voice and work to remove
the grievances of the British Indians of South Africa, and to do
educative work, by publishing matter of an elevating character. We
hope that our readers will appreciate our position, and continue to
give us their support, by subscribing to the paper.
Indian Opinion, 14-9-1912

212. PROPOSED INDIAN SCHOOL AT JOHANNESBURG
The latest reply received by Mr. Habib Motan regarding the
proposed Indian school, whilst an improvement upon the preceding
one 5 , is, in our opinion, quite unacceptable. It still retains the highly
objectionable system of inequality. Not merit, but the colour of one’s
1
Vide “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 6-12-1909, “Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”,
20-1-1910 & “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 25-4-1910.
2
On November 30, 1909, Ratan Tata intimated by cable to Gandhiji a
donation of Rs. 25,000 “to enable Indians to continue their struggle...against the
Asiatic Registration Act”; vide “Cable to G. K. Gokhale”, 19-12-1909.
3
Gandhiji had earlier thought of discontinuing advertisements altogehter;
vide “Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”, 12-12-1910.
4
For earlier statements on the objectives of Indian Opinion, vide “Last Year’s
Stock-Taking”, 7-1-1904, “Ourselves”, 24-12-1904, “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 131-1905 & “Letter to J. Stuart”, 19-1-1905 and “Suggestion to Readers”, 24-8-1907.
5
Vide “The Johannesburg School”, 18-5-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

257

skin, is to be the deciding factor in determining salaries1 . We do not
know that a superintendent is at all necessary, but, if one is required,
we hope those concerned will strongly object to the restriction of the
choice of a superintendent to white persons only.
Apart from the vital objection raised by us, the proposal of the
Government will frustrate the object the promoter have in view. They
will not be able to give Indian children education through their vernaculars. Indian teachers of standing and character are certainly not to
be found at the ridiculously low salary offered by the Government.
But we think that, if the Government are sincere about granting
an aid to the proposed school, they should modify their offer by
granting a certain sum yearly, say £1,000, towards the salary of the
teachers, etc., the teachers to be chosen and their salaries fixed by a
superintending board, consisting of Europeans and Indians, nominated by the Indian community and approved by the Govern-ment.
This board could also fix the syllabus, define the languages to be
taught, and report upon the working of the school from time to time.
We trust that Mr. Habib Motan will embody our suggestions in his
letter to the Government, and that the latter will accept them. Now that
they are prepared to spend a substantial sum, the rest is a matter of
tactful management and respect for Indian sentiment.
Indian Opinion, 14-9-1912

213. MORE OFFICIAL ILLEGALITY2
It is with the utmost regret that we have, almost issue after issue,
to heap coals of fire upon Mr. Cousins’ head, but that official, if not
by his gross tactlessness, then by the illegality of his actions, as
constantly renders it impossible for us to maintain silence. 3 Mr.
1

The annual salaries sanctioned by the Witwatersrand Central School Board
were £200 for a European Principal, £150 for a European Assistant, £120 for a female
European Assistant and £40 to £60, depending on qualifications, for each approved
Indian teacher. In his letter of September 4, the Secretary of the Board also prescribed
qualifications for the Principal and for the teachers of the proposed school. He had,
moreover, recommended the appointment of a European Superintendent Indian
Opinion, 14-9-1912.
2
Vide “The New Broom”, 13-7-1912. And “More of the New Broom”, 20-71912.
3
Gandhiji met Cousins on September 6, 1912 and Laughton on September 11.

258

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Laughton, in his recent letter1 to The Natal Mercury already quoted by
us, points out that the Immigration Officer, appointed to administer
the Natal Immigration Act at Durban, taken upon himself to decide
who shall and who shall not immigrate into the Cape Colony, where
the law is of a different kind, and where appeal may usually be made,
and has, in fact, not seldom successfully been made, to the Supreme
Court against decisions of the Immigration Officers appointed under
the Provincial statute. We are quite sure that, whilst stationed in Natal,
Mr. Cousins can exercise no authority whatever under the Cape Immigration Law, whose interpretation does not fall to our local division of
the Supreme Court. He has, actually, exercised an authority not vested
in him, and in preventing Mr. Laughton’s client—there are other
cases of which complaint has been made—from proceeding to his
destination in the neighbouring Colony,—from proceeding to his
destination in the neighbouring Colony, thereby denying him access
to the Courts of that Province, Mr. Cousins would appear to have
incurred a serious liability. We have reason to believe that suitable
action is being taken in the proper quarters. It is intolerable that
Immigration Officers shouldbe allowed to proceed as though existing
Provincial statutes did not, in point of fact, exist, and as if they had
been already superseded by a Union measure that may, after all, never
mature. If anything further were needed to prove to the Imperial
Government the impossibility of leaving enormous powers in the
hands of apparently irresponsible and certainly arbitrary officials, Mr.
Cousins could not have offered a more effective demonstration of the
fact.
Indian Opinion, 14-9-1912

1
In his letter, Laughton agreed with The Natal Mercury that the Immigrants’
Restriction Act should be administered tactfully by officials. While he strongly
opposed further introduction of Indians into the Colony, he equally strongly upheld
the maintenance of rights already acquired by them. He cited two instances of unjust
administration of the law by the Immigration officer, in one of which an Indian
returning to Kimberley from India and passing through Durban had been prevented
from proceeding either overland to Kimberley or by steamer to Port Elizabeth. He
then attempted to sail from Delagoa Bay to Port Elizabeth via Durban where he was
again detained and, this time, transhipped forcibly to s.s. President bound for India.
Eventually, he went directly to Cape Town where the Immigration Officer allowed him
to proceed to Kimberley. Indian Opinion, 7-9-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

259

214. OURSELVES
It is more than seven years ago that this journal began to be
printed at Phoenix. We are now taking a step forward. So far the legal
proprietor has been Mr. Gandhi, but the ownership is now being
transferred to [a board of] Trustees, and the objectives which will
govern the management of Phoenix have been precisely laid down.
We feel this is a step in the right direction and we are sure our readers
will feel the same.
The paper has never been in a position to pay its way. It is here
needless to go into the reasons for that. It, however, needs to be
recalled on this occasion that the paper would have been in dire straits
if Mr. Tata’s generous help had not been drawn upon to meet its
needs.
When the workers decided to settle in Phoenix and start a
journal there, it was expected that the income from it and the land
would not only give them enough to live on but also enable them to
put by substantial savings, for they were to be the masters of whatever
profit might accrue from the enterprise. Experience has shown that
the assumption was incorrect. We realized that the Phoenix way of life
could not be reconciled with monetary gain. And so, for the last
several years, the Phoenix settlement has been worked on that basis.
Our principal object was that, while living by agriculture, we
should give of our best in the service of the people and publish the
paper for them. We have not so far succeeded in that aim.
We gave up job-work many years ago. We now feel that we
should also discontinue the practice of publishing advertisements. We
believed then that advertisements were a good thing to have but on
reflection we see that the practice is wholly undesirable.
Advertisements are inserted by people who are impatient to get rich, in
order that they may gain over their rivals. They are so much in
fashion these days that any and every kind of advertisement is
published and paid for. This is one of the sorriest features of modern
civilization, and for our part we wish to be rid of it. If, however, we
published non-commercial advertisements, which serve a public
purpose, free of charge, they would fill the entire number each time,
so we shall only accept them against payment. Other advertisements,
we shall stop publishing forthwith. As for advertisements which we
260

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have on hand, we shall try to negotiate with our clients and free
ourselves of the commitments. We shall then be able to work more on
the land and more effectively fulfil the main object of the Trust Deed1
which we publish in this issue.
We believe that the proposed changes will enhance our capacity
for public service. We also hope that we shall be able to publish
worthier and more valuable [reading] matter in the journal. It has
been our endeavour daily to add to its value as an instrument of moral
education. There are two, and only two, reasons for its existence: to
strive to end the hardships suffered by Indians in this country and to
promote moral education. The second purpose can be best served by
our improving our way of life. That is why we are doing our best to
eschew the commercial aspects of our work, such as jobbing and
advertisements. Progressively as we live up to the ideals enumerated in
the title-deed, we shall be able to give our readers more useful
material. We want all Indians to help us in this.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 14-9-1912

215. MAHOMEDAN WIVES
The letter, that we reproduce in another column, from the India
Office to the South Africa British Indian Committee, shows that the
representations that have been made from time to time, both to the
Imperial and Indian Governments, seem to have borne fruit. The India
and Colonial Offices are, we learn, in consultation on the question of
the immigration of Mahomedan wives into South Africa. Matters were
bad enough when the Fatima and Sukina cases were decided, but Mr.
Cousins’ now notorious circular2 , which took occasion also to suggest
that Natal Indians were in the habit of introducing women into the
Province for immoral purposes, for which there is absolutely no
warrant in the past history of the community, has brought them to a
crisis. They cannot be allowed to remain where they are, nor can the
South African Indian community, who are so greatly prejudiced by
these horrible judicial and administrative blunders, submit to the insult
and humiliation imposed thereby. The honour of the Imperial
1
2

Vide “The Phoenix Trust Deed”, 14-9-1912.
Vide “The New Broom”, 13-7-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

261

Government is very closely involved. The personal law of Indians, that
was guaranteed by the Proclamation of 1858, applies to them
wherever in the British Empire they may go, and His Majesty’s
Ministers are wise, even at this late date, to realize how seriously they
will jeopardize the Imperial prestige if so grave a scandal as the
separation of families and the destruction of domestic ties is permitted
to be perpetrated.
Indian Opinion, 21-9-1912

216. IMMIGRATION AUTHORITIES AGAIN CENSURED
The appeal of Natha Ooka,1 before the Cape Provincial Division
of the Supreme Court, judgment wherein is reported in another
column, has once more afforded to the Court an opportunity of
offering its views on the present administration of the immigration
laws of the Province and, incidentally, of laws of a like nature in the
other Provinces of the Union. The Court has once again criticized
most strongly the harrying policy adopted by the authorities towards
lawful Indian residents of South Africa seeking readmission to their
homes in this country, and has thus completely justified the many and
bitter complaints that are heard all over the Union against the
Government’s repeated breaches of the spirit of the immigration law.2
Only recently the cape Courts had to exclude as prohibited immigrants men domiciled in the Province, and who had been delayed a
few days beyond the duration of their permits owing to causes over
which they had no control, due partly to the dilatory tactics of the
Natal Immigration Officer. It will be for the Imperial and Indian
Governments to keep such incidents in view when considering the
draft legislation that is promised for next session. In the case under
discussion, the appellant was apparently able to afford the costly
luxury of expensive litigation, a privilege denied to the average poor
applicant for readmission. The legislation that is contemplated ought,
1

Natha Ouka, a Cape businessman, left for India in 1906 retaining his
partnership in a business in East London. On his return in July, 1911, he was
prohibited from landing. On appeal, Justice Buchanan of the Cape Division of the
Supreme Court granted the application with costs and, condemning the Immigration
Officer’s action, observed that “more judiciaousness in the administration of the
spirit of the Act” would be far better “in such cases” than “the strict letter of the law”.
Indian Opinion, 28-9-1912.
2
Vide also “More Official Illegality”, 14-9-1912.

262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in our opinion, to provide a cheap and speedy remedy against official
blunders of the type condemned by Sir John Buchanan, and we trust
that His Majesty’s Government will make it their business to see that it
is provided. The so-called appeal boards contemplated by this year’s
defunct Bill were a sorry farce, and will have to be replaced by very
much more efficient machinery if substantial justice is to be done.
South African Indians cannot afford that their vital rights and most
intimate interests should be jeopardized by the high-handed autocracy
of the “tin Tsars” of the Immigration Department, backed up, as is
know, by a Government that pretend to the Imperial authorities a most
solicitous concern for the welfare of the Indian community.
Indian Opinion, 28-9-1912

217. HON. MR. GOKHALE’S VISIT
Reuter announces that the Hon. Mr. Gokhale leaves for South
Africa today by the s.s. Dover Castle, and he is, therefore, due to
arrive in Cape Town about the 26th instant. The time at the disposal of
the various reception committees is all too short for their purpose of
offering him an appropriate welcome, and we trust that they will use
their best efforts to make the visit a successful and an enjoyable one.
It appears that Mr. Gokhale, even before his departure, has been made
to bear the burden of South African racial prejudice, for the Union
Castle Company are alleged to have refused to carry him unless he
agreed to pay for a whole cabin, “since there might be no European
passenger willing to share the apartment with him”. 1 We did not
believe that such bare-faced audacity was possible in England, but
the incident shows how widespread is the influence of South African
colour prejudice. As was to be expected, Mr. Gokhale flatly refused
to meet the Company’s demand, and after some negotiation, it was
waived.2 Mr. Gokhale’s firmness of principle should endear him the
more to Indians in this country, and his example should encourage
them, as occasion demands, to do likewise, in the name and for the
honour of India.
Indian Opinion, 5-10-1912
1

He left by R. M. S. Saxon instead and was expected to arrive on October 22,

1912.
2

For a detailed description of the incident by Gokhale himself, vide Appendix
“Gokhale’s Letter to Gandhiji”, 27-7-1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

263

218. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[LAWLEY, ]

Aso Sud 6 [October 16, 1912] 1
CHI. HARILAL,

I have your letter after so many months. My letters to you seem
to have gone astray.
I have written to Revashankerbhai about your attending the
Congress.2
You have not understood the step I have taken regarding
Sorabji. The chief thing is that he is a Parsi, and it befits a Hindu to
encourage him. If Sorabji succeeds in becoming a barrister, his
responsibilities will increase. Sorabji’s services cannot be used beyond
a certain point, but this is not true of Medh. That is why I would not
encourage Medh to be a barrister. How then could I ever encourage
you [to become one]? If I did, all my ideas would go by the board;
though, at present, you will not appreciate them. We shall discuss them
if and when we meet. Just now you should only attend to the
strengthening of your character in your own way—that is all I want. I
am sure you will change your ideas in future.
You have again succumbed to passion in regard to Chanchal. I
can well understand it. The fault does not lie with the Ahmedabad
[atmosphere]. The thing3 itself is so difficult that you cannot attain it
without great effort and careful and sustained thought. If you,
however, continue in your endeavour you may some day overcome
the weakening passion. You will be a different man altogether when
you have succeeded in overcoming it. You will have a new strength.
From your letter I gather that Chanchi will not now be able to come
here for a couple of years.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S.N. 9544

1
In paragraph 3 Gandhiji discusses his choice of Sorabji Shapurji Adajania as
the satyagrahi who was to be educated in England at Dr. Mehta’s expense; vide
“Fragment of Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”, 2-4-1911 and “Letter to Dr. Pranjivan
Mehta”, p. 66. It was on July 21, 1912 that Sorabji left for London to qualify as a
barrister. That year Aso Sud 6 corresponds to October 16.
2
This letter is not available.
3
Brahmacharya

264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

219. MR. GOKHALE’S VISIT
So far as can be ascertained at present, the following is the
Johannesburg programme regarding the Hon. Mr. Gokhale’s visit. A
special train carrying about 500 passengers will leave Park Station at
about 10 p.m. on the 27th instant, to meet the Diamond Express
bringing Mr. Gokhale, at Klerksdorp, at about 2 o’clock in the morning. The coach that will be specially reserved for Mr. Gokhale and
party from Kimberley will be detached from the Express and attached
to the special. Mr. Gokhale will receive an address at Klerksdorp, and
will probably drive through the town. The special will leave Klerksdorp on the return journey at about 10 a.m., reaching Potchefstroom
about the middle of the day, when there will be a prolonged halt to
enable Mr. Gokhale to receive an address from the local community
and to drive to the Experimental Farm. The special will then proceed
to Krugersdorp, where there will be another brief halt to enable the
local community to present an address. The train will then run to Park
without a break, reaching there exactly at 4 p.m. Here Mr. Gokhale
will be received by (in addition to the Indian community) the Mayor
of Johannesburg and other European townsmen. The party will then
proceed to the platform erected for the occasion at the station where,
under the Chairmanship of the Mayor, addressed will be presented.
The address on behalf of the British Indian Association will be read;
the others will be formally handed to Mr. Gokhale, without being
read, by the Chairmen of the respective Societies—the Hamidia
Islamic Society, the Hindu Community, the Tamil Benefit Society and
the Patidar Association. In order that the function may be finished
within an hour, beyond a speech of welcome by the Chairman of the
British Indian Association. In order that the function may be finished
within an hour, beyond a speech of welcome by the Chairman of the
British Indian Association there will be no speeches on behalf of the
Reception Committee. His Worship the Mayor will then say a few
words and call upon the Hon. Mr. Gokhale to reply, where after the
meeting will disperse with the singing of the National Anthem. On the
30th, a meeting of the European Committee will take place at Mr.
Hosken’s house to enable Mr. Gokhale to meet the Committee and to
discuss the whole Indian question. On the 31st, there will be a Banquet
at the Masonic Hall. Arrangements are also being made to enable the
European townsmen to hear Mr. Gokhale. The Indian Women’s
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

265

Association will give an At Home at a place and time to be appointed.
Saturday and Sunday Mr. Gokhale will pass at Tolstoy Farm. During
the week following, he will interview the Ministers, and, immediately
afterwards, proceed to Natal. Mr. Kallenbach has placed his residence
at Mountain View at the disposal of the Indian community, and
offices are being engaged for him in town, where he may receive
visitors during the day.
Indian Opinion, 19-10-1912

220. INTERVIEW TO “CAPE ARGUS”1
C APE TOWN ,

October 22, 1912
Mr. Gandhi, interviewed by the Argus regarding Mr. Gokhale’s visit, said he
had come with the knowledge of the Indian Government, but entirely on his own
initiative. He considered it his duty as an Imperialist to investigate the whole Indian
question in South Africa for himself, and to make the acquaintance of the Union
Ministers. Mr. Gokhale had not yet settled what position he was going to discuss and
what he wanted discussed. There were no outstanding questions, but certain standing
grievances in the Cape, Transvaal and Natal. He (Mr. Gandhi) was not hopeful that
Mr. Gokhale’s visit would result in a final settlement of all questions; they were too
large to be settled in the course of a single visit by one distinguished legislator. He
hoped, however, that the visit would result in a better understanding between Europeans and Indians, and that a better tone would be adopted by the two communities
towards each other. That certainly was part of the mission that brought Mr. Gokhale
here. Mr. Gokhale informed him that the feeling in India over the South African
Question was very intense and there was no question over which all sections in India
were so much agreed as this.

Indian Opinion, 26-10-1912

1

This interview was given soon after Gokhale’s arrival at Cape Town on
October 22.

266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

221. SPEECH AT CAPE TOWN RECEPTION
TO GOKHALE1
October 22, 1912
The Mayor (Mr. Harry Hands) presided . . . Dr. Abdurahman and other leaders
of the Asiatic community also occupied seats on the platform.
The Mayor, in opening the proceedings, said they were met together to extend
a welcome to a very distinguished Indian subject of His Majesty the King; a
gentleman who was a member of the Council of the Viceroy of India, and who had
come to the Union of South Africa, with, he believed, the full consent of the Union
Government, to inquire at first hand into an economic difficulty which had arisen in
their midst and which their fellow Indian subjects had been feeling for some time. He
had pleasure in extending to him a warm welcome to the Mother City of South Africa,
and ventured to express the hope that the result of his mission would be the solution
of the difficulty in a manner satisfactory to all concerned. (Applause.) . . .
Mr. M. K. Gandhi said the name of Mr. Gokhale was sacred to him; Mr.
Gokhale was his political teacher, and whatever he had been able to do in the service
of his fellow-countrymen in South Africa—of which he claimed to be a citizen—was
due to Mr. Gokhale. (Cheers.) This South African question was not a new one to him;
but they loved him not only for his interest in that question, but because of his life’s
work. Although he was a candid critic of the Indian Government, he was also a friend
to it. (Applause.) He thought it a hopeful sign that they had this representative
gathering over which the Mayor of the city presided. And the hospitality accorded to
Mr. Gokhale showed that though there had been hard knocks given between the
European and Indian communities, there was not bitterness. In every town where
these meetings were to be held, the Mayors had signified their intentions to preside.
Mr. Gokhale had come to help them in bringing the two peoples closer together, and
his mission would let them know that behind this country was another, in which the
people were watching its representatives in this country. They knew His Highness
the Aga Khan was expected to arrive some time next year in connection with this
same question.2 The British Indian Association had only just received a letter
from His Highness, in which he expressed his intention of arriving in South Africa to
study the question at first hand, in so far as it affected his countrymen here. But
he (Mr. Gandhi) wished to utter one word of warning, and it was this: that many of
them had, in their ignorance, false expectation that Mr. Gokhale’s visit would act as a
1
The reception was held in the City Hall, Cape Town. A number of prominent
whites were present and addresses were presented by various organizations.
2
Vide “Speech at Meeting of British Indian Association”, 25-8-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

267

charm, and that all their disabilities would disappear. He hoped his countrymen would
not have those expectations, or, if they had them, that they would dismiss them. Mr.
Gokhale was certainly going to assist them, but they had to remember that there was
nothing so valuable as self-help. (Applause.) They would have to work out their own
salvation, and men like Mr. Gokhale and Mr. Schreinger1 could only point the way to
the solution, and make the path easy. They could get nothing that they did not
deserve, and it was only when the time came that they would reap the reward of their
past actions. (Loud applause.)

Indian Opinion, 2-11-1912

222. SPEECH AT KIMBERLEY MEETING2
[October 25, 1912]
Mr. Gandhi said an occasion like this was one of sacred memory. He
paid great tribute to Mr. Gokhale’s gentleness, his self-effacement, his great
1

William Phillip Schreiner (1857-1919); brother of the well-known
authoress, Olive Schreiner; Gandhiji noted his “sense of justice” and his friendly
feeling for Indians; member of Rhodes’ second Ministry, 1898; barrister and
sometime leader of the Cape Bar; twice Attorney General; Prime Minister of Cape
Colony, 1898-1900. Eric Walker, historian of South Africa, calls him an outstanding
champion of federalism. In 1909, he vehemently opposed Section 35 of the draft
South Africa Act (of Union)which disfranchised Cape Coloureds, went on their behalf
to England and persisted in his efforts even after the House of Lords had passed the
bill for unification of South Africa; In march, 1911, Gandhiji contemplated
consulting him regarding the Union Immigration Bill; vide Vol. X, “Letter to L. W.
Ritch”, 4-3-1911 & “Telegram to L. W. Ritch”, 8-3-1911. The Golden Number (190614) of Indian Opinion mentions his strenuous fight for justice for the Indian
community; became in 1914 High Commissioner for Union of South Africa in
England.
2
The meeting, arranged for Gokhale, was held in the Town Hall, which “was
crowded to its utmost capacity with members of the Indian community and a large
sprinkling of Europeans”. After the Mayor, who presided, had made a speech of
welcome an address was presented to Gokhale on behalf of the Indian community.
Gokhale himself in this, the first of his public utterances in South Africa, expressed
satisfaction that the system of indentured labour in Natal had been stopped, dwelt
briefly on the Indian question in South Africa which he said he would like to study
from all standpoints before expressing an opinion on it. Gandhiji’s memory of this
incident must have been a cherished one, for writing of it without notes several years
later in Yeravda Jail, he recalls Gokhale’s speech on the occasion-- “concise, full of
sound judgment, firm but courteous which pleased the Indians and fascinated the
Europeans”. Gandhiji adds: “I requested Senator W.P. Schreiner. . . to take the chair . .
. and he was good enough to consent”; Although Schreiner spoke on the occasion and
was in fact the principal speaker of the meeting, it was the Mayor who presided.

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

love of India, and consistently with that love of India, his love of humanity and his
love of the Empire of which he was such a distinguished citizen. He regarded Mr.
Gokhale as a political asset. He referred in glowing terms to Mr. Gokhale’s services
and sacrifices in the interest of Fergusson College, and in the cause of education. He
declared with a show of pride that had Mr. Gokhale been a Englishman he would have
been occupying position now held by Mr. Asquith, and possibly had he been born in
France he would have been President of the French Republic. He hoped the result of
this mission would be a better understanding between Europeans and Indians residing
in South Africa. He uttered a note of warning to this countrymen not to raise false
hopes and expectations from Mr. Gokhale’s visit. The advent of Mr. Gokhale in their
midst would not bring about the millennium among the Indian community, nor did
they expect that all their disabilities would disappear as if by magic. His arrival,
however, might bring about a better understanding and a better knowledge of one
another, and would lead to better possibilities of a solution of the great problem that
not only faced South Africa, but faced the whole Empire. The remedy lay mainly in
their own hands. (Applause.)

The Diamond Fields Advertiser, 26-10-1912

223. SPEECH AT KIMBERLEY BANQUET TO GOKHALE1
[October 26, 1912]
. . . Mr. Gandhi, who was cordially received, said he thought they might well
drink the toast the guest of the evening, if what Mr. Oliver, who was good enough to
pay them a visit, had playfully said was true, namely, that Mr. Gokhale had brought
with him the much-needed rain which the parched land of Kimberley required so badly.
He only hoped that the rain had reached Johannesburg, and not merely Johannesburg,
because he lived there, but throughout the whole Union. We Indians were supposed to
be a superstitious nation, and he had no doubt many of his countrymen would share
his (the speaker’s) superstition that Mr. Gokhale had brought with him the muchneeded rain. (Applause.) But he thought there was another reason also why this toast
might be commended, both to their European friends, who had been good enough to
respond to the invitation issued by the reception committee, as also to his countrymen, and it was this, that Mr. Oats was good enough to take the guest of the evening,
together with his following, over his great mine, and when he took them over those
huge pieces of machinery he (Mr. Gandhi) could not help thinking what a great thing
it was. Some of his (Mr. Gandhi’s) friends present at that function knew he was not
1

The banquet was given by Kimberley Indians, and the Mayor of Beaconsfield, T. Pratley, preside. Among those that spoke were W. Gasson, the Mayor of
Kimberley, Kallenback, Cachalia and Gokhale. “It is the first occasion in local
history when Indians and Europeans have met at a common table. . . .”
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

269

believer in machinery. He for one was quite willing to admit that he could have done
with Kimberley even had there been no diamonds and no machinery. He was no
believer in millions and in diamonds, but he realized that he was now before diamond
kings and he therefore bowed his head before them. One thing struck him forcibly
when watching the machinery, and that was that if they as human beings worked so
well together as this marvellous piece of machinery, what a happy family they would
be. Then, indeed, their swords would be beaten into ploughshares, and the lions would
certainly lie down with the lambs. He also felt that if one nut in that piece of
machinery went loose it was possible for the whole machinery to become disjointed,
and to carry that analogy to human beings, they had seen so often that one
obstreperous man could break up a whole meeting, and one rogue in a family could
damage the reputation of that family. Similarly, to take the reverse position, if the
chief part of the machinery did its work regularly they found the other pieces working
in harmony without being disjointed. He (Mr. Gandhi) regarded Mr. Gokhale’s
mission as a holy one, and it was a matter of pride to him that Mr. Gokhale had been
instrumental in bringing about such a happening in Kimberley as a meeting of the
most representative Europeans and Indians at a common board. He hoped such
gatherings would be multiplied. As a humble student of the life and teachings of
Tolstoy, he felt also that functions like that were unnecessary, and that they
sometimes did a great deal of mischief if only by way of interfering with one’s
digestion. (Laughter.) But although a student of Tolstoy, for the time being he was
prepared to reconcile himself to those functions even, if they brought them together,
and if they enabled them to know each other better. He recalled the magnificent
hymn,
We shall know each other better
When the mists have rolled away,
and though they might have their differences they would know each other better when
the mists of ignorance had rolled away. His distinguished countryman had come to
South Africa in order to dispel those mists of ignorance. He had come as the
brightest jewel that India could present to them. He (Mr. Gandhi) knew
that he deeply wounded Mr. Gokhale’s susceptibilities whenever he made mention
of what he had done, but he (Mr. Gandhi) had to perform a duty, though painful
to him. There was no one who could tell them so much of Mr. Gokhale as he
could about his life in the political arena of India. He it was who gave 20 years of his
life to the cause of education for a mere pittance. Even today Mr. Gokhale lived in
poverty, although he could command riches. Hundreds of pounds were always at his
disposal whenever he wanted them for public institutions. A Viceroy of India carried
the burden of Empire on his shoulders for five years (unless he was a Lord Curzon, and
then held office for seven), and even then had a train of workers to assist him, but

270

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

here was a distinguished countryman of his carrying the burden of Empire on his
shoulders unaided and unassisted and undecorated. True, he carried the C.I.E., but in
his opinion he was worth a much better decoration. The decoration that Mr. Gokhale
loved best was his love for his countrymen, and the approval of his own conscience.
To those Indians who were educated with Western ideas he had given a lesson in
humility and gentleness. (Applause.)

The Diamond Fields Advertiser, 28-10-1912

224. BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION’S ADDRESS
TO GOKHALE1
JOHANNESBURG ,

October 28, 19122
THE HON ’BLE GOPAL KRISHNA GOKHLE , C. I . E.
JOHANNESBURG ,
DEAR SIR,

On behalf of the British Indian Association, we beg to extend to
you a very hearty welcome to the Union in general and to the Transvaal in particular. The estimation in which you are held by our countrymen in the Motherland would suffice to ensure for you a warm
welcome from us here. But you have a special claim to our gratitude.
When Passive Resistance was at its height, and when hundreds of
our countrymen were undergoing imprisonment in this Province for
conscience’ sake, we knew that we had your most active support and
co-operation. We are aware that it was because you threw the whole
weight of your influence in our favour that the Passive Resistance
1

This address, along with others by the Hamidia Islamic Society, the
Johannesburg Hindus, the Tamil Benefit Society, the Patidar Association and the
Pietersburg Indians, was presented to Gokhale on his arrival at Park Station,
Johannesburg, where, according to The Transvaal Leader report, the crowd gave him
“a welcome of Oriental warmth and magnificence” and “showered rose leaves upon
him”. Gokhale “accompanied by Mr. Gandhi stepped. . .on to a richly-decorated and
carpeted platform. . .and was there received by the Mayor and Mayoress of
Johannesburg.” This address, the only one read out, was engraved on “a solid gold
plate representing a map of India and Ceylon”. Indian Opinion, 9-11-1912.
2
Although Indian Opinion, 9-11-1912, one of the sources of this item,
mentions October 29 as the date of Gokhale’s arrival in Johannesburg and the
presentation of this as well as the Hindus’ address (the following item), the special
number of Indian Opinion issued to commemorate Gokhale’s visit, our other source,
mentions October 28, which date is also borne out by an entry in “Diary 1912”.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

271

Fund was swelled by munificent contributions from India. Mr. Polak
has told us how invaluable your advice and guidance were to him
whilst he was our delegate in India. It was due mainly to your efforts
that the supply of indentured Indian labour to South Africa was
stopped. For this, not only are your countrymen most grateful to you,
but we believe that the European residents of South Africa also have
warmly welcomed your work in this direction.
You have crowned this special South African work of yours by
now paying us a visit for the purpose of making a local study of the
situation. We know what this visit has meant to you. We shall never
forget the sacrifice made by you in coming to us. We thank you for it,
and hope that you will carry with you pleasant recollections of your
visit to South Africa; and we pray God that He may spare you for
many a year to continue your service of the Motherland, which you
have so patriotically made the work of your life.
We remain,
Yours faithfully,

A. M. C ACHALIA
C HAIRMAN
M. K. G ANDHI
HON . S ECRETARY

Indian Opinion, 9-11-1912; also Hon . Mr. G. K. Gokhale’s
Visit to South Africa, 1912.

225. JOHANNESBURG HINDUS’ ADDRESS
TO GOKHALE1
JOHANNESBURG ,

October 28, 1912
THE HON ’BLE GOPAL KRISHNA GOKHALE, C. I . E.
JOHANNESBURG
DEAR SIR,

We, the undersigned, representing the Hindu population of
Johannesburg, desire, particularly, to voice our veneration and regard
for you.
1

This followed the address presented by the British Indian Association, the
preceding item.

272

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

There is not one among us who does not know of your untiring
labours in the cause of the Motherland and her sons scattered far and
wide throughout the globe. Your name is a household word with us,
your image graven on our hearts, your noble example an ever-present
spur to duty.
We bid you welcome to this land of our adoption, and trust that
your sojourn in our midst may be a pleasant one. May you long be
spared to us, and granted health and strength to continue your
glorious work.
M. K. GANDHI
[AND 57 OTHERS]

Indian Opinion, 9-11-1912; also Hon. Mr. G. K. Gokhale’s Visit
to South Africa, 1912

226. INTERVIEW TO “THE TRANSVAAL LEADER”1
[JOHANNESBURG ,

October 30, 1912] 2
The Hon. G. Gokhale is being kept busy receiving a constant stream of people
of all classes and complexions at the rooms which have been taken for him in
Chudleigh’s Buildings. He received a representative of The Transvaal Leader between
a visit from Mr. Creswell, the Labour leader, and the introduction of a deputation of
Parsees. . . .
While waiting to see Mr. Gokhale, the Leader representative had a chat with
Mr. M. K. Gandhi, the local leader of the Indian people, who suggested that there were
certain questions about Mr. Gokhale’s mission which he could personally answer and
which it would be an advantage to put to him, from the point of view of economizing
Mr. Gokhale’s time.
Mr. Gandhi first of all cleared up the doubt which exists in many people’s
minds as to the official character, or otherwise, of Mr. Gokhale’s visit.
[QUESTION:] Is Mr. Gokhale the formally appointed representative of the
Government of India in this matter?

No, he comes in his private capacity but with the full knowledge
and approval of both the Indian and the Imperial Governments.
Before sailing from England he had interviews with, among others, the
1

The first paragraph has been taken from a fuller report of the interview which
a special number of Indian Opinion, brought out in commemoration of Gokhale’s
visit to South Africa, republished from The Transvaal Leader.
2
Neither of the versions published in Indian Opinion mentions the date of the
interview but it was on October 30 that Gokhale received Creswell as well as the
Parsee deputation referred to in the report.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

273

Marquis of Crewe (Secretary of State for India), Mr. Harcourt
(Secretary of State for the Colonies), Lord Gladstone, Sir Richard
Solomon and Sir Starr Jameson.
How long will the visit to South Africa last?

Mr. Gokhale leaves on November 6 for Natal. Elaborate preparations are being made in Durban for his reception—on the 14th he
meets Ministers in Pretoria, and he then leaves immediately, via
Delagoa Bay on his return voyage to India.
Surely this is a very short time for the accomplishment of so important a
mission?

It is an exceedingly brief stay, but Mr. Gokhale has to be back
in India early in December for his legislative duties.
But he expects to have all his conclusions definitely formed by the time he
sees the Union Ministers?

NO R IGHT

TO

BE S URRENDERED

That is so. Of course, in so far as the rights of Indians are concerned he can have no opinions to form. He has come with an open
mind only from the point of view that he is anxious to understand the
European side of the question. In theory, he, as a distinguished patriot,
could never think of surrendering any of the rights of this countrymen. But his conclusions as to the putting of theory into practice are
open to modification by local knowledge gained from contact with
those who have carried on ceaseless agitation in this country against
British Indians.
In further conversation, Mr. Gandhi expressed his belief, which, he said, was
also Mr. Gokhale’s belief, that the problem had been virtually narrowed down to the
treatment of the Indian population domiciled in the Union.

As to that, Mr. Gokhale has, I think, come to the general
conclusion that the Indians resident here are entitled to civic equality.
That is to say, their movement within the Union should not be
hampered and, under restrictions of a general character applying to
the community at large, they should be allowed freedom of trade.
How about the Free State?

With reference to the Free State, Mr. Gokhale is still studying the
law, and it is difficult to say what his conclusions will be on that point.
Personally, I feel that for yet a few years to come the Free State will
retain its policy as far as the holding of land and the carrying on of
trade are concerned. As far as the immigration barrier is concerned, it
274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is part of the compromise that under the new Act the few fresh
immigrants that will be allowed to come in will be free to move about
in any part of the Union. They will, therefore, not be subject to the
Free State restriction as to immigration, but they will be unable to
trade or farm in that Province. But some day or other, the Free State
barrier must entirely disappear. Otherwise the Union will be a farce.
Indian Opinion, 23-11-1912

227. SPEECH AT JOHANNESBURG BANQUET TO
GOKHALE1
October 31, 1912
Mr. Gandhi, in proposing the toast of the Chairman and the European visitors, said it was his proud privilege to propose that toast. It was a proud day for
Indians that they had all responded so heartily to the invitation of the British Indian
Association to join in doing honour to their illustrious countryman, and, as so many
of the speakers had said, worthy citizen of the Empire to which they all belonged. Mr.
Gokhale himself had tendered his thanks to the Committee that was formed at the time
when the struggle was at its height. He thought that the Committee had rendered a
signal service to the Empire, as it had certainly rendered signal service to British
Indians. It was the formation of that Committee that gave new hope to those who
were struggling for the sake of conscience. The Indian community throughout South
Africa would never forget the time when the committee was formed, nor would it ever
forget that great occasion. They had held many banquets, many European friends and
sympathizers had attended those banquets, but he could not recall a single occasion
when so many great statesmen of South Africa and so many great citizens of South
Africa had gathered together at the invitation of their humble selves. It gave him,
therefore, the greatest pleasure to propose that toast.

Hon. Mr. G. K. Gokhale’s Visit to South Africa, 1912

1
The banquet, with Mayor Ellis in the chair, was given by the British Indian
Association and was the largest of its kind, about 500 persons attending. A copy of
the menu printed on satin was presented to Gokhale by Waingold and Newman.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

275

228. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
TOLSTOY F ARM,
LAWLEY S TATION,
TRANSVAAL ,

November 3, 1912
1

DEAR MR. SHASTRIAR ,

I have heard so much of you that I almost feel we know each
other: hence the familiar style.
Mr. Gokhale is taking rest for a day or two here—such as he can
get after a most strenuous fortnight. I have insisted on Mr. Gokhale
taking the rest he needs. He has therefore commissioned me to write
to you. The receptions throughout the tour have been very flattering.
Europeans—many prominent leaders—have taken part in them as you
will see from the papers sent to the Society. In my opinion Mr.
Gokhale’s mission is bound to be fruitful. Mr. Gokhale’s speeches
have been much appreciated everywhere. Owing to bad service to
India, Mr. Gokhale’s plans have to be altered. He will now sail by s.s.
Umkuzi leaving Durban on the 20th instant and reaching Colombo
about the 7th December. 2 Will you please be on the look-out? Mr.
Gokhale would like Mr. Ranganathan to meet him at Colombo and
would like you to join him at Madras.
Passage has not yet been booked. Ere this reaches you a cable
will be sent giving exact particulars.
I am,
Yours truly,

M. K. GANDHI
From Letters of Srinivasa Sastri ; Asia Publishing House, 1963
1
V. S. Srinivasa Sastri (1869-1946); became President, Servants of India
Society in 1914 after Gokhale’s death; elected to the Viceroy’s Legislative Council,
1916, and to the Council of State, 1920; Member, India’s delegation to the League of
Nations, 1921, and to the Armaments Conference in Washington, 1921; made a Privy
Councilor the same year; appointed Agent-General of the Indian Government in South
Africa; delegate to the India-Britain Round Table Conference of 1930, held in London
and the India-South Africa Round Table Conference of 1932, held in Cape Town; was
the “revered friend” mentioned in the translator’s preface to An Autobiography (1940
Edition).
2
Actually Gokhale sailed from Zanzibar on November 29, 1912 by s.s.
President.

276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

229. SPEECH AT MARITZBURG RECEPTION
TO GOKHALE1
November 7, 1912
Mr. M. K. Gandhi said he had been a resident of South Africa for the past 18
years. The Ganges was a holy river, and, if its waters had flowed into the Umsindusi in
the person of Mr. Gokhale, then it was a proud day for the City. Whether Mr.
Gokhale’s mission toward helping the Indian would be successful still remained to be
seen. It would rest a good deal with those in South Africa as to whether that devoutlyhoped-for success of Mr. Gokhale’s visit would materialize. Entered into with a
generous and noble spirit his mission should be signally successful. (Applause.)

Indian Opinion, 16-11-1912

230. SPEECH AT MARITZBURG LUNCHEON
TO GOKHALE2
[November 8, 1912]
Mr. M. K. Gandhi, in proposing “Our European Friends”, said he spoke as an
Indian and on behalf of the Indians. He voiced their feelings when he said that they
were doubly indebted to the Europeans who had so heartily assisted the
Indians in welcoming and assisting their visitor, an illustrious son of India. They
were all actuated by the best of feelings. The Indians were now going through
the process of Union, and in that process he would ask them to remember the advice
of Sir Percy Fitzpatrick and Mr. Merriman before Union, and every time there was a
jarring note he would urge them to look at the matter in the “Convention spirit”. In
the matter of the great problem now present in their minds, he would ask all to look at
it from the Gokhale point of view. (Hear, hear!) If that was done he thought they
would not have sat together at that table in vain. Wherever Mr. Gokhale had gone
there had been the spirit of peace. He could only hope that the spirit would not vanish
with his departure, but would continue and intensify, because there was not, after all,
any reason why they should not all live together under the same flag in peace, amity
and friendship. (Cheers.)

Hon. Mr. G. K. Gokhale’s Visit to South Africa, 1912
1

The meeting included all the leading Maritzburg citizens and a great number
of Indians and was presided over by the Administrator of the Province. The Indians
presented Gokhale with an address. The Administrator, Mayor Sanders and other
Europeans also addressed the meeting.
2
The luncheon was arranged by the Maritzburg Reception Committee. Among
the speakers were the Maritzburg Administrator and Gokhale.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

277

231. SPEECH AT DURBAN RECEPTION TO GOKHALE1
[November 8, 1912]
By an accident, my name has got into some corner of the
Voters’ Roll and I am therefore able to address this audience—the
whites in it—as my fellow-citizens.2
Mr. Gandhi pointed out that Mr. Gokhale was recognized to be a great statesman, not only by the millions of Indians but also by the people of England. Viceroys
had called upon him to give them advice, because he had been able to keep his fingers
on the pulse of India. He had guided the deliberations of the National Congress of
India, and was one of the greatest educationists of the country. Had he been born in
England he would today be occupying the position Mr. Asquith occupied. Had he been
born in America he probably would be occupying the position to which Dr. Woodrow
Wilson had been elected, and if he had been born in the Transvaal he would be
occupying General Botha’s position. He warned his compatriots against building
hopes too high. They would still have to agitate. Mr. Gokhale could not give them
the rights they had been clamouring for, and they might still have to go to gaol for
these rights. The addresses which had been presented to him were not given in any
spirit of anticipation of what was to come, but simply as a tribute to the great
character of the man who stood before them that evening.

Hon. Mr. G. K. Gokhale’s Visit to South Africa, 1912

232 SPEECH AT DURBAN BANQUET TO GOKHALE3
November 11, 1912
Mr. M. K. Gandhi, proposing “The European Guests”, asked his fellowcountrymen to drink that toast heartily, although they had had to drink many a bitter
draught in South Africa. Still, there was a silver lining to every cloud, and there were
many European friends who had come to their aid, including Mr. Silburn, although
that gentleman thought that the Indian Empire had been won by the sword, and that it
1
At this Town Hall meeting, Royeppen read the address. It was engraved on
gold plate and the shield was mounted on ebony.
2
This sentence is translated from the Gujarati version of the speech published
in Indian Opinion, 16-11-1912.
3
About 500 Europeans and Indians were present at the banquet. Among others
who spoke were Sir David Hunter, who presided, F. C. Hollander, the Mayor of
Durban, and Gokhale.

278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

had been kept by the sword.1 He differed from him on that point, because he believed
that it was inconsistent for England to deal out justice with one hand and hold the
threat of the sword with other.

Indian Opinion, 23-11-1912

233. SPEECH AT PRETORIA RECEPTION TO GOKHALE2
November 14, 1912
Mr. Gandhi said that he had been asked by the Chairman of the Pretoria
Committee to say a few words. He had to thank the European friends who had accepted
the invitation to be present, and he had to thank the Deputy Mayor. Throughout the
tour Mr. Gokhale had received every kindness and courtesy. It was a matter of the
greatest gratification that the Europeans had joined with the Indians in extending the
hand of hospitality to the visitor. He read letters of regret at inability to be present
from General Botha, Mr. Abraham Fischer and General Smuts. He then asked the
Deputy Mayor to open the proceedings.

Hon. Mr. G. K. Gokhale’s Visit to South Africa, 1912

234. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[LAWLEY, ]

On or before November 17, 1912] 3
CHI. MAG ANLAL,

I have your letter.
I did not find Professor Gokhale’s speeches with Mr. Kallen1

Silburn had made the point that the Indian problem in South Africa was one
for South Africa to deal with, and that no interference either by Great Britain or by
India would be tolerated by the British people of that country.
2
The reception was arranged to bid farewell to Gokhale and was presided over
by J. H. L. Findley, Deputy Mayor.
3
Gokhale’s speeches referred to in paragraph 2 were presumably those that he
delivered during his tour of South Africa between October 22, 1912 and November 12,
1912. Gandhiji, who accompanied Gokhale throughout the tour, arrived in Durban on
November 8 and left on November 12. Since the letter is addressed to Maganlal
Gandhi, who worked at the Phoenix press, the speeches must have been lost either at
Phoenix or at Durban. Gandhiji arrived at Tolstoy Farm--which came towards the end
of the itinerary--on November 15. Polak’s foreword to the special publication, which
was issued by the International Printing Press, the special publication, which was
issued by the International Printing Press, Phoenix, in commemoration of Gokhale’s
visit and contained published texts of Gokhale’s speeches, is dated November 20,
1912. It is probable, therefore, that his letter was written on November 16 or on
November 17 on which date Gandhiji left for Lourenco Marques to see Gokhale off.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

279

bach. Inquire at the Lost Luggage Office in the Station there. Possibly
a whole bundle has been left behind. It bears the date on which I came
away.
Speak to Mahomed Cassim Camroodeen1 even so about the
advertisement. Let me know what reply he gives.
Find out from Dada Sheth what action is being taken about boys
being not permitted to attend the school2 . You should also obtain
weekly reports from Mr. Subramaniam 3 and publish them. If, moreover, you arranged for this through Mr. Paul, you may [thus] be able
to keep in touch with him and secure valuable news. I know that this
will take time. It is to be done during spare hours, and it can be done
if harmony prevails in Phoenix. The answer [to the question] how this
can be brought about lies with you all and so does the responsibility
for achieving it.
Ask Mr. Aiyar 4 for information about C. K. D. Pillay’s case.
Mr. Paul will be able to give you this information at once.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5741

235. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
[November 17, 1912] 5
CHI. JAMNADAS,

I have your letters. I shall reply to them at leisure. At the moment, I shall only say that since you have grasped the significance [of
human existence] you should order your life accordingly.6
From the Gujarati original in pencil in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 5639 Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

A Durban Indian merchant
The Indian Educational Institute at Durban run by H. L. Paul
3
An Indian educationist of Natal who had consulted Gandhiji about the school
4
P. S. Aiyar of the African Chronicle
5
On the back of this is a brief letter to the addressee from Sonja Schlesin and
it is dated November 18, 1912.
6
Gandhiji ended the letter at this point and left for Lourenco Marques. The
letter was forwarded to the addressee by Polak, as is clear from the remarks added by
him.
2

280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

236. SPEECH AT LOURENCO MARQUES BANQUET
TO GOKHALE1
[November 18, 1912]
Mr. M. K. Gandhi said he remembered Lourenco Marques when it had the reputation of being a malarious place, but is was almost superfluous to drink the health of
the European guests in a town so admittedly healthy as the town was today. They also
had partaken of a vegetarian, non-alcoholic repast—these things also were consistent with good health. He considered the gathering was unique; they had with them
Christians, Jews, Hindus, Mahomedans and Parsees. He had been ordered to be brief,
so would ask all to drink to the guests, coupled with the name of Consul-General
MacDonnell.

Indian Opinion, 7-12-1912

237. A CABLE2
R. P. D. KRONPRINZ

[On or after November 19, 1912]
THANKS

PROGRAMME CONVENIENT GOKHALE’S HEALTH UNSATISFACTORY

SPARE

HIM

TROUBLE.

From a photostat of the draft in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 5736

1

The banquet was presided over by Errol MacDonell, the British Consul-

General.
2
Gokhale, accompanied by Gandhiji and Kallenback, boarded R.P.D.
Kronprinz of German East Africa Line at midnight on November 18, 1912. On the
way Gokhale and party disembarked at Beira (November 21 and 22), Mozambique
(November 25) and Zanzibar (November 27) and at each of these places he was
felicitated and presented with addresses. Some time between November 18 and 26,
therefore, Gandhiji must have addressed this telegram to the reception committee in
one of these three places.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

281

238. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
DAR-ES-SALAM ,

December 4, 1912
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

I have just heard that the Indian mail closes within half an hour
from now (9.30 a.m.). We are in this place for two more days.
On receipt of cable from Johannesburg to the effect that the
1
case was found at Lourenco Marques and that it was being forwarded
to you, I cabled to you at Mahe. 2 I hope you received the cable. A
cable 3 was also sent to Miss Schlesin, asking her to insure the case.
And now will you forgive me for all my imperfections? I want
to be a worthy pupil of yours. This is not mock humility but Indian
seriousness. I want to realize in myself the conception I have of an
Eastern pupil. We may have many differences of opinion, but you
shall still be my pattern in political life.
One word from the quack physician. Ample fasting, strict adherence to two meals, entire absence of condiments of all kinds from
your food, omission of pulses, tea, coffee, etc., regular taking of
Kuhne baths, regular and brisk walking in the country (not the pacing
up and down for stimulating thought), ample allowance of olive oil
and acid fruit and gradual elimination of cooked food—and you will
get rid of your diabetes and add a few more years than you think to
your life of service in your present body.
Mr. Kallenbach wishes to be remembered to you.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

1

This was presumably the case containing the address which was presented to
Gokhale by the British Indian Association and engraved on solid gold plate; vide 1st
footnote of “British Indian Association’s Address to Gokhale” 28-10-1912 and entry
for November 28 in “Diary, 1912”, when the case was first missed.
2
These cables to Gokhale and Schlesin are not available.
3
Ibid

282

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
We were both glad to receive your cable. Will you kindly ask
Mr. Shastriar or some other S.I. 1 to give me an account of the
Mombasa reception for I.O.?
M. K. G.
From a photostat of the typewritten copy: C. W. 4842

239. EDUCATION IN VERNACULARS
For the first time in the history of Indian education in South
Africa, Indian languages are now acknowledged as being necessary as
a medium of training Indian children in schools. One of the conditions accepted by the Witwatersrand Central School Board, in connection with the establishment of an Indian school2 in Johannesburg,
is that the Gujarati language “may be taught as a language and used
as a medium of instruction”. It strikes us as being remarkable that the
Education Department in Natal should have been so blind as not to
see that the mother tongue is an absolute essential to school training.
The position now is that not a single Indian school in Natal, under
control, gives instruction through the language of the pupils. Nor are
Indian vernaculars taught as languages to Indians in the schools,
except in one or two cases where the teachers kindly give instruction
in those languages after school hours to those who specially wish it.
Mr. Gokhale, in his farewell speech at Pretoria, laid emphasis on the
need for teaching Indian vernaculars in school hours. He also rightly
pointed out that, so long as such instruction is not given, it is a
legitimate excuse for the Indian community to ask for the admission
of clerks and others so instructed, for the proper keeping of their
bookes. But most of all we would urge the importance of the study of
1

Servants of India
This is presumably the school which Gandhiji mentioned in his speech at
the British Indian Association meeting of August 25, and for which a committee was
then formed. On November 16, the Secretary of the Witwatersrand General School
Board wrote to Habib Motan, who was on this committee, accepting his proposal for
the establishment of the school (“Proposed Indian School at Johannesburg”, p. 327)
on the conditions that: (a) a European Principal would be appointed and paid for by
the Government, who would be the supervisor of the school, and (b) that the Indians
would bear half the cost of the salaries of the teachers in return for a matching grant
by the Government. The Secretary agreed that Gujarati might be taught as a language
and used as a medium of instruction. Indian Opinion, 7-12-1912.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

283

Indian languages because, without a knowledge of one’s ideas
become warped and our hearts estranged from the Motherland. The
religions and literature of India can never be appreciated through the
medium of a foreign language. Much as we admire the bright
intelligence of our Colonial-born young men we feel that there is
something missing, and that is a knowledge of real Indian thought,
history, and literature. Many of them speak nothing but the English
language, some few have obtained a colloquial knowledge of their
mother tongue whilst scarcely any can read and write the great
languages of India. This is a great pity, and we therefore welcome the
enlightened decision of the Witwatersrand School Board, and hope
that, ere long, we shall see the spread of vernacular teaching throughout the Indian schools in South Africa.
Indian Opinion, 7-12-1912

240. LETTER TO JAMNADAS GANDHI
Magshar Sud 9 [December 18, 1912] 1
CHI. JAMNADAS,

You left the same day as I reached Johannesburg. I have both
your letters. I shall myself tear them up after reading them. I also do
not understand why your health should have suffered. Ch. Chhaganlal says that you were dispirited this time, that you, known to be the
strongest of all, tired [easily]. All this shows that your recent experiment in diet did not suit you. I could have shown you where the fault
lay if only I had been with you. Chhanganlal says that you had also
grown irritable. You should resume taking milk, ghee, dahi, etc., when
the six-month period is over. Sugar and salt you will not need. Do eat
them, however, if you must but improve your health. You may resume
your experiment, if you wish, after I go there. If you do not keep very
good health, no one will believe in the value of your experiment, and,
if you do not keep a normal temper, it will do you no good either.
And now to your questions.
If we eat no dahi, naturally butter and buttermilk should also be
avoided. Surely, if dahi is forbidden, butter and buttermilk are constituents of dahi. They are less of an evil because they are less palatable. But you need not worry over this rather subtle distinction. If
1

This appears to have been written soon after Jamnadas Gandhi left for India
on December 14, 1912.

284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you take ghee, your may as well take milk, dahi, etc. We shall see
about it later on.
It is nothing wrong if one who takes coco-nut oil eats copra. In
fact, copra should be better. But, just as one who cannot digest wheat
may be able to digest its milk 1 , so may one who cannot digest copra
be able to digest the oil. Moreover, oil is more convenient for a person
without teeth. You are likely to find yourself in this state. And the
same about gingili. In order to consume two ounces of its oil, one
must eat a large quantity of the seed and this cannot be done. True,
the cake will be left out, and for some constitutions it is just as well.
One can certainly live on bananas alone. Then one need not eat
nuts. I feel that the kernel in the almonds and other nuts contains
more nourishment than fresh fruit.
I can think of two reasons why you got boils. Because of
unsuitable food the blood became weak and the enervating air at
Phoenix had an immediate effect on you. Or else, Phoenix water
affects only the skin, in the same way that mere contact with cactus
will affect the skin of a person even it his blood is pure.
If some air enters the stomach through an enema, no harm will
come out of it. At the worst, there might be stomach-ache, as the body
has no use for air entering this way. When this happens, one should go
to the toilet and strain, so that most of the wind is expelled. One in
unlikely to die if some air enters, though, for a delicate constitution
like Krishna’s, the result might well be disastrous.
In case of any stomach disorder, a wet-sheet pack will certainly
have some effect. The pressing out of fat through the countless pores
in the skin will undoubtedly reduce pressure to that extent, and this
may well induce a motion.
When the patient is in no condition to be treated with earth
bandage and is too weak to fast, there is likely to be no unwanted
matter in the system and even if there is it will do no harm. In this
case, the patient should be given hot milk or similar food to revive
him, and he should then be given earth treatment, etc. If he is so
utterly weak that one may not even bring him to contact with cold
water or give him a glass of water, be sure he is nearing his end. One
should be resigned to and wait for it. Even while one waits, the patient
may possibly revive.
There is no universal rule that one must always do something.
1

Squeezed out of wheat soaked in water

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

285

Sometimes, rest alone is the right thing for the patient. Patients like
Krishna cannot be given a hard bhakhri1 made from rice or other
flour. They have inflammation of the intestines and can only be given
the simplest liquid food. This treatment is for enteric and other fevers.
Patients like him can be given orange juice, strained. It must contain
no trace of the peel or the pulp inside.
If a very weak patient has excessive motions, a wet pack, soaked
in ice-cold water, should be applied to the stomach. If this has no
effect, the motions should not be interfered with.
When a patient is delirious, one should understand that he is
suffering. He should be treated with mud packs over his head and
stomach and lowed plenty of fresh air. It does not matter if he continues to be in delirium after this. He will come round by and by. If
his vitality is exhausted, he will eventually succumb.
After six months are over, you may cheerfully take whatever
food your inner being prompts you to.
You may learn weaving if that can be done without strain. I do
not insist on it.
We affectionately address both God and mother as thou, having
no fear of either. The father inspires fear, so that one does not, normally, address him that way. As for others, they are all distant. They
certainly cannot take the place of God or a mother.
It was certainly not right of Sugriva to have had Vali killed.2 He
can be defended up to a point. It is surely not possible to defend all
the actions of the virtuous in the Ramayana and the Mahabharata.
Even the poet has not visualized them as perfect.
If you are so crazy about a bicycle, use it, and then rid yourself
of the craze. While riding to a village on a bicycle, one has to face
danger from cattle. The latter are utter strangers to our bicycle and,
being frightened, charge at us. You may write to Mr. Kallenbach
unhesitatingly. I shall continue to write [to you].
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C.W. 5641. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
1

Thick, coarse roti
They were brothers depicted as monkey-kings in the Ramayana. Sugriva
besought Rama’s assistance in recovering his wife from Vali who had taken her away.
Rama, therefore, killed Vali and installed Sugriva on the throne.
2

286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

241. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
December 20, 1912
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I am now reaching Durban. Up to Newcastle I had a compartment all to myself. From Maritzburg it became crowded. A native
friend usurped my seat whilst I was walking along the platform. I
thought I would walk and risk losing my seat. Could not manage two
meals yesterday. I shall see what happens today.
The Indian visit fills me ≈ consideration of it in details sends my
brain whizzing. Why need I think so much about it? One step enough
for me. That step is the patient to whom I am going. He drove out the
Indian visit from my thought. So much of self.
Now you are in a seesaw. Your mind is a spinning top set in
motion at its highest. Well, the comfort before us all is that we cannot
peep into the future and we cannot control all the forces that mould
us. Only this we know that one of such forces is ourselves. So that our
duty is done when we have performed to the best of our ability our
own part. What is your own part? To make up your mind for the
immediate future and stick to it manfully. You have made up your
mind. Now it remains to stick to the resolution. It means your refusing
to waste your time even by your mind idly thinking of other projects
which might have been better.
Do your Hindi, fix up Mountain View and Africa Building, wind
up your office and do not worry about Call or Geevers or anybody
else or anything else.
For your food, while you need not just now return to the pure
fruit diet, you may only take up bread and oil and not milk and ghee.
Later only may you take these up if they are found necessary. Bread
should have its trial without ghee and milk. That would be a scientific
experiment.
Hope that you will have things not to be kept on the Farm
packed up.
Will you remember that you may not even spend a penny
without careful thinking? The next year or eighteen months or more
are the time of your life.
Yours sincerely,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

287

242. GOKHALE’S RETURN TO INDIA
Reuter has sent us a partial report of the public meeting held in
Bombay to welcome Mr. Gokhale and hear from him an account of
his historic visit to this country.1 It gives us an idea of the hopes he
entertains.
Some Indians at home imagine that we demand free entry for all
Indians wishing to settle in South Africa. This is the impression one
occasionally gathers from newspapers coming from India. Some
Indian leaders, too, make this demand. Replying to critics of this sort,
Mr. Gokhale declared that we did not demand such [unrestricted]
rights, and also that it would not be proper for us to do so. He has
suggested that we ought to be content if the legal right was secured.
He added that if we hoped for reasonable treatment, we should
understand the underlying reason for the Europeans’ anxieties and
fears. Our prospects would undoubtedly depend to some extent on
such understanding. Mr. Gokhale seems to have succeeded in making
the Bombay meeting appreciate this.
The Union Government has assured Mr. Gokhale that the
immigration laws would not be applied inconsiderately. 2 Let us see
to what extent the assurance is acted upon. That will [of course]
depend more on our own actions. Mr. Gokhale is convinced that the
cruel £3 tax which the labouring class is made to pay will be repealed.
We would be surprised [in fact] if a repealing bill was not brought
before the forthcoming session of Parliament.
But the problem of the trade licences—the biggest and the most
complicated—will still remain unsolved. We are sure the Indian
community will have to put forth tremendous efforts in this matter.
1
At this meeting, held on December 14, Gokhale had enumerated the problems of Indians in South Africa. He had declared that African Indians, if they wanted
reasonable treatment, should respect the reasonable apprehensions of the Europeans
who were afraid of being swamped by the Coloured people. It was not a question of
right, he had said, but it was a “question of what was best for the people”. He also paid
the highest tribute to Gandhiji’s “wonderful personality and work”. Indian Opinion,
21-12-1912. For a full report of Gokhale’s speech, vide Appendix “Gokhale’s Speech
at Bombay”, 14-12-1912.
2
Gokhale met Smuts, Botha and Fischer at Pretoria on November 14, and
Gladstone on November 15, 1912; vide Appendix “Gladstone’s Minute on Meeting
with Gokhale”, 16-11-1912.

288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Wherever Mr. Gokhale went, he had discussions with Europeans on
this question, but none of them was able to suggest a satisfactory
solution. The Union Government, too, had explained their problems
to Mr. Gokhale. He feels that we here will have to exert ourselves in
this regard. He is thinking of setting up an association in Indian which
will exclusively attend to our problems, and himself will most probably be the secretary. He believes that London [S.A.B.I.] Committee,
too, should continue its work. Mr. Gokhale has also suggested an easy
way for keeping the Committee going ;we shall write of this later.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 21-12-1912

243. GANDHI UNDER DETENTION1
P HOENIX,

December 23, 1912
The Officer asked: “Are you an Indian?”
ANSWER: “Yes.”
Q:
“Were you born in India?”
A:
“Yes.”
Q:
“Do you have any papers with you?”
A:
“No. I am a lawyer practising in the Transvaal Court, and I
have with me a return ticket to Johannesburg. And I intend to go there
today.”
The official said: “Don’t you worry about that ! Sit here; your
case will be disposed of later.”
(The foregoing exchange of questions and answers was
in English. In English the word corresponding to tu 2 is not used.
The Immigration Officer used [the English] “you”; but he did so in
a manner that might well suggest Tu. He used “ y o u ” in this
contemptuous fashion, and I have rendered it in Gujarati as tu.)
Mr. Kallenbach and I travelled as deck passengers on the return
journey, having earlier accompanied the Hon. Mr. Gokhale as far as
Tanga, beyond Zanzibar. Our tickets were for Delagoa Bay. At Beira
we boarded another steamer in order to save time. On board the
1

The entry for November 29 in “Diary, 1912” contains a brief reference to the

incident.
2

A second person pronoun in the nominative case in Gujarati which implies
familiarity of contempt.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

289

second steamer, there were, besides us, abourt 60 deck passengers,
who, after they had been interrogated by the Delagoa Bay Immigration Officer, were permitted to land. He questioned them even if
they wished to stop there only for a few hours before entraining for
Johannesburg. He issued permits only after interrogation.
Most of our co-passengers were Greek and they were poor. I
was present during their interrogation. The questioning must have
taken up about an hour and a half. After asking them about their
residence, occupation, etc., he handed over their permits to them. Most
of them were to proceed to Johannesburg, and they were found
carrying some papers as well—mostly in proof of their possession of
£20 on their persons. When my turn came, the Immigration Officer
asked me the questions which I mentioned in the beginning.
It was Mr. Kallenbach’s turn next. The official asked him:
“Have you got any papers?” Mr. Kallenbach said that he had none.
He introduced me and told the Immigration Officer the we had
together gone to see the Hon. Mr. Gokhale off. I do not think the
official even bothered to hear him out. He only said: “I shall take up
his (Gandhi’s) case later. I can’t give him a permit. He is an Indian.”
Mr. Kallenbach gnashed his teeth. He was much hurt. He got his own
permit immediately, but it was like poison to him. Would he
disembark alone, leaving me behind? How could he possibly do that.
The thought rent his heart. He felt ashamed to accept his permit, and
while taking it, he turned to me and said angrily (but this was really
for the benefit of the official): “You take that ! You are an ‘Asiatic’:
your skin is black. I am a European and white. You will have to
remain under detention.” (Here the word tu suggests affection). I
kept smiling, but rage flared in my heart: ‘I a mere Indian? How
overbearing this official is and how wicked the whites are! How
despicable my countrymen are! But why blame the whites? What is
there the official can do? I must share in the benefits of and pay the
penalties for the impression created by my fellows in South Africa.
Today I pay the penalty; tomorrow I might reap the benefit. Why
blame even the South African Indians? We are after all like the
Indians in India. What would be my duty in this case? To be angry
with the official? Certainly not. Authority is blind. Shall I then hold
my peace? No, where there is suffering, I must try to seek redress.
And how does one try? I must do my duty. I must not become or
remain selfish. My Indian co-passengers on the deck are living in
filth; I must set them an example through my way of living. I must
290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

move about as a deck passenger and request them to think of their
self-respect and to preserve it, to remove the causes of filth, etc. They
should defer to the simple and reasonable laws of the whites and resist
their perverse and unreasonable laws with courage and firmness.
I must learn a lesson from this incident that person like my-self
should, in so far as possible, travel deck class. Only thus will I gain a
true idea of the condition of deck passengers, and be moreover able to
help them.’ Such I saw was my duty. These thoughts must all have
arisen in the mind within a moment. Those who have not known the
immense speed of thought can experience it as they read this. These
thoughts must have crowded in on my wounded mind- in a medley,
but eventually I became absolutely calm. I remember now that my
mind did become quiet, and that is how I now infer that it had earlier
been agitated.
I sat glued to my chair, half awake, half dreaming, while Mr.
Kallenbach was restlessly pacing up and down. He looked a lion
caught in a cage. A few Indians were standing about at the pier waiting to receive us. Mr. Kallenbach told them about my detention. They
said: “We have been ready since yesterday with arrangements to
receive Mr. Gandhi. We shall send a man again and he will soon fetch
the permit.” Mr. Kallenbach brought me this news; but becoming
impatient, he went to the official again. The latter repeated: “I cannot
do anything now.” When all the cases had been disposed of, he left.
But while going away, he told me that my case would take time yet.
Some time after the official had left, the Delagoa Bay Indians’
attempts proved effective. This messenger had returned with the
permit. It was shown to the Immigration Officer’s clerk who then
issued me a pass; I was set free. Mr. Kallenbach and I disembarked
and, having enjoyed the hospitality of the Delagoa Bay Indians, we
took the train to Johannesburg the same day.
I for one have learnt much from the foregoing incident. I place
it before readers of Indian Opinion hoping that they would know
about it, and that they, too, may learn something from it. Surely, this
has not happened only to me that I should bore readers of Indian
Opinion with this rigmarole. Let me hope that this question would not
occur to them. Admittedly, suffering a thousand times more severe
has befallen Indians at Delagoa Bay and other ports. It is because I
know this that I was pained and now write about this incident. I would,
I suppose, be considered and educated person. That is, I would know
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

291

what to do. Many Europeans know me. I would be counted among
the “big”, and many would come forward to help me. If, in spite of
all this, I have had to put up with so much, what must be the plight of
other Indians, looked down upon as uneducated and in no wise able to
defend themselves?
I wish Indians in my predicament would be infused with the
same zeal that I felt. The first step towards our deliverance is the true
realization of our condition. During my deck journey an Indian,
referring to our condition here, expressed the opinion: “We are as
ants. We must endure this suffering somehow and have done with it.”
This I call ignorance. We set no store by self-respect and are not
prepared to defend it. ‘Once I get my wages, the whites might call me
a coolie, a deck-hand might kick me. I might be obliged to live in a
Location; I might be prevented from owning land and mine might be
a dog’s plight. But I don’t care.’ Such, generally, is our lot. We have
submitted to it all along, so the Europeans treat us in this fashion.
Thus we alone are responsible for our condition. That is the lesson to
be learnt from this incident. Having learnt it, we must apply it in every
difficult situation and act accordingly. Two things need to be done:
one, we must rid the community of its defects which may have
brought about the present condition and two, every one of us must
fight against injustices perpetrated by the whites.
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI

[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 28-12-1912

244. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
December 26, 1912
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I find that I cannot leave before next week. The patients are
progressing. I am making safe experiments with one of them and it
appears to me that he will recover much more rapidly. It consists in
eliminating milk from the dietary.
Will you please have those things which have to come here
packed slowly? I should like to shorten my stay there as much as
possible. The contents of each case should be noted in a book.
I have been thinking over your letter. I think that we often
manufacture sorrows. Instead of simply saying to yourself you are
292

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

going to Phoenix and then to India, you are thinking in advance what
awaits you at these places. May you not think thus: ‘I shall go to
Phoenix. I shall take up work which I can do and no other. If I cannot
find anything to suit me and Phoenix appals me, I shall leave the
place. I do not mind admitting defeat. I shall go to India. I shall try to
like it. I shall try, too, to find pleasure in the work before me. If I still
fail, I shall not lose. I shall be the gainer for having tried.’
This is a safe attitude and it is the attitude of the average man.
Why should you worry by trying to know the whole future?
With love,
Yours sincerely,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

245. A CATASTROPHE
We have to thank our stars that the dastardly act of the bombthrower at Delhi did not prove fatal to Lord Hardinge’s life and that
Lady Hardinge had a miraculous escape. That in this century, Which
is considered an enlightened period in the history of mankind, there
are people who believe that assassination can lead to political or other
reform is a fact which should make people think and ask whether
water passes under the name of progress is real progress. We as
Indians deplore that this nefarious institution of cold-blooded Satanic
murder should find its votaries in India. We cannot recall instances of
the kind in Indian history. Assassination for selfish ends is as old as
the hills. It had its sway in India also long before the introduction, in
that land, of Western influence. But Political assassination is a recent
excrescence in the life of India. The mad youth who perpetrated the
crime no doubt thought that by striking murders of distinguished
men, rulers could be terrorized and an independent Indian could be
thereby secured . We should decline to share any such independence
even if it were attainable, which we doubt. We do not believe that good
can be brought about by evil.
The fact is that the idea of securing independence by
assassination is chimerical. The result can only be greater repression,
greater suspicion on the part of the rulers, greater taxation on the
people, and consequent increase in the hardships of the poorest in the
land. In the midst of this darkness we can but pray for India’s
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

293

deliverance from the curse of assassination and the return of the few
misguided youths to the sane teaching of their forefathers that freedom comes only from self-suffering and purification—never by
inflicting on others. We pray, too, for Lord Haridinge’s quick
recovery from the effect of the wound received by him.
Indian Opinion, 28-12-1912

246. LETTER TO G.K. GOKHALE1
P HOENIX,
NATAL ,

December 28, 1912
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

Chhaganlal’s son being ill I was obliged to hurry here as soon
as we reached Johannesburg. The youngster is much better now
thanks to the hip baths & partial starvation.
Many thanks for your letter from Mombasa & cable from India.
The criticism you cable was expected by us. It does not affect me at
all. The critics have not troubled to study the question. Even Mr.
Natrajan in his paper says that we have made as good a bargain as we
could under the circumstances. The fact is that we have made no
“bargain”. But I must not worry you. I value your time and health
too much to inflict a long letter on you.
I replied to your cable early this week. I hope that the souvenir
case was received in time. The Umkazi remained a long time at Beira.
You were right and I was wrong. The foodstuff bought at
Johannesburg for our voyage went to the Farm. All evidently lost their
heads, Miss Schlesin most of all. You wanted to know, too, as to who
was responsible for the omission to pay our passage. Ismail says he
knew nothing about it and that he never received Polak’s wire. Polak
distrusts Ismail. Poor Rustomjee was upset when he heard that the
passage had to be paid at Beira. The omission to give you the diary of
your tour was due to Polak’s forgetfulness. I admit that all these
mishaps were preventable and I could have prevented them had I
given them more thought. The lessons I have learnt during the tour
will not be lost on me.
1

294

Vide also “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 4-12-1912.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I hope to shift to Phoenix during the middle of January.
On my arrival in Johannesburg Miss Sclesin told me that the
whole of the passive resistance balance was used up. As I have several
calls to meet, I took the liberty of adding to the cable a few words
asking you to ask Mr. Petit to cable the balance in his hands.1
I hope that you are keeping well. I should value all the news
you could give me abut your health and the changes made in your
dietary, &c.
If one of the Servants of India could be specially put on S.A.
Work arrangements could be made to send him a regular letter every
mail about the position here, and a few copies of I.O. for
careful distribution. You have asked me to write to you regularly
about the position. But I feel that I ought not to expect you to read
such heavy correspondence from fortnight to fortnight . The member
whom you may appoint could do all that & take you instructions
when necessary.
I remain,
Your sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

[PS.]
Enclosed is the bill of lading regarding the lost case and
insurance certificate.
From a photostat of the original in Gandhiji’s hand: G. N. 3806

1

Petit had cabled the first instalment of Ratan Tata’s donation of
Rs. 25,000; vide “ Mr. Tata’s Munificence”, 10-8-1912.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

295

247. DIARY, 19121
JANUARY 15, MONDAY, POSH VAD 11

Medh, Manilal, Pragji returned
Trip ticket book
Stamps
Bal[ance]

1. 6. 3
0. 2. 0
________
3. 3. 10

JANUARY 16, TUESDAY

Went to town—Porter met [me]—Returned—Plague in Durban.
Leather
0. 7. 6
Paper
0. 0. 3
Bal[ance]
2. 16. 1
JANUARY 17, WEDNESDAY

Went to town—Met the Committee on Crematorium near the
graveyard—
Wire
0. 1. 0
Freight Salt
0. 1. 0
Paper
0. 0. 3
________
Bal[ance]
£ 2. 13. 10
1

These brief memoranda were made by Gandhiji from day to day on a copy of
“Indian Opinion Pocket Diary for 1912” published by the International Printing
Press, Phoenix, and advertised for the first time in Indian Opinion, 6-1-1912. It
measures 4Ω” x 3Ω” (Crown sexto-decimo size). Written in Gandhiji’s hand, it
contains, for the most part, names of persons he wrote to each day and of those who
visited hem at Tolstoy Farm and references to his visits to Johannesburg or to
Phoenix. While all these notes are in Gujarati, the entries of daily receipts and
disbursements, made in single vertical column, are in English. These accounts
presumably concern the petty cash kept with him at the Farm and include sundry
credits and receipts and disbursements on account of the school. The punctuation in
the Diary is meagre and sometimes misleading. Marks of punctuation have been
supplied where absolutely necessary. In transliterating names of persons from the
Gujarati, English spellings have been taken over from advertisements or news-items
in the Indian Opinion issues for the year or from the English entries in the accounts
column. As for proper names, which could not be checked with contemporaneous
sources, the conventional or phonetic spelling has been used. Of the letters
mentioned in the Diary, the few that have been traced have been identified by crossreferences.

296

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Post—Harilal, Doctor, Lallubhai, Dulabhai, N. M. Kadir, Editor,
Gujarati, Chhaganlal, Lallubhai, Gulabbhai.
JANUARY 18, THURSDAY

Went to town—Saw Chamney who said
Bhayat’s wife sentenced.1
Newspaper
0. 0.
Buckle
0. 0.
R[eceive]d form Bhayat
0. 1.

he would telegraph Delagoa.
3
6
0

JANUARY 19, FRIDAY

Wrote letter—Ismail Moosa Dhaled, Dulabh Vash, Maganlal
Wire to chamney
0. 4. 3
Messenger
0. 1. 0
Bal[ance]
2. 8. 10
JANUARY 20, SATURDAY, MAHA SUD 1

Went to town. Saw Dr. Porter. Meanwhile Mr. Dunning came to Farm
and missed train. Schlesin and Dorabji came together—wrote letters to
Mrs. Shaer.
Albert
1. 0. 0
Ricksha, etc. fr.
0. 1. 3
The Star
0. 0. 3
________
Bal[ance]
1. 7. 4
JANUARY 21, SUNDAY

Mahomed Hafejee & two other Musalmans & Bhikhu & Morarji
came. Dorabji, Hafejee & his friends, and Schlesin & Dunning left.
Wrote to Schlesin, Chhaganlal, Mehta, Winterbottom, Maud, Cole
[Kaul?2 ], Purshottamdas. Started Valmiki Ramayana.
JANUARY 22, MONDAY

Post—Dada Abdulla, Gokuldas, Lord Ampthill.
1

Indian Opinion, 27-1-1912, mentions that on January 18, 1912 one Salomi,
wife of Bhayat, was sentenced to detention by a Johannesburg magistrate pending an
order for deportation.
2
This name can also be transliterated as Kaul and occurs frequently in the
Diary.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

297

JANUARY 23, TUESDAY

Ismail came—Morarji & Bhikubhai left.
Wrote—David Keshavalu, Purshottamdas, Nathu Bhana, Bomansha.
Stamps
0. 2. 6
R[eceive]d re: Ismail
2. 0. 0
________
Bal[ance]
3. 4. 10
The entries above should have been under Monday1 . Thambi Naidoo
came. Letters—Lepin, Saiyad Haji Mia, [Su]bhan Godfrey, Schlesin,
Velshi, Burnett.
JANUARY 24, WEDNESDAY

Thambi Naidoo left, Dadabhai came & left, Albert came, wrote—
Abhechand, Tyndale, Schlesin, Diwan.
JANUARY 25, THURSDAY

Wrote—Schlesin, Thakkar, Chhaganlal, Maganlal
Wire Hasan
0. 1. 3
Stamps
0. 2. 0
John
0. 2. 6
________
Balance
3. 0. 1 2
JANUARY 26, FRIDAY

Mohan Soni came & left. Two whites came for sandals
JANUARY 27, SATURDAY

Wrote—Lepin, Shelat, Dularkhan, Shaer, Tyndale, Mrs. Vogl came &
left. Bhimbhai came. Naidu came & left. Manilal and Jamnadas went
to J. B.
JANUARY 28, SUNDAY

Gordon, Jivanji, Naoroji, Ismail Moosa Dhaled and his two friends—
all these had come and left. Ferozesha and Maneksha also left with
them. Wrote—Maud, Winterbottom, Chhaganlal.
R[eceive]d from Dhaled
2. 0. 0
1
Gandhiji is here referring to a misplaced entry—the two paragraphs
preceding this footnote mark belong to the previous day.
2
Eror of Is. was later corrected on January 31 (p. 367).

298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

JANUARY 29, MONDAY

Lutavan left. I went to town and returned. Velshi and his son Rajabali
came. Hoosen and his uncle came to J. B. Wrote to Lane about New
Bill.1
Wrote— . . . 2 , Alexander, Schlesin.
Rd. re.Rajabali
3. 1. 0
Prema re.Lutavan
1. 10. 0
P[ai]d fare
0. 2. 11
Leather
0. 19. 0
Books, etc.,
0. 3. 0
Manilal
0. 6. 6
JANUARY 30, TUESDAY

Hoosen and his maternal uncle 3 came. Manilal and Jamnadas came.
Fakiro4 came & returned. Velshi left. Telegraphed to Lane5 . Abdoolla
Sheth died yesterday.6 Letters to West, Harilal, Schlesin. Wire to Lane:
[about] Dad[a]
Abdoolla; Rustomjee & Cape
0. 13. 0
JANUARY 31, WEDNESDAY

Essop Mia left-Essack’s mother came and left—Kennedy came and
left—and also Naidoo. Received a long telegram7 from Lane. Wrote—
Ha[jee], Habib, Prabhashanker, V. S. Pillay, Raghavji, Khanderia
Rd. For sandals
1. 0. 0
Paid Dano
0. 6. 6
Freight
0. 4. 6
Error
0. 1. 0
Bal.
£7. 14. 8
1

Vide “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 29-1-1912.
A word here is illegible.
3
Husband of his aunt
4
Fakir, referred to in the diary variously as Fakiro and Fakiri; also known
among the settlers of the farm as Fakirabhai. Gandhiji refers to him as “the brave
Fakira”; he was in charge of stores at Phoenix for a time; served six or seven terms of
imprisonment and was sentenced later to deportation; vide “Johannesburg”, 4-4-1910
& “Johannesburg”, 18-4-1910.
5
Vide “Telegram to Private Secretary to Minister of Interior”, 30-1-1912.
6
Dada Abdoolla Hajee Adam died on January 29, 1912; vide “Late Mr.
Abdoolla Hajee Adam”, 3-2-1912.
7
Vide Appendix “Telegram from Secretary of Interior to Gandhiji”,
31-1-1912.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

299

FEBRUARY 1, THURSDAY

Budrea, Ramlal and two others came. Hoosen left. Dano came.
[Wrote]—Schlesin, Chhaganlal, Editor, I.O., Bhayat, Ritch, Kallenbach,
Nalji Hari, Rustomjee, Osman Ahmed, Velshi Keshavji, Clement Doke.
Telegraphed1 Registrar [of Asiatics]
Rd. For Essack’s father
0. 3. 6
, , John for potatoes
0. 16. 6
, , Refund loans
0. 7. 0
, , Paraffine
0. 0. 6
________
P[ai]d John for milk to Jan.
1. 10. 0
Telegram
0. 16. 9
________
Bal.
6. 15. 5
FEBRUARY 2, FRIDAY

Budrea and his friends left. Parbhu came. Hoosen came. Wrote to
Miss Schlesin.
P[ai]d stamps
0. 2. 0
Wire to Registrar Bhayat
0. 1. 6
________
Bal.
6. 11. 11
FEBRUARY 3, SATURDAY, MAHA VAD 1

Wrote in morning: West, Chhaganlal and Purshottamdas. Pragji left.
Hoosen left. Valji and Dulabh Bhaga came by evening train.
Telegram from Lane saying Smuts Would reply on Monday.2
Pd. Station Master
3. 0. 0
Rd. From Parbhu
0. 2. 6
________
Bal.
3. 14. 5
FEBRUARY 4, SUNDAY

Wrote—Joshi, Maganalal, Thakkar, Winterbottom, Maud, Anandlal,
N. M. Kadir, Munu.
1
2

300

Telegram not available
Vide footnote “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 6-2-1912.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Gordon, Quinn, Schlesin and Coopoo, who had come, left, and also
Valji and Dulabh. Mrs. Naidoo and Nayana Chaki also left.
Rd. From Gordon
1. 0. 0
FEBRUARY 5, MONDAY

Wrote: Chhaganlal, West, Schlesin, Burnett.
Stamps
0. 1. 9
Wire Kall[enbach]
0. 1. 3
________
Bal.
4. 11. 5
FEBRUARY 6, TUESDAY

Vaja and Raja came and returned. Wrote: Dr. Gool Schlesin, Kalida
Patel, Dularkhan, Amod Bhayat, Velshi. Drafted telegram to Smuts.1
Stamps
0. 0. 6
________
Bal.
4. 10. 11
FEBRUARY 7, WEDNESDAY

... man came & left. Did not send telegram to Smuts. Received one3
from him dated yesterday. Sent another4 in reply Wrote: Vallabhram,
G. A. Makanji, Velshi, Schlesin.
Rd. re. Fakir
3. 0. 0
Pd. wire Smuts
0. 4. 3
Freight & Parcel to Gool
0. 5. 7
2

FEBRUARY 8, THURSDAY

Telegram5 from Smuts, drafted
Pd. wire Kallenbach
Freight balance yesterday
Stamps
Bal.

reply 6 , . Pragji came. Wrote: Schlesin
0. 1. 6
0. 0. 9
0. 2. 6
6. 16. 1

1

Vide “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 6-2-1912.
A word here in illegible.
3
Vide Appendix “Telegram from Secretary for Interior for Gandhiji”,
7-2-1912.
4
Vide “Telegram to Private Secretary to Ministry of Interior”, 7-2-1912.
5
Vide 1st footnote of “Telegram to Private Secretary to Minister of Interior”,
7-2-1912.
6
Vide “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 8-2-1912.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

301

FEBRUARY 9, FRIDAY

Budrea, Ohler [Olive?] & Govind came and left. Kalikasingh came.
Budrea’s son and Ablak came. Wrote: Chhaganlal, Purshottamdas,
Parsee Rustomjee, Joshi, Dada Osman & Anglia.
Pd. wire Smuts
0. 4. 6
________
Bal.
6. 11. 7
FEBRUARY 10, SATURDAY

Ablak, Kalikasingh, Manilal, Medh & Jamnadas left. Bush & Moorgan
came. Coopoo and Dahya left.
Jamnadas
0. 5. 0
Coopoo
0. 3. 0
Dana
0. 7. 3
Stamps
0. 2. 6
Medh for wire
0. 2. 6
Bal,
5. 11. 4
FEBRUARY 11, SUNDAY

Tailor from Krugersdorp came & left. Brought coat. Schlesin &
Coopoo Naidoo came and left. I also left to see K. along with Ritch.
Doctor gave £12
Rd. from the Tailor
0. 5. 0
For I.O.
0. 1. 0
St[ation] Master
3. 0. 0
_________
Pd. Trip tickets tr[ai]n
1. 6. 3
FEBRUARY 12, MONDAY

Went to Krugersdorp. Saw K. Lunch at Quinn’s. Schlesin Incident—
Hanif came—The Parbhu boy 1 came to Farm—Kallenbach, Medh,
Manilal, Jamnadas, Dahya, Coopoo, Shelat etc. came to Farm—
Wrote—West, Devi, Purshottam, Sanghavi, Schlesin.
Coopoo’s fare
0. 3. 0
Rd. Dahya’s
1. 10. 0
Parbhu’s fare
0. 3. 0
1

302

A student at the Farm School
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Pd. fares
„ Kallenbach

_________
0. 5. 0
3. 0. 0
FEBRUARY 13, TUESDAY

Wrote: Chhaganlal, Ani, Anandlal, Abhechand. Kallenbach went to
town. Telegraphed Registrar in connection with Velshi’s men.
Kallenbach & Kasam came—Wrote to West, to Maganlal—Pd. wire to
Chamney and Velshi
0. 6. 3
FEBRUARY 14, WEDNESDAY

Wrote—Purshottamdas, Keshav Fakir, Manilal Doctor. Schlesin,
Kallenbach, Narottam & Dulabhai came. All left except K. Hoosen
left for Vereeniging.
Stamps
0. 2. 3
Wire for Bhayat
0. 2. 1
_________
Bal.
5. 10. 7
FEBRUARY 15, THURSDAY

Doctor, Chhaganlal, Editor, N. Kadir, Gangot, Velshi, Schelsin, Moosa
Hajee Adam—Govan came & returned. Shelat left. Wrote—Shaer, Dr.
Gool, Chhaganlal, Ritch, Tikli, Mayo.
Pd. Freight
0. 1. 3
_________
Bal.
5. 9. 4
FEBRUARY 16, FRIDAY

Wrote—Mrs. Polak, West. Kallenbach & Hoosen came.
Wire Sorabji
0. 2. 0
Freight
0. 1. 3
_________
Rd. Kallenbach
3. 0. 0
_________
Balance
8. 6. 1

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

303

FEBRUARY 17, SATURDAY

[Wrote to:] Editor, Nathalia, Abdool Karim, Keshavji Goga, Velshi,
Chanchi1 , Harilal2 .
Pd. Parbhu and Bhaga
0. 10. 0
R[ece]i[ved] from Dahya
0. 0. 6
_________
Bal.
7. 16. 7
FEBRUARY 18, SUNDAY

Schlesin and Thambi Naidoo came. Both Left. Received telegram
about Sorabji’s landing at Durban. Dictated Letter for Polak to
Schlesin. Wrote to Maud & Winterbottom.
FEBRUARY 19, MONDAY, PHAGAN SUD 1

Wrote—Noormahomed, Suleman Ismail Mian, Revashankerbhai,
G. S. Kaul [Cole?], Purshottamdas, Raoji—pragji came. Bhago came.
Pd. Wire Sorabji
0. 1. 0
Freight
0. 1. 3
Kr[ishna] samy rail
0. 2. 11
Trip ticket
1. 6. 3
_________
Bal.
6. 5. 2
FEBRUARY 20, TUESDAY

Went to town, taking Parbhu with me—Pragji came by evening train—
Parbhu & I returned—also K.—From office, wrote letters to
Purshottamdas, Doctor Rajkot3 , Mahajan, Joshi, A., etc.—
Pd. leather
0. 9. 6
Fares
0. 4. 5
_________
Bal.
5. 11. 3

1
2
3

304

“Letter to Chanchalbehn Gandhi”, February 18, 1912 (pp.237-8)?
“ Fragment of Letter to Harilal Gandhi”, February 18, 1912 (p.238)?
Dr. Pranjivan Mehta in Rajkot
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

FEBRUARY 21, WEDNESDAY

Sorabji, Shelat, guests from Zanzibar,1 Medh, Pragji, Budrea [?],
Lalbahadurshigh came. Guests, Budrea & Pragji returned. Windmill
man came & Left.
Rd. Peaches
0. 18. 6
Budrea
2. 7. 0
[Rd.] Zanzibari for sandals 0.10. 0
Bhagu
0. 5. 1
Freight
0. 1. 5
_________
Bal.
9. 10. 5
FEBRUARY 22, THURSDAY

Moonsami—Pavade came & Left—[Wrote to:] Harilal, Manager I.O.
Jussat2 , A. Karim, Dada A.—Mahomed E., Miss Schlesin.
FEBRUARY 23, FRIDAY

Hoosen came—Wrote letters in the afternoon: Abdul Karim, etc.
Parbhu came. Suleman and Ali left.
Fares for S. & Ali
0. 3. 9
FEBRUARY 24, SATURDAY

Hoosen, Ferozesha, Maneksha & Parbhu left in the morning. Sorabji,
Shelat & Dano left in the afternoon. Coopoo, Hanif & Shiv left for
Van Wyksrust. Wrote letters to Ani and Abhechand.
Stamps
0. 2. 6
_________
Bal.
9. 4. 2
FEBRUARY 25, SUNDAY

Gordon, Schlesin, Isaac & Coopoo came. Narayansami came. All
except Isaac left.
Paid for leather to Isaac
1. 10. 0
_________
Bal.
7. 14. 2
1
These were M. Saly, Kanjee Jeewanbhai and Laljee Meghjeebhai; vide
“Telegram to Registrar of Asiatics”, before 21-2-1912.
2
Vide “Mrs. Jussat’s Case”, 9-3-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

305

FEBRUARY 26, MONDAY

Wrote—-Gu[jarati] E[ditor], I.O., Maud, Winterbottom, Manilal
Chaturbhai, Motilal Diwan—Manilal, Isaac & Kallenbach left. Talked
to Kallenbach last evening about his niece. Suleman & Dano came.
Manilal & K. returned.
Rd. For Dana
0. 10. 0
FEBRUARY 27, TUESDAY

Wrote: Maganlal, West, Thakkar, Doctor, Purshottam, Polak, Amarsi
Joshi, Jussat, Nathalia, Lachman Pandey. Ali came—
Rd. For peaches
1. 15. 3
FEBRUARY 28, WEDNESDAY

Wrote: Memon, [M]oosa Alisa, enclosing certificates, Mahomed
Ibrahim Kunake, Patel, Shaer—Manilal left. Medh, Ismail, Fakir and
Mahomed left. K. also left. Lallubhai, Gandabhai [?], Morarji,
Bhikhubhai and Medh came, also K.
Pd. fares Ismail & Mahomed
0. 3. 0
Manilal
0. 5. 0
_________
Bal.
9. 11. 5
FEBRUARY 29, THURSDAY

Went to town. Morarji, etc., left. K. left for Ermillo. Saw Mr. Howard.
Ba, etc., & Krishnasamy returned.
Pd. Carriage
0. 2. 0
Fare Krishnasamy
0. 1. 2
Ricksha
0. 0. 9
Reuter
0. 10. 0
Leather
1. 14. 6
Trip ticket
1. 6. 3
_________
Bal.
5. 16. 9
MARCH 1, FRIDAY

Telegram to Chamney. Rail letter for Schlesin. Letters to: Chamney,
Greg, Ritch, Bhayat [?], Nelson. Fakir, Ismail & Mahomed came.
Wrote letters to Maganlal and Manilal.
306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Pd. [?] & wire Chamney
Stamps
Rd. fr[om] John for flour
Bal.

0. 4. 0
0. 2. 6
_________
0. 1. 0
_________
5. 11. 3

MARCH 2, SATURDAY

Miss Knudsen came—Medh, Pragji & Jamnadas left.
Rd. John for potatoes 6/[0]. 9. 9
and extras
3/9
Paid John for milk
[0]. 13. 6
Jamnadas
0. 4. 0
_________
Bal.
5. 3. 6
MARCH 3, SUNDAY

Schlesin, Roche & Mrs. Roche and Coopoo came. All of them & Miss
Knudsen returned. Kallenbach came.
MARCH 4, MONDAY

Winterbottom, Maud, Gu. S., Cachalia, Bhayat & Vallabhram came.
Kallenbach, Medh & Desai returned—
MARCH 5, TUESDAY, PHAGAN VAD 1

Wrote letters: Purshottamdas, West, Harilal, Manilal, Chhaganlal,
Jivaram Pandya, Motilal, Ramji—Alexander, Schlesin & Vallabhram
left. Cachalia, Bhayat and K. Left in the morning. Olive & Joan
[Doke] came.
Rd. Peaches sale
0. 17. 1
_________
Balance
6. 0. 7
MARCH 6, WEDNESDAY

Letters: Miss Schlesin, Ranchhod Hari, I.O., Dr. Porter, Lazarus,
Chamney—Ritch came & let—Medh came.
Rd. John for K.
3. 0. 0
Stamps
0. 2. 0
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

307

Medh & Desai
1. 0.
Telegram Congress re. Nathalia 1. 4.

0
0

MARCH 7, THURSDAY

Polak, Thakkar, Loren, Dawad Mahomed, Velshi, Schlesin, K., came—
Wrote some letters
Rd. fr[om] Kallenbach for cable
call
0. 10. 0
Medh
0. 9. 6
Desai
0. 7. 1
_________
Rd. from boys
0. 0. 6
Pd. telegrams Dawad Mahomed
re. Hoosen & to West &
stamps
0. 4. 6
„ Kallenbach for John
3. 0. 0
_________
Balance
5. 19. 10
MARCH 8, FRIDAY

Posted letters to Velshi, Nathalia, Anglia & those of J. B.—Telegram
to Nathalia—Wrote letters: Manager, I.O., Ani, Delaney, Velshi, De
Vere[?] Schlesin, Kallenbach, Shelat came.
Wire Nathalia
0. 1. 0
MARCH 9, SATURDAY

All left the Farm leaving Amod Bhayat [?] & K. behind.
Schlesin came in the morning & left. Gajadhar from Boksburg came
to fetch me.
Fares for boys
0. 11. 8
„
Hanif
0. 2. 11
Rd. From Dhaled
3. 0. 0
Pd. Hanif
0. 5. 6
Ricksha
0. 0. 9
MARCH 10, SUNDAY

Went to Boksburg, accompanied by Medh and others. Returned by
2 o’clock train—Meeting at 4 about Bhayat [?]
308

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Pd. railway fares
Carriage, etc.

2. 9.
0. 4.

6
6

MARCH 11, MONDAY

Medh & Desai went to Durban—Boys returned to Farm, accompanied
by Sorabji & Jamnadas. Bhaga Chhota & Tikli’s sons came.
Rd. For Bhaga Chhota
2. 0. 0
Dahya Parbhu
1. 10. 0
For phone
0. 1. 0
Telegram re. Medh
0. 1. 0
_________
Bal.
8. 13. 9
MARCH 12, TUESDAY

Whittaker came—K. arrived in the evening. Wrote a letter to Ritch,
also to Rustomjee.
Vesanram [sic] —
At night—[wrote] to Harilal Thakkar, Manilal, Chhaganlal, Rutnam,
I.O., Medh, Rustomjee, Schlesin.
MARCH 13, WEDNESDAY

Wrote—Dangare [?], Moosa, Essackji, Schlesin, Chamney, Mahomed
Ismail, David Keshavalu. Shelat came & left. Bhago & Sivpujan came.
K. Came.
Bhaga’s board
1. 10. 0
Stamps
0. 2. 6
_________
Bal.
10. 1. 3
MARCH 14, THURSDAY

Schlesin & Henry. Letters to Purshottamdas, Suleman Amod, Schlesin,
Whittaker left.
Rd. Suleman fare
0. 3. 0
MARCH 15, FRIDAY

Hazurasingh, Lalbahadursingh & K. arrived.
Gave cheque of £4.10.0 for Suleman.
Pd. Kallenbach for tickets
1. 0. 0
_________
Bal.
9. 4. 3
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

309

MARCH 16, SATURDAY

Hazurasingh & Lalbahadursingh left—K. went & returned. Letter to
Chhaganlal.
Rd. fr. Kallenbach
0. 17. 6
_________
Pd. for tickets
0. 17. 6
MARCH 17, SUNDAY

Schlesin, Gordan, Moorgan, Naidoo & Bush came—Schlesin, Gordon
& Naidoo left. Dhobi from Germiston came over to stay. Letters:
Laughton, Medh, Hoosen [?], Tarasingh, Maud, Winter-bottom, Mayo,
Schlesin.
Pd. Schlesin
0. 4. 0
MARCH 18, MONDAY

K. went & returned. Ba, Moorgan & Bush left. Telegram about Sodha
having been detained [?] at Komatipoort. Shelat left. Letters: Schlesin,
Cachalia, West, Ritch, Pranjivan.
Mrs. G.
0. 5. 0
Freight
0. 1. 3
Trip ticket
1. 6. 3
1
Wire Nicely
0. 1. 0
_________
Bal.
7. 6. 9
MARCH 19, TUESDAY, CHAITRA SUD 1

Sorabji came—Kallenbach came. Wrote letter to Schlesin, to Sodha.
Pd. Stamps
0. 1. 0
Rd. fr. Basda [Basela?]
for bread
0. 1. 6
MARCH 20, WEDNESDAY

Revashanker went to town—He and Ratanshi returned. Letters:
Schlesin, Kastur, Cachalia.
Wire Smuts2
0. 1. 6
_________
Bal.
7. 4. 9
1
2

310

Telegraphic Address of Natal Indian Congress
Vide “Telegram to Minister of Interior”, 20-3-1912.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

MARCH 21, THURSDAY

Soni, Tulsi & Valji came—Kanabi came. Wrote letter to Schlesin—
MARCH 22, FRIDAY

K. came—Ratanshi went & returned—Suleman came. Tulsi & Valji
left—
Rd. famine fund Sodha
2. 1. 4
Rd. Amurandeh [?]
0. 10. 6
_________
Bal.
9. 16. 7
MARCH 23, SATURDAY

Kallenbach left—Wrote: Velshi Keshavji, Mahomed, Mahomed
Belim—
Rd. Bhikha
0. 2. 0
_________
Pd. John loan
0. 10. 0
MARCH 24, SUNDAY

About six Kanabis came to see Pana Bhag—Coopoo also came—
Letters: Maud, Winterbottom, Schlesin, Ritch, Chhaganlal1 ,
Abhechand—Amirudin.
MARCH 25, MONDAY

Ba & K. arrived. Ratanshi went to town.
Pd. for Hanif’s mattress & rug 1. 9. 3
Pd. for Sivpujan’s milk [?]
0. 5. 9
Stamps
0. 1. 6
_________
7. 12. 1
MARCH 26, TUESDAY

Sorabji left—I went to town on foot. Started at 3 and reached J. B. at
9.15.
Pd. Hanif’s benzine
0. 1. 0
Stamps
0. 0. 1
1

Vide “Letter to Chhaganlal Gandhi”, 24-3-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

311

_________
0. 0. 3
_________
7. 11. 3

Rd. from Sorabji balance
Bal.

MARCH 27, WEDNESDAY

Letters: Omar Zaveri, Manilal, Velshi, Mohanlal, Schlesin, Nathu
Bhana, Ahmed Bhana, Padiar, Editor, West.
Pd. stamps
0. 2. 2
Freight
0. 2. 1
_________
Bal.
7. 7. 0
MARCH 28, THURSDAY

Wrote letter to Schlesin. Valji Hari and Schlesin [came?] K. came
back.
MARCH 29, FRIDAY

Letter: Schlesin—K. came back.
MARCH 30, SATURDAY

Naidoo came & left. Bhikho left—Ratanshi came. K. Went &
returned.
Pd. for freight on Forage
0. 1. 3
_________
Bal.
7. 5. 9
MARCH 31, SUNDAY

Gordon, Schlesin and Annie [?] came. All left.
APRIL 1, MONDAY

Letters: Winterbottom, Maud, Mr. MacDonald, West, Langston,
Halim—K. Arrived—A boy, Feda, came for the night. Ratanshi &
Rajabali left.
Rd. stamps
0. 1. 0
Bread Basda
0. 0. 3
Kallenback
0. 2. 6
_________
Pd. freight on soap
0. 1. 0
312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Rajaab’s fare
Bal.

0. 3. 8
_________
7. 4. 10
APRIL 2, TUESDAY, CHATTRA VAD1

[Letters:] Medh, Hoosen Dawad, Rustomjee, West, Anglia, Chamney,
Thakkar, Fancy, Diwan, Maganlal, Mahomed Ismail, West, Tata 1 ,
Nathalia. Ritch, Schlesin, Kennedy came & let. Kallenbach came.
Stamps
0. 3. 6
APRIL 3, WEDNESDAY

Dano went to town, K. Also—Letters: Medh, Anandlal, Ani, Editor,
Maganlal, Andrews, Lachman Pandey, Ranchhod Hari.
Dana’s fare
0. 2. 0
APRIL 4, THURSDAY

Went to Johannesburg on foot & returned. K. & I with Sorabji,
Ratanshi, Dano, Rajabali and his brother came. Reached office at 8.50.
Rd. from Luxman
3. [0. 0]
for prizes, etc.
0. 12. 0
_________
Pd. for bag
0. 0. 9
Fare Ratansi
0. 2. 3
Paper
0. 0. 3
Leather
0. 17. 6
Buckles & tube
0. 2. 0
APRIL 5, FRIDAY

Editor, Umiyashanker, Ritch, Schlesin, Isaac, Marimootu, and a relative
of Parbhu came. Alibhai, Parbhu’s relative, left. Schlesin having
missed the train stayed over.
Rd. from John
0. 10. 0
_________
Stamps
0. 1. 7
John for milk
0. 12. 6
1

“Public Letter to Ratan J. Tata”, 1-4-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

313

APRIL 6, SATURDAY

[Letters:] West, and Lane. Raoji Manibhai, Naik, Schlesin, Manilal 1 ,
Mr. [?] Editor, Cole came. Ratanshi & Miss Schlesin left—Ratanshi
returned— Coriander, currants, potatoes,
railage vegetables,
coconut covers. . .2
1. 16. 0
Pd. for stamps
0. 0. 6
Freight
0. 1. 0
_________
Bal.
7. 7. 0
APRIL 7, SUNDAY

Mrs. Naidoo, Mr. Naidoo, Rangasamy, Miss Bush, Moorgan came.
Hanif’s health remained pretty bad.
APRIL 8, MONDAY

Mr. Phillips’ choir came. Ritch, Gordon and many others came.
Avabai stayed over, & so also Maneksha. About 200 persons came.
All left. Naidoo & Mrs. Naidoo too—Wrote letters to Winterbottom
and Maud.
Pd. Schlesin for Mrs. Vog1
re. Ind[ian] W[omen’s]
Ass[ociatio]n
1. 0. 0
_________
Bal.
6. 7. 0
APRIL 9, TUESDAY

Letters: Mehta, Editor, Good—Ratanshi, Miss Bush, Moorgan, Cole, K.
& Essack left. Wrote to Schlesin at night. K. & Cole returned.
Rd. Basda for sugar
0. 0. 3
Essack’s fare
0. 2. 0
Bal.
6. 5. 3
APRIL 10, WEDNESDAY

Avabai left, Sorabji also—Dorabji came at night.
Paid freight
0. 1. 6
1
2

314

Vide “Letter to Manilal Gandhi”, 6-4-1912.
A word here illegible
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APRIL 11, THURSDAY

Both went to town on foot—West, etc., came yesterday—accompanied
to Farm today. Wrote to Schlesin. Sodha came.
Paid Moorgan for expenses
1. 0. 0
APRIL 12, FRIDAY

Cole went to town & returned—Wrote to Schlesin.
Pd. for stamps
0. 1. 0
APRIL 13, SATURDAY

Krishnasamy, Dano, Dahyo and Bhago went to town—Wrote letters—
Pd. for freight on timber
0. 10. 5
Dana’s fare
0. 2. 3
_________________

Bal.

4. 10.

7

APRIL 14, SUNDAY

Schlesin & Coopoo came & left. Essack came. Bhai Ismail left.
Letters: Tayob Haji Khan Mahomed, L. Pandey, A[bdul] Ka[dir],
Noormahomed, Mahomed Halim, Gokuldas, Chhaganlal, Manilal1 .
Bal.
4. 10. 7
APRIL 15, MONDAY

K. & Cole went & returned—Dana & Bhago returned—Letters:
Winterbottom and Maud in the morning—Chhaganlal, Schlesin at
night.
Pd. stamps
0. 2. 6
Trip ticket
1. 6. 3
_________________

Bal.

3. 1. 10
APRIL 16, TUESDAY

[Letters:] D.M. Khan, Dada Abdulla, Harilal Thakkar, Nana, Omar
Zaveri, Parsee Rustomjee, Naik, Hajee Dada Hajee Habib,
Purshottamdas, Harilal, Manager, N.A. [?], E[ditor] I.O., Cole, West,
Miss West and Mrs. Left.
Rd. fr. Kal. for freight
0. 10. 5
“for Maud
0. 9. 0
1

“Letter to Manilal Gandhi”, 13-4-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

315

Stamps

0. 0.

2

_________________

Pd. for stamps

0. 1.

9

_________________

Bal.

3. 19.

8

APRIL 17, WEDNESDAY

Letters: Budrea, V. S. Naidoo, Chunilal, Anglia, Dawad Mahomed,
Harilal Thakkar, Manager I.O., Ani—Mrs. Naidoo & Marimootu
came. K. went & returned.
Rd. guest carriage
0. 11. 8
_________________

Pd. stamps

0. 1.

9

_________________

Bal.

4. 9.

7

APRIL 18, THURSDAY, VAISAKH SUD 1

K., Jamnadas & I left at 6 o’clock on foot. K. Took 4.45 hours to
reach [Johannesburg], J. & I six hours.
Rd. for Naidoo
0. 10. 0
_________
Books for the boys
0. 3. 0
Potash
0. 2. 0
Tape and pins
0. 1. 6
Cheddar cheese
0. 1. 3
Paper
0. 0. 3
_________
Bal.
4. 11. 7
APRIL 19, FRIDAY

K. Went to town & to Pretoria. Letters: Chhaganlal, Tavaria, Manilal,
Ismail, Jada, Thambi Naidoo.
APRIL 20, SATURDAY

Fakira & Bhanabhai left—Ratanshi, Velshi, Jivan Bojo & Ibrahim
came. K. returned. Schlesin also came. Velshi sent a cheque for £3.
Rd. cheque fr. Velshi
3. 0. 0
Rd. for sugar
0. 0. 6
_________
Pd. freight
0. 1. 0
316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APRIL 21, SUNDAY

Vethan, Kallenbach & his wife came by car. Gordon & Jamnadas
came on foot. Schlesin, etc., left. I also. Meeting in Hamidia Hall.
Slept in Office. Boys slept at Van Wyksrust.
Pd. trip ticket
1. 6. 3
APRIL 22, MONDAY

Naidoo’s sons & I returned. Heard that Revashanker was beaten up by
the police yesterday.
Pd. for freight
0. 1. 0
_________
Rd. for young Bhayat
1. 10. 0
_________
Bal.
4. 13. 10
APRIL 23, TUESDAY

[Letters:] Khushalchand, Lakshmichand, Karsandas, Meghji Raoji,
Revashanker Jagjivan.
APRIL 24, WEDNESDAY

[Letters:] Purshottamdas, Chamney, Editor
Rd. for Bhaga
0. 1. 0
Coffee
0. 0. 6
_________
Stamps
0. 2. 0
_________
Bal.
4. 13. 4
APRIL 25, THURSDAY

Fifteen boys, K. & I went to town on foot. Rajabali and two of us
returned. Saw Kitchin[?]. Depositions before Chamney.
Pd. for Rajab’s ticket
0. 1. 2
_________
Bal.
4. 12. 2
APRIL 26, FRIDAY

[Letters:] Mahomed Belim, Sorabji, Schlesin.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

317

APRIL 27, SATURDAY

Hanif & K. went to town—Letters: Chhanganlal, Revashankerbhai,
Doctor, Manilal, Jeki, Maganlal, Velshi, Motilal. K. returned. Suleman
Kasu brought his certificate.
Pd. Hanif
0. 7. 11
Stamps
0. 0. 9
_________
Bal.
4. 3. 6
APRIL 28, SUNDAY

Gordon, Schlesin & I went to Germiston on foot. Ramdas, Ratanshi &
Sivpujan followed. Ritch came by train. Slept last night at Ritch’s.
Cachalia, Sorabji & Naidoo also came.
APRIL 29, MONDAY

Slept last night at Gordon’s. Arrived at Farm at 6.20 a.m., along with
the boys. K. met us on the way & turned back. Albert broke fifteen
days’ old fast. Hanif came at night, so also Cachalia, Aswat, Vaja &
other gentlemen and also Sodha. Krishnasamy, Ali & Mahomed are
out.
Rd. Gordon
0. 1. 0
Fakir & Essack
3. 0. 0
_________
Bal.
£7. 4. 6
APRIL 30, TUESDAY

A. Cachalia, Aswat, etc., left. Ali, Mahomed came. Mahomed Essack
came. Ratanshi & Rambha left.
Pd. Sodha
0. 16. 10
MAY 1, WEDNESDAY

K. and I went to J. B. on foot, starting at 1.40 a.m., and from there to
Germiston. K. went to Pretoria. Krishnasamy came. Ba ill.
Rd. fr. John
0. 0. 6
_________
Pd. fare Germiston
0. 1. 7
Freight
0. 1. 7
318

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

MAY 2, THURSDAY, VAISAKH VAD 1

Went to town with K. in morning on foot. Took 5 [hrs]-40 minutes.
West, etc., returned. Chhotalal also came.
Pd. watch repair
Rail

0. 3. 6
0. 0. 2
MAY 3, FRIDAY

West went to town. Letters to Lane, Mahomed Hasam Mitha,
Chhaganlal, Dangare, Mahomed Aba, Captain Stuart—Velshi, West
returned.
Rd. for West tickets
Rail Naidoo boys
Whip lash
Stamp
Bal.

0. 7. 11
0. 5. 10
0. 0. 9
0. 1. 0
______
6. 1. 8
MAY 4, SATURDAY

Jamnadas, . . . 1 Dano & Hanif went to J. B. Hanif returned by
afternoon train. J. & I reached in 4[hrs]-37_ minutes. Wrote letters to
Hoosen & Ismail Gora.
MAY 5, SUNDAY

Schlesin, Jamnadas, Dano & Bhago came walking—Parbhu, Hanif,
Dahya and also Ismail met Imam. Isaac, Miss Ploughman and Gordon
arrived by train—Schlesin, Gordon, Isaac & Miss [Ploughman] left-Pd. freight

0. 2.

0

MAY 6, MONDAY

Kallenbach went to J. B. on foot having missed the train through
forgetfulness & came back. Sorabji arrived. Wrote letters to Miss
Winterbottom, Maud, etc.
Rd. fr. West fr. Vyas
Stamps

1

1. 0.
0. 2.

0
0

A name illegible here

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

319

MAY 7, TUESDAY

The West family left. All went [to the station] to see them off. Miss
West stayed on. Letters: Dawad Mahomed, A. E. Jada, Chhaganlal,
Manilal, Ved Dharma Sabha, Boksburg, West, Purshottamdas,
Chamney; [also] letters to Ani, Chhaganlal, Rahim, Naik, Anandlal,
Vyas.
Rd. for West

0. 6. 1
_________

Pd. trip ticket

1. 6.

Pd. John for milk

3

0. 10. 0
_________
5. 7.

0

MAY 8, WEDNESDAY

[Letters:] Editor, Schlesin, E. Kotwal, Lzarus, Raoji, Cole, Dahyabhai,
Chunilal, Roche, Lane. At night Lalbahadursingh & Ramavatar came.
Pd. stamps & freight

0. 2.

0

MAY 9, THURSDAY

K., Sorabji & I went to J. B. on foot. K. & I returned.
Rd. for Laxman

3. 0.

0

0. 11.

0

Pd. for sultanas, broom, barley,
etc.
Hanif’s socks and gloves
Freight

0. 2. 6
0. 0. 11
_________
7. 10.

7

MAY 10, FRIDAY

[Letters:] Parekh, Chamney, Polak.
Pd. freight

320

0. 2.

0

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

MAY 11, SATURDAY

Jamnadas, Dano, Sivpujan, Coopoo & Suleman have gone to town on
foot. Sent Ramdas to sleep at Devi’s.
Pd. Vyas for West
0. 17. 0
Rd. for Vyas for int[erest] next
year per p.c. note
0. 17. 0
Payment not entered in cash book as £ 1 rd. 1st May not entered.
MAY 12, SUNDAY

Schlesin, Mrs. Naidoo & her sister came & left. Jamnadas, Shivpujan
& Coopoo returned. Wrote letters to West, Manilal, Yashwant Sadashiv,
Lazarus, Abdool Karim Zaveri, Velshi, Dawad Mahomed.
MAY 13, MONDAY

[Letters:] Editor, Manilal Doctor, Anandlal, Chhaganlal, Pranjivan. K.
went to town & returned.
Pd. stamps
0. 2. 0
MAY 14, TUESDAY

[Letters:] West, Ismail Gora, Omar Zaveri, Moosa Hajee Adam, Pragji.
Rd. fr. John
0. 0. 9
_________
Pd. wire to Manilal
0. 1. 3
Stamps
0. 0. 9
_________
Bal.
7. 5. 4
MAY 15, WEDNESDAY

K. & I went to town on foot. Went round with Cachalia, etc., collecting
funds. Slept at Gordon’s.
MAY 16, THURSDAY

Returned in the morning with Schlesin & Gordon on foot. Dano
came. Some friends of K.’s came & left. Gordon & Schlesin also left.
MAY 17, FRIDAY, JETH SUD, 1

Did not write a single letter during the day. Spent the whole morning
in the kitchen.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

321

MAY 18, SATURDAY

Hanif, I & Devdas went to town on foot. Busy with collection. Slept at
Gordon’s. Wrote to Kotwal.
Pd. Hanif
0. 2. 6
Devadas
0. 0. 6
MAY 19, SUNDAY

All three returned from town. Cole came to Farm. So did Premo.
Premo returned. Letters: Maud, Winterbottom, Kalidas Patel.
MAY 20, MONDAY

Manilal Doctor & Jeki and Sorabji came. Rambha also. In the
evening, Suleman, Kallenback & Narsimulu came.
Rd. fr. John
0. 1. 0
Pd. stamps
0. 1. 0
MAY 21, TUESDAY

[Letters:] Lane1 , Manilal, Lotwal, Chhaganalal, [De] Vere [?],
Schlesin, Ti...2 Sinsingle.
Pd. for stamps
0. 2. 6
MAY 22, WEDNESDAY

[Letters:] Anglia, Chamney, Rustomjee, Dada Osman, Chhaganlal,
Kotwal, Dhoribjai. Rambha, Revashankers, Chotan & Jamndas left.
Ramparshi Hario came. Isaac came & left.,
Rd. Dahya’s Board
1. 10. 0
Rd. Jamnadas
3. 0. 0
Luggage
0. 2. 3
not entered
MAY 23, THURSDAY

[Letters:] Chhaganlal, West, Velshi, Boyd.
Pd. railage for Vijiya
0. 2. 6
Stamps
0. 1. 0
Freight
0. 1. 0

1
2

322

Vide “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”, 21-5-1912.
Some letters in this word are illegible.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

MAY 24, FRIDAY

Krishnasamy, Bhago, Dahyo & I went to town on foot. Took 5 [hrs]14 minutes. Meeting about school—Manilal, Ba & Jeki came to town.
Ba, Jeki, Manilal & I returned. So did Revashanker.
Freight
0. 1. 0
MAY 25, SATURDAY

[Letters:] Kotwal, Chamney, Rustomjee, Manolal-Schlesin came &
left—
Rd. John & stamps
0. 0. 9
_________
Stamps
0. 1. 0
_________
Bal.
2. 1. 10
Rd. returned Jamnadas [?]
3. 0. 0
_________
5. 1. 10
MAY 26, SUNDAY

Schlesin, Gordon, Quinn & Gulam Mahomed Mulla came. All went
back. Wrote letters.
Rd. fr. Devi
0. 5. 0
MAY 27, MONDAY

[Letters:] Chhaganlal, Purshottamdas, Manilal Desai, Captain Stuart,
Maud, Pranjivan, Winterbottom, Anandlal, West, Isaac, Rustomjee.
Jamnadas left. Dahyo, Kallen[bach] & Cole came.
Pd. stamps
0. 2. 6
“
0. 2. 6
MAY 28, TUESDAY

Sent [letters] to [:] Velshi, Anandlal, Editor, Mahomed Ismail,
Schlesin, Jamnadas, Chhaganlal, West, Medh.
Kunwarji, Tavaria. Dano went to town. K. & Manilal returned. Three
Tamils—Francis, etc—came.
Pd. Dana
0. 2. 0

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

323

MAY 29, WEDNESDAY

[Letters:] Editor,
Jamun[adas].

Purshottamdas,

Manga

Soma,

Chhaganlal,

MAY 30, THURSDAY

Kallenback, Coopoo, Sivpujan and Suleman & I walked to town.
Manilal & Kotwal came. Left same evening.
MAY 31, FRIDAY, JETH VAD 1

Kotwal, Manilal, Kallenback, Coopoo, Sivpujan & Suleman and also I
went [to town] on foot. Devibehn, etc., came to receive us. Took 5
[hrs]-12 minutes to reach J.B. 6 [hrs]-10 minutes on the way back.
Pd. for carriage re. Kotwal’s goods,
etc.
0. 3.
0
Pd. carriage Suleman & Bhaga
0. 5.
0
JUNE 1, SATURDAY

15 boys, Kallenbach, Kotwal, Schlesin, Sorabji & I went on foot to
Vereeniging.1 Ba, Devi, & Jeki Vijiya & baby left by train. Bhago &
Suleman left last night to join in cooking.
Pd. for railage, etc.
1. 0. 0
JUNE 2, SUNDAY

Spent in Vereeniging. Ba, Kallenbach, Manilal, Schlesin & Sorabji
returned by evening train.
Pd. Kallenbach
1. 0. 0
not entered
JUNE 3, MONDAY

All of us returned with the boys. Mr. Suji came along with us.
Reached home at 4. Dano came. Ranchhod Dhana came to ask about
his boy.
Rd. for Dana
0. 2. 0
Pd. Miss West
0. 2. 6
JUNE 4, TUESDAY

[Letters:] Anandlal, Purshottamdas, Schlesin, Narandas, Hazurasingh,
1

Presumably for the party (“the treat”) that Aswat gave to the “boys”. Indian
Opinion, 8-6-1912.

324

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Kalidas Patel, Chhaganlal, Maganlal, E. N. Patel. Mr. Bhayat’s three
sons, Essop, Mahomed & Ibrahim came—K. came on foot.
Pd. stamps
0. 2. 0
Freight
0. 1. 7
_________
Bal
2. 8. 0
JUNE 5, WEDNESDAY

[Letters:] Beethasee, Sanghavi, Dada Osman, Dada Abdoolla, Damania,
Hassan, Essop Moosa Hajee Adam, Cole, Ritch, Editor, Mahomed
Hassim, Bhayat. Narsimulu left.
Rd. Dana
0. 0. 6
Rail Narsimulu
0. 2. 0
JUNE 6, THURSDAY

K. & I went to town. Slept at Gordon’s. K. went back. Schlesin’s
birthday.
Rd. fr. Dahya for Mehta’s book 0. 1. 0
Pd. freight
0. 1. 0
Milk
0. 4. 0
JUNE 7, FRIDAY

Went to Pretoria. Saw Chamney and also Lane. Came back to Farm.
Manilal Doctor came to town yesterday, walking.
Pd. rail to Pret[oria]
0. 10. 0
Paper
0. 0. 3
Freight on K.’s bag
0. 0. 3
Freight on goods
0. 1. 4
JUNE 8, SATURDAY

Bhayat’s sons left for Boksburg. Letters: Dr. Gool, Velshi, Lazarus,
Chhaganlal, West, Omar Zaveri, Fancy. Gordon came—also Valji.
Pd. stamps
0. 2. 3
Pd. Kallenbach
0. 2. 6
_________
Bal.
1. 6. 5

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

325

JUNE 9, SUNDAY

Valji, K. & Gordon left—Dano & Bhago also. Edlestein [?] came &
left.
JUNE 10, MONDAY

[Letters:] Mrs. Mayo, Chhaganlal, Editor, Maud, Winterbottom, Mehta,
Bhaga Daji, Navsari [Hindu United Trading] Co[mpany], Schlesin.
Joshi & Chhagan[lal Bhawanidas] Gheewala [Randeria] of Cape Town
came and went back.
Pd. freight
0. 2. 1
Stamp
0. 1. 0
Freight
0. 2. 3
JUNE 11, TUESDAY

[Letters:] Maganlal, Jamnadas, West, Thakkar. Dano came—young
Bhago came. So did Tikli’s brother and other Gujarati Hindus [to
ask] about their sons. The Hindus, Tikli’s brother and Tikli left.
JUNE 12, WEDNESDAY

Dano left school.
Rd. Dr. Mehta’s book Bhago
„ fr. Bhago for st[am]ps
St[am]ps

0. 1. 3
0. 0. 9
_________
0. 1. 0

JUNE 13, THURSDAY

K., Fakir, Revashanker & Ismail went to town. I too. K. & I, with
Chhotam, came back. Sorabji also came.
Rd. for sugar
0. 0. 6
_________
Pd. carriage
0. 1. 0
Freight
0. 7. 0
JUNE 14, FRIDAY

Letters: Dada Abdoolla, Mahomed Hassim, Nathu Kasam, Dangare,
Motilal Diwan. Manilal Doctor and Sorabji left.
Rd. fr. K.
1. 2. 6
P[d.] Stamps
0. 1. 0
326

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

JUNE 15, SATURDAY

[Letters:] Editor, Velshi, Manilal, Narandas.
Rd. for sugar
0. 3. 0
Rd. for stamps
0. 0. 8
JUNE 16, SUNDAY, ASHADH SUD, 1

Coopoo, Revashanker and Fakir came. Ismail did not return & has
discontinued [school] from today. Coopoo, Fakiri and friends left.
Letters: Purshottamdas, Chhaganlal, Winterbottom, Maud, Schlesin,
Dada Osman.
Rd. for Essack
2. 0. 0
Rd. milk
0. 0. 6
JUNE 17, MONDAY

Young Bhago left. K. went to town & came back.
Pd. young Bhago
0. 1. 6
Stamps
0. 2. 3
JUNE 18, TUESDAY

[Letters:] Harilal Thakkar, Editor, West, Chhaganlal, Gordon, Ritch,
Imamali. Vaja & Mohamed who had come, left.
Rd. for Mehta’s book
0. 1. 3
Sugar
0. 0. 3
_________
Stamps
0. 1. 0
Freight
0. 1. 0
JUNE 19, WEDNESDAY

[Letters:] Fancy, Editor, West, Shaer, Parbhu Bhaga, Narandas,
Bharucha, Vaja Moojaji. Makda came & left. Naidoo’s sons came.
Pd. freight
0. 2. 5
Stamps
0. 0. 4
JUNE 20, THURSDAY

K., I, Hanif, Devdas, Parbhu, Coopoo, Krishnasamy, Ali, Luxman,
Sivpujan [and] Bhago went to town. Spent night at Ritch’s. Rajabali
went to Pretoria. Parbhu’s brother brought at the office £5.
JUNE 21, FRIDAY

Still in J. B. Night at Gordon’s. Went round for collection,
accompanied by Sorabji.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

327

JUNE 22, SATURDAY

K. & I returned with all the others including the boys except Ali and
Parbhu. In the afternoon Schlesin came. Devi, Fakir, Bharat Sarthi,
etc., had gone to receive them.
JUNE 23, SUNDAY

Boksburg people came. Quinn came. Gordan & Manilal also came.
All left. Wrote letters at night.
JUNE 24, MONDAY

[Letters:] Editor, Chhaganlal, Bhayat, Maud, Doctor, Anandlal,
Winterbottom, West, Abhechand, Mohanlal, Harilal Thakkar.
Kallenbach & Davis came.
Stamps
0. 2. 6
Freight
0. 2. 4
JUNE 25, TUESDAY

[Letters:] West, Thakkar, Chhaganlal.
JUNE 26, WEDNESDAY

Manilal & I went to J. B. Ba & Jeki went by train. Came back. Sorabji
also came.
Wire
0. 1. 7
Freight
0. 0. 9
Not traced
1. 0. 0
Rajabali
0. 5. 3
_________
Bal.
2. 5. 10
JUNE 27, THURSDAY

[Letters:] Chhaganlal, Tikli, Hajee Dada, Hajee Habib, Mahomed Baba,
Dada Abdoolla—Sorabji left. Jan Effendi [?] came. K. went &
returned.
Rd. from Dahya for Dana’s book 0. 0. 3
Sugar, etc.
0. 0. 6
Pd. for the mules

0.18.

6

Bal.

1. 8.

1

328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Rd. fr. Miss S.

10. 0. 0
_________
11. 8. 1
JUNE 28, FRIDAY

Ba & I left for Durban.
Tickets to Dur[ban]
Schlesin

6. 6.
0. 3.

8
0

JUNE 29, SATURDAY

Arrived in Durban. Considerable inconvenience on the way. A good
many people had come to the station. Meeting of Ottoman Cricket
Club in the evening.1 Jamnadas & the two of us went to Phoenix by
evening train.
JUNE 30, SUNDAY, ASHADH VAD 1

Jamnadas, I, etc., left Phoenix on foot. Met Omar Sheth, etc., on
the way & I went by carriage to attend Istanbul Anjuman meeting. Meal at Hajee Hassim’s. Went to Abdool Huq’s. Congress
meeting in the evening. Abdool Karim Sheth elected. Problem of
Colonial-born [Indians]. Night at Omar Sheth’s.
JULY 1, MONDAY

Went to Phoenix in the morning. Returned by 4 o’clock train. Held
meeting about Deed. Lunch at Ismail Hafeejee Moosa’s. Gujarati
meeting in the evening. Problem of Colonial-born [Indians].
JULY 2, TUESDAY

Dawad Mahomed, Rustomjee, Abdool Karim, Abdool Huq, etc., came
to Phoenix. At Chetty’s by 1.36 train for lunch. Evening at Mahomed
Ibrahim’s. Anjuman meeting . Went with Rutnam to sleep at his place.
Odd thing.
JULY 3, WEDNESDAY

Dawad Sheth left. Went to Abdool Kadir Sheth’s. Met Colonialborn
[Indians] in the evening. Slept at Omar Sheth’s.
JULY 4, THURSDAY

Went to Phoenix in the morning. Met Raghavji, Talevant Singh.
1

Vide “Speech at Durban Farewell to Pilgrims”, 29-6-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

329

Enema [prescribed] to Sam’s wife. Dr. Stanton came. In the evening,
Mahomed Ibrahim Anglia, etc., came . Left at night. Purshottamdas
and Ani came.
JULY 5, FRIDAY

I & Purshottamdas left for Durban by the afternoon train. Met
[people] at Budrea’s. Left for J. B. in evening.
Rail phone cycle
0. 6. 0
JULY 6, SATURDAY

Inconvenience in the train.
JULY 7, SUNDAY

Arrived in J. B. Had a talk with Manilal Doctor. Speech at night.
Kotwal came on foot. Manilal & Ba went to Farm. Manilal, Devi and
Jeki came.
Pd. trip ticket
1. 6. 3
Ricksha, etc.
0. 1. 6
JULY 8, MONDAY

Ramdas, Fakir and other boys went to Farm. Manilal writes to say
that he doesn’t now want to go—Fiji. Slept at office at night—Kotwal
& I. Jeki & Solbehn left by morning train. Manilal, Suleman, Ali, K.
came in the evening. Sorabji, I & Bhago walked down.
Rd. for Fakir
3. 0. 0
JULY 9, TUESDAY

[Letters:] Editor, Velshi. Sorabji went to town. Sent invitation to Mrs.
Vogl for a visit here.
Rd. for Jasma
0. 0. 1
_________
Pd. For stamps
0. 2. 0
Hanif
0. 1. 6
Railage etc. during Natal visit not
entered
0. 4. 5
_________
Bal.
£5. 16. 10

330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

JULY 10, WEDNESDAY

[Letters:] Editor, Medh, Pragji, Anandlal, Omar Hajee Amod—Uka
Bhana, Gopal Vallabh, Kanji Raoji came on Thursday [sic]. Ibrahim,
Ahmed and Mahomed Ahmed Sunara came.
JULY 11, THURSDAY

K. & I went to town, walking. Krishnasamy & Dano also came along.
Saw Chamney. K., Dano, Dahyo & I returned.
Pd. Chamney for wire
0. 3. 0
„ Wire Phoenix re. Ani etc
0. 2. 0
JULY 12, FRIDAY

[Letters:] Chhaganlal, Editor, Dada Osman, Raghavji, Purshottamds.
Kotwal, Manilal & I left by evening train. Function in honour of
Chettiar, etc. Kotwal & I slept at Ritch’s.
Rd. for Mrs. Tilak & Mrs. Stead 1. 10. 0
_________
Richsha
0. 1. 0
JULY 13, SATURDAY

Kotwal & I returned. Jammadas. Ani and her sons came in the
evening.
Rd. for sugar etc.
0. 2. 8
_________
Pd. for wire to Gool re. Manilal 0. 2. 6
JULY 14, SUNDAY

Mrs. Badhasingh [?.], Ramji Kanji’s father, Schlesin, her sister,
Gordon came—All left in the evening. Dhaled had also come.
Rd. for Dahya
0. 2. 0
_________
Pd. for stranger
0. 2. 0
JULY 15, MONDAY, ASHADH SUD 1

[Letters:] Naik, Dr. Gool, Tikli, Paul, West, Editor, Chhaganlal,
Winterbottom, Maud, Mehta, Manilal, Chhaganlal, Tipnis, Rustomjee,
Mrs. Shaer, Sulemanji Patel, Shelat, Anglia, Vallabhji Brothers,
Kallenbach & Dano went & returned.
Pd. stamps
0. 2. 6
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

331

JULY 16, TUESDAY

[Letters:] Schlesin, Kharwa, Editor, Thakkar, Sam, Laughton, Joshi,
Anglia, Telegram to Laughton.
Rd. from Dana
0. 2. 0
_________
Pd. stamps
0. 2. 0
JULY 17, WEDNESDAY

[Letters:] Khan, Editor, Mararji. Bhago went to town. Sent letter to
Schlesin with him.
Pd. for freight
0. 2. 0
Kallenbach’s freight
0. 1. 8
Stamps
0. 0. 2
JULY 18, THURSDAY

Kallenbach, Dano & I went to town and came back. Caught cold. Saw
Town Clerk. Had a talk about Malay Location and Crematorium.
Rd. for Fakir’s books
1. 0. 0
_________
Pd. freight
0. 2. 5
JULY 19, FRIDAY

Three persons came and went back—Gold continues. Sorabji came in
the evening. Telegram from Interior that settlement stood.
Pd. telegrams [to] Rustomji [&]
Asiatics1
0. 3. 8
2
Pd. freight. . .
0. 1. 0
_________
Bal.
7. 7. 7
JULY 20, SATURDAY

[Letter:] Chhaganlal, Virji, Rustomjee, Nathalia, Virji—Nathu Naik,
Gajjar, Balkrishna, Azam Abed, Suleman Mamuji, Purshottamdas,
Prabhashanker, Balkrishna, Azam Abed, I.E[?]. Paredh, Diwan,
Mahomed Ismail, etc. Sorabji & Schlesin came and left by night
1
2

332

Telegraphic address of the Registrar of Asiatics
Illegible
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

train—
Stamps

0. 3.

6

JULY 21, SUNDAY

Letters: Maud, Doctor & Winterbottom, Harilal—Kotwal, Kallenbach,
Jamnadas & I went to town on foot. Meeting about Mrs. Tilak. Sorabji
left. Gordon came to Farm & went back.
JULY 22, MONDAY

Kotwal & I returned to the Farm. Ba & Jamnadas stayed back in town.
Will return in the evening. Also K. [Letters:] Khanderia, Anglia,
Editor.
Pd. trip ticket
1. 6. 3
Chamney’s wire re. Sorab
0. 2. 1
Freight forage
0. 1. 3
Mrs. G.
2. 0. 0
_________
Bal.
3. 14. 6
JULY 23, TUESDAY

Dano & I went to town K. went by train. Meeting with Chamney.
K. & I returned.
Pd. Mrs. Hearth
0. 1. 0
JULY 24, WEDNESDAY

[Letters:] Anglia, Editor, Hakim Saleji, Abdool Hajee Adam, Hajee
Dada, Hajee Habib.
JULY 25, THURSDAY

[Letters:] Naik, Dada Abdoolla, Jayashanker, Editor, Chotabhai,
Chhotabhai
Udyar,
Khushalbhai,
Chhaganlal,
Meghjibhai,
Revashanker, Royeppen, Rutnam, Purshottamdas, Harilal, Editor,
Somabhai, Chhabildas, K. & Manilal went to town on foot & returned.
Pd. stamps
0. 2. 6
JULY 26, FRIDAY

[Letters:] Ibrahim Noormahomed, Shapuriji, Durbin [?], Naik,
Purshottamdas, Schlesin, Charlie, Maliha, G. P. Patel. Kanji, anew boy,
came. Two men had come escorting him & returned.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

333

Rd. Kanji’s board
Bal.

1. 10. 0
_________
5. 1. 0
JULY 27, SATURDAY

[Letters:] Vallabh Nathu, Winterbottom, Dirk, West, Dano Bhago.
Rd. from Gordon, bread
1. 0. 0
_________
Pd. Kall. railage for West
& wife [?]
1. 6. 9
Gordon for Jam[nadas]’s suit
1. 10. 1
Baths, saucepans etc.
1. 13. 0
Knickers, Calico, etc
2. 2. 0
Jeki’s flannelette
0. 5. 0
less including Gordon’s
6. 16. 9
Cash paid today
5. 0. 0
_________
1. 16. 9
St[am]ps
0. 2. 1
JULY 28, SUNDAY

Schlesin & Ritch came & left. Telegram to say Gohkale will start on
October 5. Manilal left for Fiji on Friday.
JULY 29, MONDAY

[Letters:] Editor, Joshi, Bhaga Daji, Mansukh1 , Fiji [?], Purshottamdas,
Kalidas, Sorabji, Maud, Doctor, Gohkale2 , Dungarsi, Kanaiyalal, Dana
Valji, Chhaganlal, K. & Dano came.
Stamps
0. 2. 0
_________
Bal.
3. 0. 3
JULY 30, TUESDAY

[Letters:] Dada Abdoola, Wybergh, Osman Omar, Rooknoodeen,
Hoosen Dawad, Cole, Schlesin, Suleman Mamuji, Ram Bahadur,
Bhawani Dayal, Motilal, West, Chhabildas, Khan. Thambi Naidoo
1
2

334

“Letter to Mansukh”, July 27, 1912
“Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, July 28, 1912
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

came & took his children with him.
JULY 31, WEDNESDAY

Wrote in the evening to Keshav Fakir, Joseph, Solomon, Royeppen,
Amod Metar, Govan Manji, Fulchand Shah, Govindlal. Solomon,
Beethasee, Singaram, Pragji, Sheikh, Coovadia. K. & Gordon came.
AUGUST 1, THURSDAY

K., Kotwal, Ramdas & I went to town. Party to Chettiar1 . Jeki came in
the evening. Manilal & Jamnadas came by train.
Trip ticket
1. 6. 3
AUGUST 2, FRIDAY

All returned form town in the morning. K. returned in the evening.
Pd. for milk
0. 0. 3
Leather
1. 5. 0
Curds etc.
0. 2. 0
Dana Valji
0. 2. 6
AUGUST 3, SATURDAY

[Letters:] Abhechand, Chhaganlal, Albert, Naik, Vyas, Hunter, Hassan,
Essack, Durbin, Ritch, Tutla, Chunu, Omar Hajee Amod, Rustomjee,
Purshottamdas, Chamney,
Freight
0. 2. 6
_________
Bal.
0. 1. 9
AUGUST 4, SUNDAY

[Letters:] Schlesin, Chamney, Maud, Thakkar, Winterbottom,
Gokhale2 . Chhabildas, Editor, Doctor, Fancy, Sorabji, Manilal Fiji.
Telegram to Chamney. Schlesin came & left, Gordon also came in the
evening and left.
AUGUST 5, MONDAY

Kallenbach went to town. Ratanshi, etc., who had come also left.
1
2

Vide “ Speech at Johannesburg Banquet to V. A. Chettiar”, 1-8-1912
Vide “ Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 4-8-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

335

AUGUST 6, TUESDAY

[Letters:] Joshi (Cape), Schlesin—sent to Schlesin and . . .1 her drafts
of letter to Town Clerk and that about Fatima by rail post.
[Also letters to:] Laughton, Nathalia, Madhavdas, Omar Hajee Amod,
Godbole, Rajkumar, Somabhai, Kallenbach Came. Naidoo’s sons
came.
AUGUST 7, WEDNESDAY

Kanji came. Wrote to Schlesin. Kallenbach went to town by night
train.
Rd. from Kanji
0. 2. 0
_________
Freight
0. 1. 6
AUGUST 8, THURSDAY

[Letters:] Naransami Aiyar, Chhagan, Chanchal, Umiyashanker,
Naidoo, Naidoo [sic], Ishwarbhai Gordhands, N. J. Shaikh. also Jani
[?] Jagabhai Chhabildas, Gavarishanker, Christopher, Maganbhai,
Editor, K. arrived at night.
Rd. for John
0. 2. 9
, , freight & ect.
0. 1. 6
Pd. freight
0. 1. 6
AUGUST 9, FRIDAY

Posted Natal Bank letter.
Pd. wire Gokaldas
Stamps
Pd. milk freight

0. 1.
0. 1.
0. 0.

0
6
3

AUGUST 10, SATURDAY

Kotwal & I went to town on foot, also Kallenbach. I went to
Roodepoort & Krugersdorp, accompanied by Cachalia. Kotwal
returned after affixing his signature.
AUGUST 11, SUNDAY

Left Krusgesdorp by morning train for J. B. found Ba and Ani ill.
Schlesin and Fakir also came along in train.
1

336

BIA., Johannesburg?
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Rd. fr. Schlesin
Pd. fare Lawley

0. 12.
0. 2.

6
3

AUGUST 12, MONDAY

Illness continues, school closed in evening. Kallenbach went to town
& returned. With him came Gokaldas Makwa’s mother, Ba, M [?], etc.
Also Tulsi
AUGUST 13, TUESDAY, SHRAVAN SUD 1

Tulsi, etc., left in the morning. Kallenbach went to town & returned .
Thambi Naidoo came & left in the afternoon.
AUGUST 14, WEDNESDAY

Illness continues. Ramzan commences. Almost all boys observed a
partial fast and had only one meal. Essack went to J. B. K. went to
town by night train. Schlesin and a friend of hers came. Both left.
Chettiar, who had come on Monday, left.
AUGUST 15, THURSDAY

Kallenbach arrived in the evening.
AUGUST 16, FRIDAY

Lallubhai and Lachman Pandey and Ramavatar came. Left in the
afternoon. Rajabali and Mahomed went to town.
AUGUST 17, SATURDAY

Sent letter to I.O. Wrote to Chhaganlal 1 and Purshottamdas. Illness
subsided. Hanif. Coopoo & Bhago went to town. Devibehn went to
town.
Rd. for Gokaldas
0. 7. 0
Pd. Hanif
0. 4. 6
Devi
0. 5. 0
AUGUST 18, SUNDAY

Kotwal, Krishnasamy, Kanji, Gopal, Luxman, Govindoo & I went on
foot . A Hindu meeting was held. Much disturbance. Had a long talk
with Kotwal.
1

“Letter to Chhaganlal Gandhi”, August 16, 1912 (pp. 302-3)?

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

337

AUGUST 19, MONDAY

Kotwal, Luxman, Devi & I returned to Farm. Hanif, Kallenbach &
Essack arrived by night train.
Rd. for Luxman
5. 0. 0
including 10% books refund 0. 0. 9
_________
Pd. trip ticket
1. 6. 3
Freight
0. 1. 8
Luxman’s ticket
0. 1. 6
AUGUST 20, TUESDAY

[Letters:] Omar Zaveri, Rustomjee, Schlesin, Chamney1 , Anandlal,
Popat, Virji, Purshottamdas, Motilal, Dada Abdoolla, Chhaganlal,
Velshi. Bhago, Kanji & Gopal arrived.
Stamps
0. 1. 0
Freight on fruit
0. 1. 3
AUGUST 21, WEDNESDAY
[No entry]
AUGUST 22, THURSDAY 2

Kotwal & I went to town for lecture on Theosophy.
Trip ticket book for Miss West 1. 6. 3
K’s present
0. 10. 0
AUGUST 23, FRIDAY

In town again.
AUGUST 24, SATURDAY

Schlesin and Geevers [?] came & left.
AUGUST 25, SUNDAY

Kotwal, I & Jamnadas attended Association meeting. 3 Had lunch at
Geevers’.
1
2

“Letter to Registrar of Asiatics”, August 19, 1912 (p. 305)?
“The accounts under this date have been cancelled and entered under august

26, 1912
3
Vide “ Speech at Meeting of British Indian Association”, 25-8-1912.

338

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

AUGUST 26, MONDAY

All three returned to Farm—Mrs. P. K. Naidoo came.
Trip ticket Miss West Thursday 1. 6. 3
Present by Kallenbach
0. 10. 0
Waggon repair
1. 5. 0
AUGUST 27, TUESDAY

Geevers came.
AUGUST 28, WEDNESDAY, SHARAVAN VAD 1

Kotwal & I went to town. Tamil meeting—Returned.
Rd. Moosa Nathi
0. 3. 0
_________
Kotwal’s parcels
0. 7. 11
AUGUST 29, THURSDAY

Kallenbach, Kotwal, Manilal, Sivpujan, Dano went to town on foot.
Rd. for Schlesin
0. 10. 0
Rd. for Mehta’s book
0. 1. 3
_________
Pd. freights
0. 2. 6
Stamps
0. 7. 0
AUGUST 30, FRIDAY

Left for Durban—Accompained by Kastur, Dano, Sivpujan, Devdas.
Jeki, Manila, Ramdas & Revashanker came to town—
Pd. fr. Teckets etc.
9. 19. 10
Pd. tickets for Lawley
0. 8. 6
Ticket Sivpujan
3. 3. 4
_________
Bal.
7. 1. 7
AUGUST 31, SATURDAY

Reached Durban—Came to Phoenix in evening, accompanied by
Purshottamdas
SEPTEMBER 1, SUNDAY

In Phoenix for whole day.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

339

SEPTEMBER 2, MONDAY

Went to Durban town. Purshottamdas & I walked. Returned in
evening.
Wires re. Makda
0. 9. 9
SEPTEMBER 3, TUESDAY

Went to town. Night in the town.
SEPTEMBER 4, WEDNESDAY

Polak came. Stayed at Mr. Moosa’s. Pragji also came.
Rd. fr. Kallenbach at D[urba]n 1. 10. 0
_________
Pd. wire re. Pragji
0. 8. 0
Wire re. Makda
0. 2. 9
Pd. Albert
1. 0. 0
Wires & fares
0. 10. 10
_________
Bal.
6. 1. 0
SEPTEMBER 5, THURSDAY

Whole day in Phoenix. Talevant Singh came & left. Pragji, Chettiar,
Palok, Mrs. Raoji & Amin arrived. Long talk with Anandlal. He took a
vow to give up smoking for six months.
SEPTERMBER 6, FRIDAY

Again went to town. Meeting with Cousin[s?], also Khan. Returned in
evening.
SEPTEMBER 7, SATURDAY

Went to town in the afternoon. Meeting. Omar appointed Chairman of
Reception Committee.
SEPTEMBER 8, SUNDAY

Chhaganlal & I went to town by train—Abdool Huq came to receive.
Meeting—Omar appointed chairman.
SEPTEMBER 9, MONDAY

Polak, Chhaganlal & I came to Phoenix on foot—Pragji came by
340

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

train.
Wire Schlesin

0. 1.

0

SEPTEMBER 10, TUESDAY

Caught cold. Polak left yesterday. I went to town today . Meeting of
Committee. Slept at Omar Sheth’s.
Pd. wire Goordeen
0. 1. 0
SEPTEMBER 11, WEDNESDAY

Retutned from town to Phoenix. Meeting at Depot Road. Met
Laughton.
Pd. Polak
1. 0. 0
SEPTEMBER 12 THURSDAY, BHADARVA SUD 1

In Phoenix till noon—At noon, again went to town. Returned to
Phoenix in the evening.
SEPTEMBER 13, FRIDAY

Again went to town in the afternoon. Returned to Phoenix with Pragji
by evening train.
SEPTEMBER 14, SATURDAY

Came to town by the morning train. Collected contributions. Attended Hindu meeting & left for J. B. in the evening accompanied by
Navin, Chhotu, Lalita, Shivaprasad, Sivpujan and Pragji. Rd. for
Govindlal
10. 0. 0
Train
0. 2. 6
J. H. B. fares for Pragji
& S. Prasad
2. 14. 3
Wife
0. 10. 0
SEPTEMBER 15, SUNDAY

In train—Wrote letters.
SEPTEMBER 16, MONDAY

Reached town in the morning. News of Godfrey’s death. Paid
condolence visit. Came to Farm. Found Ani & Jeki ill Pragji & Hanif
and Albert also came.
Pd. carriage
0. 1. 0
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

341

SEPTEMBER 17, TUESDAY

Kallenbach & Pragji went to town.
Pd. trip ticket
1.
Railage
0.
Ricksha
0.
Prunes
0.
Milk
0.

6.
12.
0.
3.
0.

3
7
3
9
3

SEPTEMBER 18, WEDNESDAY

Went to town & returned in the evening.
Rd. from John
0. 5. 3
SEPTEMBER 19, THURSDAY

Went to town by afternoon train—Kotwal left for Cape in the
morning. Kallenbach also.
Pd. for freight milk
0. 0. 6
Kotwal
1. 0. 0
Pass for Sivpujan
0. 2. 6
Freight etc.
0. 2. 11
_________
Bal
£8. 8. 0
SEPTEMBER 20, FRIDAY

Went round for collections among Patidars last night. Slept in the
office at night—a boy, Dayaram Sahay, came to Farm. Suleman
returned yesterday. Mahomed & Ibrahim also arrived today.
Telegrams from Desai & Abhechand. I returned to Farm in the
morning. Pragji & Kallenbach went to went to town. Wrote letter to
Kalidas—Also to Desai.
SEPTEMBER 21, SATURDAY

Shelat came with his wife. [Letters:] Manilal Doctor. Polak, Lachman
Pandey, Kastur, Devdas, Doctor, Chhaganlal, Winter-bottom, Sorabji.
Pd. wire to Office
0. 1. 3
Stamps
0. 1. 6
Milk freight
0. 0. 3
Freight
0. 1. 10
Bal.
8. 3. 2
342

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

SEPTEMBER 22, SUNDAY

Abhechand, Mr. Kallenbach & Gordon arrived by the same train.
Dayaram drowned.
Rd. for st[amp]s I.O.
0. 1. 0
SEPTEMBER 23, MONDAY

Kallenbach, Jamnadas & I went to letter on foot. Retruned same day.
Posted mail t England. Suleman came. Sent wire to Maud.
SEPTEMBER 24, TUESDAY

Spent on Farm.
SEPTEMBER 25, WEDNESDAY

Two new boys came. Sivipujan, Dano [?] & Kanji and Devi & I left
for town at noon. Both slept in the office. Went to Fancy in the
evening for his contribution.
Rd. for books for the new boys 0. 10. 0
SEPTEMBER 26, THURSDAY

Maud arrived. All went to Station. Purshottamdas came. P. went to
Farm by morning train. Maud, K.., Devi & I came to Farm. Kanji
came to Farm.
Rd. fr. Gordon
1. 0. 0
_________
SEPTEMBER 27, FRIDAY, 1 BHADARVA VAD 1

Spent [day] on the Farm—Kanji left the school.
Pd. for milk
0. 0. 6
SEPTEMBER 28, SATURDAY

Abhechand & Maud left.
Rd. fr. Abhechand for Devi

0. 10. 0
_________
3 wires Chimney, Polak & Medh
re. Medh
0. 5. 6
1

The printed pages (pp. 273-80) of the Diary corresponding to the dates
September 27 - October 4 appear to be misarranged owning to an error in the binding,
the page for September 29 coming before that for September 27, etc. Gandhiji, has
however, corrected the date lines in his own hand.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

343

Freight
Stamps, freight etc.
Overlooked

0. 1. 10
0. 8. 0
1. 0. 0
_________
8. 9. 0

Bal.

SEPTEMBER 29, SUNDAY

Some persons form Boksburg came—Raoji, etc. returned. Bechar
Brahnam and Ramsami Moodaley also came.
SEPTEMBER 30, MONDAY

Kallenbach, Manilal, Bahu and
Maud & Geevers came by train.
Leather
Freight
Stamps unpaid letters
Bal.

Govindoo accompanied me to town .
1. 15. 0
0. 1. 5
0. 1. 2
_________
6. 11. 5

OCTOBER 1, TUESDAY

[Letters:] Chhabildas, Anandlal, West, Abdool Huq, Kotwal, Rustomjee,
Dawson, Kastur, Dada Abdoolla. Cropped Prabha’s, Vijaya’s,
Chanda’s, Rama’s & Lalita’s hair. Kallenbach went & returned.
Rd. for sugar
0. 0. 6
pd. Maud’s boxes
2. 15. 4
Stamps
0. 1. 9
_________
Bal.
£3. 14. 10
OCTOBER 2, WEDNESDAY

[Letters:] Moosa Akuji, Velshi, Shaikh Rasul, Chhaganlal, Motilal,
Millie. Prgji came at night.
Rd. for sugar
0. 0. 6
Sugar
0. 0. 9
_________
Stamps
0. 1. 0
JOHN
0. 2. 6
_________
BAL.
3. 12. 7
344

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

OCTOBER 3, THURSDAY

Kallenbach, I, Pragji, Coopoo & Chhotu went to town. There was a
meeting at Hosken’s. Maud came along with us to the Farm.
Pd. for needle boxes and balance
to Schlesin
0. 10. 0
Rail
0. 0. 8
Tram
0. 0. 3
_________
Bal.
3. 1. 8
OCTOBER 4, FRIDAY

Geevers came in he morning. Ramdas
[diet]. Prabha also. Rajabali left.
Pd. for stamps & milk
0. 1.
Rajabali’s fare
0. 5.
Cash
0. 2.

started saltless and spiceless
3
3
8

OCTOBER 5, SATURDAY

Maud left. Today is the ninth day since I started on a fruit diet. Three
since Purshottamdas started and four since Jamnadas. Nayno went to
town. Bhago too.
Rd. fr. John refund
0. 2. 6
Rd. sugar
0. 0. 6
Sugar etc.
0. 3. 9
_________
Stamps & milk
0. 1. 3
Nayna’s fare
0. 2. 0
_________
Bal.
2. 16. 2
OCTOBER 6, SUNDAY

[Letters:] Lachman Pandey, Winterbottom, Umiyashanker, Anandlal,
Kastur, Chhaganlal, Sorabji, West—Luxman left. His uncle & Kana’s
brother-in - law has come here, Miss Bush & Moorgan came & left.
Medh came. Pragji also.
Rd. for Nayna
2. 6. 0

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

345

St[am]ps. . . 1 K.
0. 0. 6
Pd. Medh for wires Kalidas and
Noormahomed
0. 2. 0
_________
Bal.
£5. 0. 8
OCTOBER 7, MONDAY

Medh & Desai left. Tailor & Ratanji came regarding Lallu.
OCTOBER 8, TUESDAY

Kallenbach & I went to town. Jamnadas came along part of the way.
Went round for collections in the town. Meeting at Hosken’s.
Rd. sugar ect.
0. 0. 9
_________
Pd. for freight ect. to Paragji
0. 5. 0
Kallenbach
1. 0. 0
_________
Bal.
3. 16. 5
OCTOBER 9, WEDNESDAY

K & I went to town . Geevers also with us—Had a meeting with
Chimney. [Letters:] Naik, Makhera, Ram Piyari & Rutnam—Abdul
Huq.
Rd. for milk
0. 0. 6
_________
Bal.
3. 16. 0
OCTOBER 10, THURSDAY

See entry for Wednesday which was written [there] by mistake.
OCTOBER 11, FRIDAY

Bhai Kotwal came. Doctor Dunning arrived with Kallenbach at night.
pd. freight thro[ugh] P’das
0. 3. 5
OCTOBER 12, SATURDAY

[Letters:] Polak,
1

346

Anandla,

Abhechand,

Chhaganlal,

Mohanlal.

A word here illegible
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Telegram to Polak and Hindu . . . 1 Umiyashanker, Morarji, Bhago &
Naik came at noon.
Rd. book
1. 0. 0
_________
Pd. for rubber tube Jeki
0. 5. 6
Wires
0. 2. 3
Freight
0. 1. 3
Freight
0. 0. 3
Stamps
0. 1. 6
_________
Bal.
4. 2. 9
OCTOBER 13, SUNDAY

Mr. Gordan & Maud came & left in the evening
OCTOBER 14, MONDAY

Kallenbach, Jamnadas & I went on foot. Umiyashanker by train.
Mohamedali, Kanji came [back?] to school—Box 1167.
Rd. f[o]r. Kanji
[0.] 5[.0]
pd. Jamnadas for fruit ect.
1. 0. 0
OCTOBER 15, TUESDAY

Pragji & I went town. Meeting at Hosken’s office.
OCTOBER 16, WEDNESDAY

Kallenbach went to town. Letters: Revashankerbhai, Anandlal, Polak,
Joshi, Dr. Gool, Harilal2 . P. Naidoo came & went back—
Pd. stamps
0. 3. 0
„ Kotwal
1. 15. 0
OCTOBER 17, THURSDAY

K., Kotwal & I came to town. I spent the night in town .
Rd. fr. Miss Knudsen
0. 5. 0
_________
Pd. for freitht
0. 2. 9
1
2

Some letters here illegible
Vide “Letter to Harilal Gandhi”, 16-10-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

347

OCTOBER 18, FRIDAY

Left for the Cape accompanied by Kallenbach, Cachalia & Imam.
Rd.
£ 2[0?]. 0. 0
OCTOBER 19, SATURDAY

On the way [to Cape].

1

OCTOBER 20, SUNDAY

Arrived in Cape [Town] evening—went to stay with Dr. Gool,
Attended Hindu meeting at night.
OCTOBER 21, MONDAY2

Spent in Cape [Town], explaining [plans] regarding addresses, etc.
Met Nooroodeen’s men. Meeting with Mr. Cousins.
OCTOBER 22, TUESDAY

Mr. Gokhale arrived in the morning. Addresses in Town Hall.
OCTOBER 23, WEDNESDAY

Went to Nooroodeen’s meeting. Tea at Abdurahman’s. Discussion
with Committee at night.
OCTOBER 24, THURSDAY

Left for Kimberley.
OCTOBER 25, FRIDAY

Mrs. Olive Schreiner came at De Aar. Indians came [in] special train
[and met us] at Modder River. Mayor & the Indians came at
Beaconsfield. Reached Kimberley. Mayor and others at the station.
Stayed at Sami’s. Meeting at Town Hall3 .
OCTOBER 26, SATURDAY

Went to see a mine—Oliver came [too]. Maclaren 4 . Banquet5 at night.
1

Gandhiji here has “Have to send Sorabji £45” which he appears to have
subsequently crossed out.
2
Pages 297-304 of the Diary corresponding to the dates October 21—October
28 are wrongly arranged as were pp. 273-80; vide footnote of entry dated September
27 of “Diary, 1912”. From the number of pages involved in each case, which is eight,
and from the correspondence in the error between the two sets, it is clear that they
both form part of a 32-page forme. While Gandhiji corrected the date lines of the first
set of misarranged pages, in the second and corresponding set it would appear he
followed the printed date line ignoring the binder’s misarrangement.
3
Vide “Speech at Kimberley Meeting”, 25-10-1912.
4
Maclaren came to represent Bloemfontein Indians’ grievances.
5
Vide “Speech at Kimberley Banquet to Gokhale”, 26-10-1912.

348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

OCTOBER 27, SUNDAY, ASO VAD 1

Went to Oliver’s. Meeting of Indians. Left for Klerksdorp. Addresses
at Christiana, Bloemhof & Windsorton.
OCTOBER 28, MONDAY

Addresses in Klerksdorp, Potchesfstroom and Krugersdorp. Arrived in
J. B. Address at station. Stayed at Mount [ain] View.
Pd. stewards
3. 0. 0
OCTOBER 29, TUESDAY

Reception by Europieans in Carlton Hotel.
OCTOBER 30, WEDNESDAY

Function at Hosken’s.
OCTOBER 31, THURSDAY

Banquet at Freemason Hall.
Pd. T. Naido

10. 0.

0

NOVEMBER 1, FRIDAY

Breakfast with Chinese at Grand National Hotel, Indian meeting at
Drill Hall, address by women. Night at Alexander’s.
NOVEMBER 2, SATURDAY

Tolstoy Farm.
NOVEMBER 3, SUNDAY

Tolstoy Farm.
NOVEMBER 4, MONDAY

Tolstoy Farm.
NOVEMBER 5, TUESDAY

Left Farm. Tea at Chaplin’s.
NOVEMBER 6, WEDNESDAY

Saw Boksburg and Germiston Locations. Left for Natal in the
evening.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

349

NOVEMBER 7, THURSDAY

Addresses in Newcastle and Dundee. Arrived in Maritzburg. Stayed at
Camden Hotel. Address in Town Hall.1
NOVEMBER 8, FRIDAY

Meeting with Indians in school. Special train arrived from Durban.
Left for Durban at noon. Meeting and [presentation of] address at
Town Hall, Durban.2
NOVEMBER 9, SATURDAY

Boys’ sports. Gave away prizes.
NOVEMBER 10, SUNDAY, KARTAK SUD 1

Met Indians at Lord’s ground. Special train left for Isipingo. Function
in that town. Went to Phoenix by car in the evening.
NOVEMBER 11, MONDAY

Left Phoenix in the afternoon. Banquet at night in Drill Hall.3
NOVEMBER 12, TUESDAY

Dinner at Marshall Campbell’s. Meeting of indentured labourers. Left
for Pretoria.
NOVEMBER 13, WEDNESDAY

On the way, addresses at Heidelberg, Standerton & Volksrust. Address
at Pretoria station. Stayed in Transvaal Hotel.
NOVEMBER 14, THURSDAY

Meeting with General Botha, General Smuts & Fischer. Function in
the evening at Town Hall.4
NOVEMBER 15, FRIDAY

Left Pretoria by car to see Wyndham. Returned. Lunch with
Gladstone. Left for Lawley in the evening.
NOVEMBER 16, SATURDAY

At the Farm.
1
2
3
4

350

Vide “Speech at Maritzburg Reception to Gokhale”, 7-11-1912.
Vide “Speech at Durban Reception to Gokhale”, 8-11-1912.
Vide “Speech at Durban Banquet to Gokhale”, 11-11-1912.
Vide “Speech at Pretoria Reception to Gokhale”, 14-11-1912.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

NOVEMBER 17, SUNDAY

Went by car to see Sir Thomas Smartt. Called on Imam [A. K.
Bawazeer], Fancy & Jivan Prema. Left for Delagoa Bay.
Rd. from Miss S.
15. 0. 0
Book etc.
4. 0. 0
_________
D[elagoa] Bay tickets
6. 6. 0
Kallenbach
4. 0. 0
NOVEMBER 18, MONDAY

Arrived at Delagoa Bay. Address in Town Hall. Dinner at Hotel.
Steamer Left at midnight.
Rd. from Madhavji
20. 0. 0
_________
Stewards
5. 0. 0
NOVEMBER 19, TUESDAY

At sea.
NOVEMBER 20, WEDNESDAY

Fast. Arrived in Beira—At night
NOVEMBER 21, THURSDAY

Address in Beira—Started eating twice.
Pd. Kallenbach
9. 0.

0

NOVEMBER 22, FRIDAY

Telegram to Agent that fare money not received in Durban. Borrowed
£63 from Tayob Sakoor & paid Agent. Went round Beira in the
evening. Got diary ready for Gokhale.
NOVEMBER 23, SATURDAY

Steamer left at night.
NOVEMBER 24, SUNDAY

At sea.
NOVEMBER 25, MONDAY, KARTAK VAD 1

Arrived in Mozambique. Address in the city in the morning. Went
round in a rikshaw. Steamer left after three hours.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

351

NOVEMBER 26, TUESDAY

Promised Shri Gokhale [during the voyage] that I would not leave for
I[ndia] without making arrangements for the work in S[outh] A[frica]
to be carried on in my absence. Most probably the management of
affairs will be left in Polak’s hands. I would also try to raise £600 for
three years for the Committee in England. Obtained his permission to
inform the people that more help was likely to be received from him.
NOVEMBER 27, WEDNESDAY

Arrived in Zanzibar in the morning. Went to the city. Called on Mr.
Yusufali, etc. Function in Victoria Gardens.
NOVEMBER 28, THURSDAY

Luggage of all three put on [board] President in the morning.
Address presented in the city in the afternoon. Spent the day in . . . 1
Box 2 containing the J. B. Address seemed to have been left behind.
NOVEMBER 29, FRIDAY

President left last night. Reached Tongaat in the morning. Mr.
Gokhale came to know about loss of box. Expressed regret.
Kallenbach went to Tongaat and sent a telegram to [s.s.] Kronprinz.
Parted from Gokhale at 4 in the afternoon. Boarded [s. s.] Trebora
[and travelled] deck [class]. K. vented his feelings on board ship3 .
Deck and 3rd class passage
0. 17. 0
Porterage
0. 10. 0
NOVEMBER 30, SATURDAY

Reached Zanzibar in the morning. Stayed in the city. Sent telegram to
Ginwala at Delagoa Bay and another at J. B. Bought chairs, etc.
Returned to Trebora at 10 p.m.
Deck chairs etc.
0. 9. 0
Dhotias[?] etc.
0. 13. 0
CABLES
1. 2. 0

1

Word illegible here
Vide 1st footnote of “British Indian Association’s Address to Gokhale”,
28-10-1912.
3
Vide “Gandhi under Detention”, 23-12-1912.
2

352

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

DECEMBER 1, SUNDAY

Reached Dar-es-Salaam in the morning. Captain sent second-class
ticket so that it might be easier to land. Had lunch at Mr. Ratanshi’s.
Wore Indian dress [for first time].
DECEMBER 2, MONDAY

Received Gokhale’s cable, dispatched from Mombasa, saying that he
was all right. Another from J. B. to say that his box had been found1 .
Wired to [Gokhale at] Mahe & [to Miss Schlesin at] J. B. asking that
the box be sent on, duly insured2 .
Cables
0. 16. 0
DECEMBER 3, TUESDAY

Address in Dar-es-Salaam. Mr. Kallenbach started learning Hindi,
Rd. for tickets
7. 0. 0
DECEMBER 4, WEDNESDAY

In Dar-es-Salaam. Read about Maharaj Libel case, Age Khan’s case,
etc.
DECEMBER 5, THURSDAY

Boarded steamer in the evening. Function at Babu’s.
Rd. fr. Goolam Husein Sarnasji [?] &
Son for I.O.
Rs. 12[.0. 0]
3
Manilal Desai for Souvenir Rs. 7 [.0. 0]
DECEMBER 6, FRIDAY

Left Dar-es-Salaam.
DECEMBER 7, SATURDAY

Reached Mozambique at night. Experience of deck [travel] going
well. Merchants came [to meet us].
DECEMBER 8, SUNDAY

Left Mozambique at 11 a.m.
1
2
3

Vide entries for November 28 and 29 of “Diary, 1912”.
Vide “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 4-12-1912.
Souvenir Number of Indian Opinion published to commemorate Gokhale’s

visit.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

353

DECEMBER 9, MONDAY, MAGSHAR SUD 1

Reached Chindee.
DECEMBER 10, TUESDAY

Reached Beira in the morning—Stayed at Tayob Sakoor’s in the city.
DECEMBER 11, WEDNESDAY

Bought tickets for [s.s.] Dunvegan Castle. Left by this [boat] at noon.
Wires Schlesin etc.
0. 6. 0
Gratuities etc. porterage
1. 0. 0
DECEMBER 12, THURSDAY

At sea.
DECEMBER 13, THURSDAY

Reached Delagoa Bay in the morning. Detained some tine before
being permitted to land. Went to Madhavji’s. Boarded train at noon &
arrived in Komati[poort]. Interrogation by the police.
DECEMBER 14, SATURDAY

Arrived in J. B. —
Arrived at Lawley by 1 o’clock train. Baptism of Burnett’s son.
Medh went ahead [of the others] with the luggage.
DECEMBER 15, SUNDAY

Spent at the farm. Dwarkadas Gandhi came. Gabo, Krishnasamy &
Revashanker came. Gabo went back, taking his luggage with him.
DECEMBER 16, MONDAY

At the Farm. Miss Bush and her mother came. Kunake came.
DECEMBER 17, TUESDAY

Kallenbach, Govindoo & I went to town on foot. Kotwal came by
train. Kotwal & Govindoo went to Pretoria. Chhotam accompanied me
to Farm. Telegram from Chhaganlal about Krishna.
Ticket to Phoenix
1. 17. 1
DECEMBER 18, WEDNESDAY

Left for Durban by morning train.

354

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

DECEMBER 19, THURSDAY

Arrived at Phoenix.
DECEMBER 20, FRIDAY

Spent at Phoenix.
DECEMBER 21, SATURDAY

Went to Durban on receiving a telegram. Had an interview with Sir
John Hulett—Returned by afternoon train.
DECEMBER 22, SUNDAY

Had a talk with Anandlal, West, etc. Meeting in the evening.
DECEMBER 23, MONDAY

Krishna1 appeared to be well.
DECEMBER 24, TUESDAY

Parbhudas

2

fell ill. West went to town—Gajjar came-

DECEMBER 25, WEDNESDAY, MAGSHAR VAD 1

Worked till late in the press. Talk with Virji. Gajjar left. Sent Pragji
with him.
DECEMBER 26, THURSDAY

Started working regularly. 5-7 in the orchard—8-11—study. 12-4.30
press—5-6 in the orchard—Budrea, Bhawani Dayal, Devi Dayal,
Gajjar & his wife came. Pragji also came with them. from this year’s
accounts saw that the press will incur a loss next year.
DECEMBER 27, FRIDAY

Shivlal arrived.
DECEMBER 28, SATURDAY

Ram’s son ill. Went to see him.
Abdool Karim Sheth came.
Bal.
2. 1.
1
2

6

The younger and elder sons, respectively, of Chhaganlal Gandhi
Ibid

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

355

DECEMBER 29, SUNDAY

Dada Sheth, Omar Sheth, Rustomjee Sheth, A. Huq & Ismail Haffeejee
Moosa came—& left. At night Bhawani Dayal & Devi Dayal came &
left.
DECEMBER 30, MONDAY

Rain—
DECEMBER 31, TUESDAY

Rain—Wrote letters. Meeting at night. Explained fresh changes.
D[ATE JANUARY] 2ND [1913]

Left Durban. Budrea gave a cheque for £15.
ON THE 4TH

Arrived in J. B. The same day Burnett’s daughter fell ill at the Farm.
Medh, Desa[i] & Naidoo came.
[ON THE] 5[TH]

Kallenbach went to town. Coopoo, Shanti, Umiyashanker came.
[ON THE] 6[TH]

Sivpujan . . . met
1

MEMORANDA2

Mrs. Shaer
c/o Mrs. Mann
Victoria Parade
Mose[ley?]
Birmingham
H. B. Godbole
Box 1541
C[ape] Town
P. Desai—
J. E. Dada [?] & Co
Nicholson’s Sugar Estate [?]
1
2

356

A word illegible here
The addresses that follow are in English unless otherwise indicated.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Glensdale
Harila[l]
Todani Pol No. 1514
. . . 1 ni Pol
Kalupur Road
[Ahmedabad]

[Gujarati]

Mrs. MacDonald
521, Bannatyne Avenue
Winnipeg
Bapubhai Daulatrai Medh
Raipur
Akasheth’s
Kuva Pol
[Ahmedabad]

[Gujarati]

Pragji K. Desai
Salej
Post Amalsad
Taluka Jalalpur

[Gujarati]

E. Dalborn [?]
6, Centennial Chambers
Sydney
Australia
Mehta
[c/o] M. Spendjian [?] Esq.
26, Rue de la Grande . . . 2
Antwerp
G. Isaac
19, Upper Head Row
Leeds
Cable: Islam
1
2

Some letters illegible here
Illegible

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

357

Miss A. A. Smith
22, Harley Road,
South Hampstead
N. W.
Ardeshir Jamshedji Mehta
Yokohama Specie Bank, Ltd.
Fort
Bombay

[Gujarati]

Manekbai Ardeshir Jamshedji Mehta
In the house of Dosabhai Bootwala
Khetwadi 14th Lane
[Bombay]

[Gujarati]

Kunverbai Sorabji Shpurgi Adajania
In the house of Palanji Edulji . . . 1
Khetwadi, 10th Lane, Back Road,
Bombay

[Gujarati]

Palanji Edulji and Sons
Khetwadi, 13th Lane,
Bombay

[Gujarati]

Maud Polak
c/o Mrs. Siees
31, Myrtle Gardens
Hanwell
London
From the original in Gandhiji’s hand: G. N. 8220. Courtesy: Gandhi Smark
Nidhi

248. MR. GOKHALE AT THE NATIONAL CONGRESS
The Hon’ble Mr. Gokhale did not allow grass to grow under his
feet before he commenced work in India after his return from the
arduous work done by him in this subcontinent. He succeeded in
having a motion carried in the Congress at Bankipore, advocating the
1

358

A word here is illegible. Cf., however, Vol. VIII, p. 427.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

total abolition of the system of indenture. We trust that before long we
shall sea an end to the system. Mr. Gokhale is not given to leaving
things half done. He does thoroughly whatever he undertakes. He
fights his battles to a finish. He is no retreat general. We feel sure,
therefore, that the cause of the voiceless indentured labourers is safe in
his hands. Besides speaking directly to his motion, Mr. Gokhale is
reported to have devoted his speech to a reply to his critics in India.1
The latter seem to have imagined that Mr. Gokhale had given away
some rights and had made a bad bargain. Here his critics like Major
Silburn charged Mr. Gokhale with having intimidated the people of
South Africa. Truly, a public man who wishes to obey the voice of his
conscience alone has a difficult if not an impossible task before him if
he wishes also to please all people. With Mr. Gokhale it is well if he
pleases the people, but it is well also if he must displease the people or
any section of them so long as he pleases the voice from within.
From Reuter’s condensed summary of his reply to his critics
it is difficult to form any accurate opinion about the speech. But
Reuter has supplied us with an infallible test by saying that
Mr. Gokhale endorsed and urged all the demands made by us in
South Africa. It may be well, therefore, to state them in a few sentences. So far as we know them they are: “Complete legal equality as
to immigration throughout the Union, but, whilst we should be, we
could be, no party to administrative discremination, we should not
oppose it, so long as a certain number of new Indians are permitted
annually to enter the Union. (2) Our goal is most certainly complete
equality in everything, but we do not agitate for disturbing the present
political status and we do agitate for the removal of all other legal and
administrative disabilities in all the parts of the Union, save the Orange
1

According to a Reuter telegram, Gokhale had moved a resolution at
Bankipore urging that the system of indenture be abolished altogether. He called
upon the Government [of India] to prohibit further recruiting. “ . . . Mr. Gokhale,
referring to his critics, said that neither he nor Mr. Gandhi had given any assurance of
the limitation of immigration in South Africa and not one particle of the Indians’
rights had been surrendered. Mr. Gandhi thought, and he agreed, that it was politic and
expedient to concentrate efforts on obtaining for those already in South Africa the
same conditions as were enjoyed by Europeans. The grievances that could be redressed
included ability to enter and leave South Africa without difficulty; to migrate freely
from one Province to another; to reside where they might choose; to acquire and own
land and other property; . . . to enjoy the municipal and political franchise; and to
enter the Government service and public life. . .” Indian Opinion,
4-1-1913.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

359

Free State. (3) As for the Orange Free State, all we ask for is that, if a
General Immigration Bill is passed, there should be no racial bar so
far as immigration is concerned. All the other disabilities in that State
will remain until our irreproachable conduct and the natural working
of time have softened the present prejudice of the Europeans of the
Free State, who appear to be Free Staters first and South Africans
after.
When we receive the full text of Mr. Gokhale’s speech, there is
no doubt that we shall find his case formulated along these lines.
Indian Opinion, 4-1-1913

249. TO READERS OF “INDIAN OPINION”
In this issue readers will notice a few changes. We believe these
to be an improvement; we have made them because we thought that, if
the journal was printed in two columns instead of three, it would look
better. It would [also] be more convenient if the articles had to be
published in book form. Our purpose is to publish, from time to time,
articles of permanent value so that readers who like to preserve copies
can later have them bound into a volume. It is our intention to
continue providing the same [reading] matter [as before], but in as
short a form as possible. By so doing we will be able to fit in more
material within the same space or even less. Beginning this time, we
have reduced the number of Gujarati and English pages, but we wish
to provide more information, though not more words within these
pages. It is our hope to reduce the work of the compositor while
increasing that of the writer.
Our venture is more than eight years old.1 We have published information about rates [and prices] of interest to merchants and have also discussed serious topics. Matter varying
fromfour to twenty-two pages in length has appeared in the Gujarati
Section of Indian Opinion. We now hope to print, for the most part,
writings of two kinds: those which will provide the community with
full information, in so far as that is possible, of the hardships we
suffer, and we will [also] consider and suggest remedies; secondly,
those that deal with an ethic of public conduct or contain, in essence,
1

360

More than nine years actually, vide “Ourselves”, 4-6-1903.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

thoughts of great men on this problem. We hope that Indian Opinion
will thus become an instrument of education.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 4-1-1913

250. ROYAL INDIAN NAVY
We learn from a cable in the newspapers that the Indian princes
are prepared to offer a few warships to help the Imperial Government.
It was estimated that they would cost £21 million, which amounts to
Rs. 31.5 crore. In effect this would amount to a contribution of Re. 1
per capita of India’s population. But these figures are inadequate [for
conveying the true picture]. From the names suggested for the
warships, it appears that the rulers who offered to help are the Nizam,
the Maharajas of Mysore, Baroda, Gwalior, Kashmir, Travancore and
Rajputana, and the King of Nepal. The total population of their states
is about four crores. The taxes to raise this amount would have been
borne by this population; that is, the tax would have amounted to Rs.
8 a head. For a very poor man, this sum represents his earnings for
four months. That the Indian princes were not going to fetch this
money from the heavens is certain. It was their subjects who would
have had to pay up. Happily for the good name of the Imperial
Government, the Reuter cable was based on a mere rumour; and that is
due to India’s good fortune and the grace of God which the subjects
of Indian rulers still enjoy. All responsible newspapers in England
dismissed the idea as impracticable. Some of them expressed strong
views. One or two even remarked that, if any such help was received
from the Indian Princes, it would not be voluntary. Indian states do
not enjoy real independence. If they were only told that the Imperial
Government would be pleased if they rendered such help, they would
consider themselves obliged to do so. Alternatively, if the Political
Agents brought pressure to bear on them, they might be equally ready
to make contributions. Moreover, a certain paper reminds that, while
the Colonies do not contribute a single penny towards the war effort
of the Imperial Government, India bears the heavy cost of financing
the entire Army, both white and coloured. Over and above this, the
Indian Princes keep their armies in a state of preparedness so as to
assist the Imperial Government. Although the clouds over India have
lifted, it does not seem likely that the Indian States will remain wholly
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

361

free. Some newspapers, however, welcomed this rumour. Germany is
expanding her fleet. The Imperial Government is also expanding hers
comparably. This means that the British people must go on paying
heavier taxes. If the subjects go on paying taxes in this fashion, they
get fed up. In this situation it will not be surprising if the British
Cabinet casts a coveting eye on India.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 4-1-1913

251. GOKHALE’S SPEECH IN INDIA
It would appear, from newspapers coming from India, that
cables of Mr. Gokhale’s speeches in this country have been received
there and have caused some misunderstanding. From the Gujarati got
from Bombay, we see that the major share of the responsibility for this
misunderstanding must be that of the English newspapers. The
Gujarati defends Mr. Gokhale’s speeches. On reaching Bombay, Mr.
Gokhale seems to have taken note of the misconception about his
work [here].1 And now Reuter’s cables tells us that Mr. Gokhale’s has
answered his critics in full [in the course of his speech] at the
Congress.2 Here, one of Mr. Gokhale’s speeches was misinterpreted
by our Major Silburn. Mr. Gokhale gave a reply which appears to
have satisfied everyone.3 In India, too, persons like our Mayor and
Major Silburn misinterpreted Mr. Gokhale’s speech. Such things have
always happen, and will happen, to public men. No wonder, therefore,
Mr. Gokhale’s words were misconstrued.
Not that Reuter’s cables always report speeches correctly. We have, nevertheless, to make meaning of the cables and arrive
at what is likely to have happened at Bankipore. Before we can
understand Reuter’s cables, we should find out the significance of
what Mr. Gokhale said here. What this patriot then said was that, if
equality of rights in law is conceded under the Immigration Act, India
would not object to the prohibition of Indian immigration beyond
what was necessary to meet our needs [here]. He also said that we did
not want political rights for the present. Replying to his critics in
1

Vide Appendix “Gokhale’s Speech at Bombay”, 14-12-1912.
Vide footnote of “Mr. Gokhale at the National Congress”, 4-1-1913.
3
Vide Appendix “Gokhale’s Answer to Silburn and F. C. Hollander”, before
4-4-1913.
2

362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

India, Mr. Gokhale has said that India would not place any [upper]
limit to [Indian] immigration [into South Africa]. About the franchise,
he pointed out that that was contained in his demand that Indians in
South Africa should have equal rights with the whites. We shall see on
reflection that this is not inconsistent with his speeches in South
Africa. Mr. Gokhale seems to have been charged with having bound
India’s hands and made her responsible for ending immigration of
Indians into this country in excess [of the figure agreed upon]. This
charge is not just, because all that Mr. Gokhale has agreed to is only
that India would not object if the Union Government were to disallow
further immigration of Indians. Between this [statement] and saying
that India herself has ended [emigration], there is a deal of difference.
The same is true of the franchise [issue]. Between what Mr. Gokhale
has said—that we do not ask for the franchise at present—and saying
that India does not demand it, there exists a great difference and a
contradiction. Accepting the latter proposition would make India a
party to the disabilities inflicted on the Indians. Mr. Gokhale has
further pointed out that he has not committed himself to the waiving
of a single right. By arguing that the demands he put forward were the
same as ours, Mr. Gokhale has shown that he has neither made new
demands nor has he left out any from among those that we have been
making. What has been established, then, is misunderstanding on the
part of the Bombay critics, for they have not until this day criticized
our demands!1
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 4-1-1913

252. DECK PASSENGERS
I have already recounted my experience of how the
Immigration Officer at Delagoa Bay behaves. 2 One reason why we
must suffer this is the behaviour of deck passengers. By their general
deportment they have created an impression that one can with
impunity harass Indians in any way one likes. From my few days’
experience of deck [travel] I realized that such criticism is not
altogether unjust.
1
2

As being too moderate
Vide “Gandhi under Detention”, 23-12-1912.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

363

There seems to be no limit to the filthiness of deck passengers.
Even though facilities for bathing are provided on the ship, many of
them rarely take a bath. They feel they cannot bathe in brine from the
sea. This is only superstition, but they have clung to it. Some of them
bathe only once in a week due to sheer laziness. Many Indians on
deck do not change at all and look very slovenly. Many spit right
where they happen to be sitting. They have no thought for others’
convenience. One of them spat over Mr. Kallenbach’s head where he
sat. The deck is so covered with leavings and spittle that one shrinks
from walking barefoot over it, and if one does, there is every danger
of slipping. They also quarrel with one another for places. They foul
the latrines by using them so carelessly that even those who observe
the minimum of cleanliness cannot but feel revulsion. If this is how we
live, no wonder the ship’s officers treat us with contempt. And that is
precisely what happens.
Furthermore, even those Indians who ought not to be travelling
deck class, do so. I believe that, when these Indians who are wealthy
and well known as businessmen travel deck class, through sheer
miserliness, their rivals, the white traders, cease to be friendly and to
think well of them. Imagine the Manager of the Standard Bank, who
draws an annual salary of £1,000 or more travelling first class on a
ship. He discovers an Indian client [travelling] on deck in a wretched
condition. The Indian keeps a balance of five to seven thousand
pounds in his bank and enjoys credit facilities of the order of
£25,000. Every Christmas, moreover, he gives the manager gifts worth
twice the deck fare. Though the passenger is clearly far better off, as
far as money goes, than the bank manager, he travels deck class. What
thoughts must cross the manager’s mind when he sees his client in
these circumstances! He cannot but despise us and our money.
It is not my desire that we should imitate the whites in these
matters. Even so, I would certainly say that when we compete with
them in trade and the like and demand the same rights that they have,
we should, provided we have the means, give them no opportunity to
point an accusing finger at us in matters which do not trouble our
conscience. It is the duty of well-to-do people to travel first or second
class for the sake of their own prestige and that of India as well and to
keep the place absolutely clean. In many situations, we forget our
honour.
Those who are poor may travel deck class, but they should do
364

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

their utmost not to leave any scope for complaint. We shall become
happy if we end these self-created difficulties; it will then become the
officers’ duty to provide us further facilities, a duty they can escape
only by fulfilling it.
If we had acted in this manner right from the outset, the state of
deck passengers would never have been what it is. It is not great matter
to [have to] observe cleanliness, to wear clean clothes and to keep
them tidy. It only calls for a little care. But what I have said should not
be construed to mean that we must not protest against harassment by
the ship’s crew nor that whatever they do is right; this is not the
construction that must be put on it. On the other hand, on the ship by
which I travelled as a deck passenger, I tried to get the right thing
done in every circumstance; this is the duty of every passenger who is
in a position to do so by virtue of his knowledge of English, etc. A
passenger from the Purnea brought a few facts [to our notice]. If
these are correct, it is absolutely necessary that some action be taken
to correct this [state of affairs]. All that I mean is that we, for our part,
should not be at fault. If we are ourselves blameless, our complaints
will receive a better hearing. Bathing arrangements, whether they are
inadequate or totally lacking; lavatories, whether they are too few in
number of foul and exposed; meagre protection against the cold or
the heat; inconvenience as regards cooking; the absence of special
places for women; and the shepherding about of passengers [by the
crew] from one spot to another as though they were cattle—none of
these can be an excuse or an answer for our inadequacies or our
slovenly living, whatever we are. Passengers must do something about
these deficiencies. Shipping agents ought to intervene in this matter
and get the right thing done. My only aim in narrating my experience
is that we should do our duty as men and as Indians, and uphold
India’s honour in all circums-tances.
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI

Phoenix
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 4-1-1913

253. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-I]
I have had to reflect on the subject of health for the past twenty
years. Having gone to England and having [earlier] become used to a
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

365

particular mode of living, I had to devise my own arrangements for
food. I can claim that, as a result, I have acquired considerable
experience, and have been able to form certain ideas thanks to that
experience. I write these chapters in the hope that they may be of
some use to the readers of Indian Opinion.
There is a saying in English, “Prevention is better than cure”.
“The bund should be built before the flood”, 1 expresses a similar
idea. Taking steps to prevent disease is, in English, termed
“hygiene”. In Gujarati, it may be called arogya samrakshan shastra.
This science is distinct from medicine, though some take it to be a
branch of medicine. My only reason for mentioning this distinction is
that, in these chapters, the means for the care of health will be
described for the most part. Like a lost jewel that takes greater effort
to find than it does to keep it in the first instance, good health, once it
is lost, costs much time and effort to regain. It is therefore essential for
thoughtful people to attach the utmost importance to the keeping up
of health. We shall consider further importance to the keeping up of
health. We shall consider further how health, which may be lost from
time to time, can be regained.
Milton, the English poet has observed that both Heaven and Hell
exist only in the mind of man. 2 Hell does not lie under-neath the
earth, nor heaven in the clouds. This idea appears in Sanskrit
literature, too. “The mind is the cause at once of bondage (hell) and
moksha3 (heaven).” Pursuing this line of thought, we may argue that
whether a person is ill or well he is himself for the most part
responsible. One falls ill owing to one’s thoughts as well as
one’deeds. There are numerous instances of a father contracting
cholera on seeing his son suffer from it. A distinguished physician has
remarked that more patients die of fear than of the plague or other
diseases. The saying that “ a coward dies without being dead” 4
deserves to be pondered over.
Ignorance is also a great cause of broken health. When overtaken by misfortune, our ignorance makes us helpless, and we don’t
know what to do; with the best of intentions, we do the wrong thing.
1
2

3
4

366

A Gujarati saying
The mind is its own place, and in itself
Can make a heav’n of hell, a hell of heav’n.
Liberation
A Gujarati saying
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Being unacquainted with the common rules concerning the human
body, we often do things which we ought not to, or fall into the hands
of selfish and unscrupulous quacks. It is surprising but true that we
know less of things close by than of those that lie far away. I might be
ignorant of the topography of my street but learn by heart the names
of cities and rivers in England. I will patter away about the stars in the
sky but you may be sure that I know nothing of the roof atop my
house. I will think of country up the stars but do not ever feel the urge
to know what there is in the roof above and how many rafters have
gone to its making. I do not care to watch the drama that Nature
enacts before my eyes but want to watch the got up shows in the
theatre. In the same way, I have no knowledge of what happens in my
body—what it is, what it is made of, how the bones, flesh and blood
are formed, what their functions are, who it is within me that speaks,
how my movement is affected, why I think good thoughts one
moment and wicked ones at another, why my mind runs ten million
miles away against my will, why, when my body moves at a snail’s
pace, my mind can move a thousand times swifter than the wind. I
thus know less than nothing about the relation which my body, nearer
to me than the nearest of things, has to my mind.
It is the duty of everyone to free himself from this predicament.
To discover the relation between the body and the mind is an exacting
task, but everyone should consider it essential to have some idea of the
normal working of the human body. This knowledge should also
form part of the education given to children. When one sits down to
think about it, it is a matter for shame that, when my finger is cut, I
should not know what to do about it, or, when pricked by a thorn, I
should be unable to take it out or, upon being bitten by a snake, I
cannot think of what to do at once without losing my nerve. To argue,
using difficult words, that a layman cannoy understand these matters
is sheer conceit, or worse still, a “fraud to exploit mankind”.
We shall, with the help of these chapters, try and enable readers
of Indian Opinion to free themselves, to some extent, of such
dependence and ignorance, if they have not already done that.
Not that such articles have not been published elsewhere. People,
however, get into the habit of reading particular books or newspapers.
The readers of Indian Opinion have come to read this journal along
with a few others. Some of them do not read books on health. It is
likely that they will benefit from the following chapters. Moreover, I
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

367

intend, in these chapters, to provide an abstract of the views found in a
number of books. I have read many books, considered contradictory
opinions and, having put them to the test, have formed certain ideas.
Consequently, there will be found in these chapters the substance of
more than one book. What is more, they will possibly spare the
beginner the bewilderment caused by books that contradict one
another. One book recommends the use of warm water for a particular
condition while another suggests cold water. This may confuse the
beginner. These contradictory courses of action will be considered in
these chapters in the light of reason. Those who so desire may then
refer to the original books and thus modify these conclusions. One
may therefore safely assume that these chapters will prove useful, to a
greater or lesser extent, to every reader of Indian Opinion.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 4-1-1913

254. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Wednesday [January 8, 1913]1
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

For me, last night was momentous. Let me try to explain. I feel
that you are accepting my conclusions without being ready to follow
them out. Such a man dare not risk the unbalancing of his mind in the
attempt to follow out somebody else’s conclusions. If you had proved
for yourself the correctness of the theory of life as I have endeavored
to sketch it, if you had an inner conviction, if your belief in future life
was unshakable, if you had become sick of the world unto death, if
money had no attractions for you, if you were not influenced by your
surroundings, if you were longing for poverty and suffering, it would
be your duty to attempt to live the new life. But you are not any of
these things, so I think that you ought not to think of India or work in
Phoenix just now. I have an inner conviction about the things I have
mentioned. My conclusions are my own and I ought to risk even the
unhinging of my mind in the attempt to live the new life.
My mistake was in trying to force your pace and thinking that
you could not but be right in trying to do right. But the trying to do
1

The addressee has recorded on this letter: “Mr. Gandhi left on the 9th, Thursday for Phoenix and he handed this letter to me.”

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

right would not have been your act. Or the many thoughts that arise in
your mind, e.g., about Mr. Alexander1 , or getting more work or more
money, would not find place in your system. The fact is, we cannot
help ourselves beyond a certain point. I feel sure, as I did not up to
last night, that your duty is just now to adhere to your practice and
your material advancement. In doing so, you have to watch yourself.
You must not abandon the simple life, you must not revert to the
rake’s life and pursue your calling as in trust for others. Make very
little use of your riches for you own comforts and keep poverty and
suffering as your goal. So doing, you will be more in tune with
yourself and it will be possible for you to come to India with a better
preparation. Instead of India being a preparation, let your practice be
it. After all it may only mean one year, it may even mean less. But,
meanwhile, you cannot live a double life. You cannot prepare in
Phoenix for India. You prepare for it in the midst of social attractions.
You will thus test yourself. You will soon know when you are ripe for
the change. I was wrong in presenting India before you quite so soon
and wrong in suggesting a study of Hindi. You may drop the latter for
the time being. Of course you will continue it, if you like the study.
Under this plan you would come to Phoenix as a visitor as often as
possible and comparing the two lives you will make your final choice.
Such is the result of my last night’s hard thinking. I hope you
understand my meaning. You will do exactly as you please but in my
opinion you would err in thinking of India.
Herewith draft letter to Alexander.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

Morris Alexander, Jewish Member of Parliament from Cape Town

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

369

255. LETTER TO M. I. DESAI
[On or after January 9, 1913] 1
TO
S HRI MANILAL ICHHARAM DESAI
BOMBAY
SIR,

When new of the death of you revered father 2 was received in
this country, a meeting of Hindus was held in Johannesburg. May
I respectfully inform you that, at this meeting, a resolution was passed
concerning your deceased father and condoling with you and your
family.
Your servant,

MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI
C HAIRMAN OF THE MEETING
From the Gujarati, 6-4-1913

256. AN “ACT OF GRACE”
Last week we printed Mr. Polak’s letter to the Minister of the
Interior on the action of the Chief Immigration Officer of Natal
regarding two young Indians born in South Africa claiming rights of
entry into the Transvaal.3 That letter speaks for itself, and shows in a
1

The meeting referred to in the letter was held on this date.
Ichharam Sooryaram Desai; Gujarati writer, jouranalist and publisher
3
On December 22, 1912, Bhawani Dayal and Devi Dayal, both Transvaal born
sons of a domiciled Transvaal resident, arrived in Durban on their way back to the
Transvaal. They were both accompanied by their wives one of whom had brought her
baby with her. Although one of the men could have passed the education test and both
calimed that they had been in the Transvaal on May 31, 1902, Cousins, the Immigration Officer refused them visitors’ permits. Polak obtained an affidavit from a respectable Transvaal Indian who vouched for their identity and certified that they had been in
the Transvaal on May 31, 1902, but Cousins refused to consider their claim without
instructions from the Registrar of Asiatics; he further refused to communicate with the
Registrar or to give the applicants visitors’ passes. Polak telegraphed the Registrar of
Asiatics and asked Goodricke and Laughton, attorneys, to apply for an interdict against
Cousins and other parties to prevent removal of applicants, pending consideration of
their claims by the Transvaal authorities. The interdict from the Supreme Court was
obtained, a condition being that applicants should lodge £100 as security. Cousins,
after considerable delay, went aboard ship and demanded that applicants sign a
document authorizing him to keep them under restraint at the Detention Camp and to use
the security for their maintenance. Polak protested that it was unlawful, but Cousins,
2

370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

telling manner how high-handed the action of the Officer concerned
was. Mr. Polak addressed a letter to The Natal Mercury also about the
same time, in which he dealt not only with the case of two young
Indians, but with that of Mr. Gajjar,1 with which also our readers are
familiar. Our contemporary has written a very forcible editorial 2 on
learning that Polak was not yet enrolled as attorney in Natal, had him ordered off ship.
Under pressure from Cousins, the applicants signed. The attorneys had meanwhile
communicated with the Judge who declared that Cousins’ action was not intended by his
order. Although Cousins then issued them visitors’ passes, he still refused to accept
their applications for registration. Polak then wrote to the Minister of the Interior
setting forth the details of this case and requesting that instructions be issued for a
“humaner administration” of the immigration laws. The Dayal brothers applied directly
to the Registrar of Asiatics, Pretoria, who had not yet replied when the period of their
visiting passes expired. The Immigration Officer refused an extension. Meanwhile, the
elder brother’s claim to reside in Natal was admitted on grounds of his ability to pass the
education test but his proof of marriage was rejected. The brothers, therefore, crossed
the border accompanied by Polak. Although their application for residential rights was
under consideration, they were charged as prohibited immigrants and the cases remitted
to Pretoria and remanded to January 30. On January 27, however, Polak was notified by
the Registrar that the cases had been withdrawn and the brothers’ claims admitted.
Indian Opinion, 4-1-1913 & 1-2-1913.
1
Gajjar, an Indian merchant from Somerset East in the Cape, had gone to
Durban to receive his family coming from India. He asked the local magistrate to
issue him a visitors’ permit for Natal which the latter in this ignorance of Cape
Immigration laws thought unnecessary. He was, however, issued a certificate of
identity which mentioned his standing in the community. On arrival at Durban,
Cousins, the Natal Immigration Officer summoned him and discovered that he had
neither a visiting pass for Natal nor a permit of temporary absence from the Cape.
While Cousins issued him a visiting pass for Natal, he ordered Gajjar to stay on in
Durban until he had obtained the Minister’s instructions, but refused to allow his
family to disembark on the ground that Gajjar was technically a “prohibited
immigrant” in both provinces--in Natal because he had not got a visiting pass and in
the Cape because he had not obtained a permit of absence. He was, however, allowed
to return home as “an act of grace”. Polak then wrote to The Natal Mercury saying,
“Such, however, is the ‘humane’ administration of the Immigration Law that Mr.
Gokhale was given to understand might be expected when he interviewed the
Ministers at Pretoria. Are these expectations never to be realized, and is every
conceivable occasion to be seized to harass unfortunately placed members of the
Indian community?” Indian Opinion, 11-1-1913.
2
In this The Natal Mercury strongly condemned Cousins. He apparently
laboured, it said, under the impression that he had been placed “to give the public the
greatest amount of inconvenience . . . the maximum degree of hardship he can
impose”; he was “about the last man for the job” and they did “not intend Natal to rest
under the stigma of being a place” where the law was administered according to
Cousins’ ideas. Indian Opinion, 11-1-1913.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

371

these cases, which we reproduce in this issue, as also that part of Mr.
Polak’s letter which refers to Mr. Gajjar’s case.
The most painful part of Mr. Polak’s letter is where he says
that Mr. Gajjar has been permitted to return to the Cape as an “act of
grace”. No case—and there have been harsh cases enough—under
the Cape Immigration Act has, perhaps, shown in a manner as this has,
the cruelty of the section that requires an Indian leaving the Province
to take out a permit of absence in a particular form. Mr. Gajjar might,
but for this precious“act of grace”, have become a prohibited immigrant for the Cape Province although he was armed with a document
of identification from the Chief Constable of his town. Under the Act,
a Cape Indian paying a visit to a sister Province on the strength of a
permit issued by that Province may be prevented from returning, if he
happened not to know, like the Magistrate at Somerset East, the exact
terms of the Cape Immigration Law. Justice in Mr. Gajjar’s case has
been forced from the Government by the persistent efforts of Mr.
Polak, but the Cape Indians ought not to rest until the section in
question has been altered and a promise taken from the Government
that, pending alteration, the section will not be rigorously enforced.
So far as the action of the Officer1 in question is concerned, the
public will perhaps feel thankful to know that he has handed over the
charge to Mr. Harry Smith, who is, so far as Natal is concerned, an old
experienced official possessing the requisite legal knowledge of the
people he has to deal with. But Mr. Harry Smith’s conduct of his
department under the Union Government will be watched by the
Indian community with not a little anxiety. Whilst we have had to
perform the painful duty of severely criticising Mr. Cousins’
administration of the Immigration Act of Natal, 2 we have always felt
that we might not have done justice to him by ignoring the fact that he
is now a Union Officer, and that probably he has been acting against
his own wishes and under orders from the Department of the Interior.
However, we have not been able to place any such charitable
construction upon his action so far as Mr. Gajjar’s case, for instance,
was concerned. No matter what the orders from the Department of the
Interior might be, humane Immigration Officers would always find
scope for their humanity in dealing with helpless men and women;
1

Cousins
Vide “The New Broom”, 13-7-1912 and “More of the New Broom”,
20-7-1912.
2

372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and we trust that Mr. Harry Smith will exercise, as he has often done
before, kindly tact in his dealings with the Indian community.
Indian Opinion, 11-1-1913

257. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH[-II]
It is our habit that, at the slightest illness, we rush at once to a
doctor, vaidya or hakim.1 And if we do not, we take whatever medicine
the barber or our neighbour suggests. It is our belief that no sickness
can be cured without drugs. This, however, is sheer superstition.
People who suffer from other causes are—and will continue to be—
fewer than those who have suffered, and are suffering, because of this
superstition. If, therefore, we can get to know what constitutes illness,
we should be able to take a somewhat balanced view. “Darad”2 means
pain. “Roga” 3 means much the same. It is right to seek a remedy for
pain, but it is fultile to take drugs to suppress pain. Actually, the result
is often harmful. Taking medicine has the same effect as my covering
up the refuse in my house. Refuse which is kept covered will putrefy
and cause me harm. Moreover, the covering itself may putrefy and
add to the refuse. I have then to get rid of the refuse which has since
formed as well as that which was to begin with. This is the fate that
befalls people taking drugs. But, if one throws out the refuse, the
house will become as clean as it was before. By giving rise to illness—
pain [that is]—Nature, in fact, informs us that there exists impure
matter in our body. Moreover Nature has provided within the body
itself the means of cleansing it, so that, when illness occurs, we should
realize that there exists impure matter in the body and that she has
commenced her cleansing process. I should be thankful to anyone
who came forward to remove the refuse from my house. So long as he
has not done with the cleaning, I might be inconvenienced but I would
keep my patience. Likewise if I am patient while Nature is cleansing
the body, which is my home, it will be well again, and I shall become
healthy and so free from pain. If I have a cold, I do not have to rush
to swallow drugs—sunth4 [for instance]. I know that some impure
matter has accumulated in a certain part of my body and that Nature
1
2
3
4

A vaidya practices the Ayurvedic and hakim the Unani system of medicine.
Gujarati words for pain, ailment, disease
Ibid
Ginger, dried and ground, is a much used household remedy.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

373

has stepped in to remove it. And so I must let her have her way, so that
my body may be cleansed in the shortest possible time. If I resist
Nature, her task is doubled; she has both to cleanse me and cope with
my resistance. I can assist Nature, for instance, by getting rid of the
effective cause of the impurity, so that more of it does not accumulate.
That is to say, if I stop eating for the duration of the illness, thus
preventing the ingress of further impurity, and if I exercise in fresh
air, I shall also start ejecting the impurity through the skin. That this is
the golden rule for keeping the body free of disease, every one can
prove for himself. Only, the mind must be kept in a stable state. One
who reposes true faith in God will always act in this fashion. The
following [throught] will help in bringing about this state of mind:
`Even if I undergo the treatment prescribed by the vaidya or some
such person, no one can guarantee that my disease will be got rid of.
Not all those who put themselves in the hands of a doctor are cured. If
they were, Mr. Gandhi should not have to write these chapters and all
of us would be leading happy lives.’
Experience shows that once the [medicine-] bottle enters a
house, it never leaves. Countless persons suffer from some ailment or
other throughout their lives, go on adding to the drugs one after the
other or go on changing their vaidyas and hakims in their search for
the one who will cure them; finally, having ruined both themselves
and others, they die, a troubled death. That famous judge, the late Mr.
Justice Stephen, who had lived in India [for a time], once said that
doctors introduce herbs, of which they know little, into bodies of
which they know even less. Doctors say the same thing after attaining
due experience.
Dr. Magendie has said: “Medicine is a great hoax.” A famous
doctor, Sir Ashley Cooper, has observed: “The science of medicine is
based on mere guess-work.” Sir John Forbes has remarked: “Notwithstanding the skill of physicians, it is Nature which cures most men
of their diseases.” Dr. Baker tells us: “In cases of night fever many
more patients die of the drugs than of the disease.” Dr. Froth declares
that it is difficult to find a more dishonest profession than that of
medicine. Dr. Thomas Watson writes: “In the most important matters
our profession drifts on a sea of dubious hypotheses.” Dr. Coswell
feels that the human race would benefit immeasurably if the entire
medical profession was ended. Dr. Frank avers that thousands have
been killed in hospitals. Dr. Mason Good says: “Drugs claim a
374

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

heavier sacrifice of human lives than do wars, epidemics and
famines.” We find that an increase in the number of doctors is
followed in one place after another by a rise in the incidence of
disease. Large advertisements appear in newspapers which do not
accept other advertisements. When Indian Opinion used to accept
advertisements, its workers had to go about soliciting these from
others, but as for drug advertisements, their manufacturers pressed
them on the journal and would even tempt [us] with large sums. We
pay a rupee for medicine which should cost no more than a pie. Most
manufacturers generally do not let us know what the drugs are made
from. A drug-manufacturer recently brought out a book entitled
Secret Medicines, his object being to ensure that people are not
misled. He reveals therein that the ingredients of sarsaparilla, fruit salt,
syrup and other well-known patent medicines, for which we pay from
three to seven shillings a bottle, cost from a farthing to a penny. This
means that we pay from 36 to 336 times the actural cost of the
medicine. The profit to the dealer is thus 3500 to 35000 per cent.
The reader ought surely to see from all this that it is unnecessary
for a patient to rush to a doctor or buy drugs in a hurry. But few will
so forbear. All doctors are not dishonest. That every time the drug is
harmful, the common man will not admit. To such persons, one may
say: ‘Forbear as much as you can. Do not bother a doctor as long as
you can help it. If you must call in one, get only a reliable person and,
having called him, stick to him. Consult another only if he so advises.
Your disease is not under your doctor’s control. If it is given to you
to live, you will get well and if, in spite of all that you have done,
death comes to you or to your relatives, know that death is no more
than a transition.’ The purpose in my writing these chapters is that we
might think and act according to this principle. In these, I wish to
discuss with readers such topics as physiology, air, water, diet, exercise,
clothing, water and earth treatment, accidents, child-care, the duties of
men and women during pregnancy and common ailments.
MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI

Phoenix
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 11-1-1913

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

375

258. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Saturday [January 11, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Just a line to say that I got the message about the fares for the
Naidoo boys all right.
Here we are quite comfortable but I do not know that you
could stand this life. We were most of us on the verandah sleeping side
by side. Jeki1 was next to me. We all sat at the same table last night to
dine ≈ we were 20. The work is good but hard. I have been up since
4.30 a.m. and now it is 5.40 a.m. I woke up the boys at 5.20 a.m. We
are in all 23 in one household. In the light of what happened at the
station, in the light of what is happening here, consider my letter well.
Over my meal yesterday I could not have taken more than 10
minutes. I think I took the least time of all and I did not gulp. I have
simply found out, I hope, the right food for me. One can only die in
the attempt to find the truth. I am passionately in search of it. May
you not for the time being follow my career from a distance? Poor
Mrs. Gandhi and poor you! Mrs. Gandhi must have felt simply
shocked to see her neat little home turned into a menagerie. But she
took it all quite calmly. Your case is somewhat different. She is bound
up in my life. She is not on the fence. You are not bound up in me
and you are on the fence. All these things should put you on your
guard. I therefore urge again: do not be hasty, nurse your office in
terms of my letter, come to Phoenix whenever you like partly to share
my life but not wholly, and you will test yourself. Watch me just now
not with a friendly eye but a highly critical and fault-finding eye.
Assimilate the joint life as we have lived it hitherto but in my flight
now hesitate, watch and wait. More when you come here. You will
observe things for yourself. Please understand me. I do not want to
put you off. If you will take the full step in spite of my warnings, I
will not stop you.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India
1

376

Jayakunvar, wife of Manilal Doctor
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

259. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[Before January 18, 1913]1
CHI. MANILAL,

I have your two letters. I will not do anything in haste. Ideas
ought to come up and great changes must take place in my way of
life. But I will not do anything that might cause you apprehension. It
is your duty not to lose hope. You can rise only through supreme
effort. And when you have done that you will attain limitless
effulgence. It isa great enterprise. You are competent to undertake it,
for all souls have the same attributes. If only you lift the veils, you can
see for yourself your powers. The key to this [life] is in the
yamaniyamas2 . I wish to write of these hereafter. I have other things to
say, but there is now no time. I have corrected the verse from the
shataka. Look at it carefully. If you don’t follow, ask again. Always,
ponder what you read. Do not utter a syllable or set down a word nor
do a single deed without taking thought.
David Ernest and others are coming today.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 105. Courtesy:
Sushilabehn Gandhi

260. DOES IT MEAN PASSIVE RESISTANCE?
We are in possession of information of the utmost importance to
the Indian community throughout south Africa. We may, next week,
give the whole history of the matter, which bids fair to bring about a
revival of passive resistance which we had hoped would not be
necessary. We understand that the Government are not keeping their
1

The reference by Gandhiji in this letter to the great changes in his life is
presumably to his decision to leave for India about the middle of 1913, which was
published in Indian Opinion, 18-1-1913.
2
Yama is a duty or observance enjoined by religion. Niyama is a voluntary
acceptance of that discipline. While writers have mentioned as many as ten yamas,
five are commonly known: non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy and
non-possession. The ten niyamas include penance, alms-giving, study, restraint,
fasting and observing silence.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

377

promise regarding those British Indians who, in terms of the
settlement, should be given rights of residence in the Transvaal or the
Union as the case may be. It would appear that they decline to accept
all the names submitted by the Passive Resistance Committee. Delicate
communications are still proceeding and we hope that they will end
satisfactorily. There are also other points which, directly or indirectly,
bear upon and arise out of the settlement, any one of which may
produce a conflagration in the community. We warn the Government
to be careful. We hope that they will. But if they do not, we know that
the seasoned soldiers in passive resistance will give a good account of
themselves at the call of duty.
Indian Opinion, 18-1-1913

261. THE INDENTURE SYSTEM
If any further testimony were needed to bring home to the mind
the evils of the indenture system, Miss Dudley’s letter, which we
reproduced from India elsewhere in this issue, would supply it. This
lady’s experience of fifteen years’ missionary work in Fiji leads her
to say that the system is past mending, and [to] entreat her readers not
to be satisfied with any reforms but to continue to use their influence
against the system until it is abolished. We are grateful to Miss Dudley
for her outspoken letter. Such independent testimony is worth much.
Other European friends, we are sure, could add their testimony against
the system and so bring nearer the end which is almost in sight. We
are confident that the Hon. Mr. Gokhale means to see this thing
through. The National Congress, only the other day, again brought
forward a resolution dealing with this matter, Mr. Gokhale being the
mover.1 So long as women and children can be dragged away into a
state of slavery under the guise of indentured labour, with results too
horrible to mention, so long must we continue to advocate the total
abolition of this most iniquitous, cruel, and immoral system.
Indian Opinion, 18-1-1913

1

378

Vide “Mr. Gokhale at the National Congress”, 4-1-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

262. INDIAN EDUCATION
In the Natal Provincial Gazette we read the following among the
rules framed for the guidance of teachers in the Government schools:
No Native, Indian or Coloured children are to be admitted to schools
other than those specially provided for them.
No pupils under standard II may be admitted to an Indian School under
European teachers.
No subject not included in the Standard Syllabus for Primary Schools
may be taught during ordinary school hours in an Indian School in charge of
European teachers.
No pupil who has passed Standard IV will be allowed to remain at an
Elementary Indian School.

Hitherto there have been no Gazetted rules specifically debarring Indian children from entering schools other than those specially
established for them. But the rules before us have altered all that. The
Provincial Administration have thrown down the challenge. They have
made it a matter of law. The rules, moreover, hamper Indian education
in many other respects. Their effect is to prevent the teaching of
vernaculars in the Government schools and to prevent our children
from receiving other than elementary education in Government
schools. The duty of Indian parents is obvious. They ought to make
adequate provision for the education, along national lines, of their
own children. There should be established our own schools affording
our children opportunities to learn their own vernaculars and, through
them, their own history. It is a serious reflection on us that our
children are being brought up without a proper foundation to build
character upon.1
Indian Opinion, 18-1-1913

263. ENGLAND’S BIGGEST CUSTOMER
A letter has been addressed to the English Press by Messrs R.
Knight & Sons, of the Calcutta Statesman. In this letter they point out
that India is now England’s largest customer. In 1911, India’s
purchases from England amounted to £52,246,000 as against
1

Vide also “For Indian Parents”, 19-8-1911.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

379

£39,284,000 from Germany, the great rival of England. These
gentlemen further point out that the percentage taken by India of
British produce and manufacture in 14Ω whereas the percentage taken
by Australia is 8 and [by] Canada and South Africa 6 each. These
figures carry a moral which should be driven home to every wellwisher of the Empire. The Colonies we have named have been the
worst offenders in regard to their treatment of British Indians. And
their trade with Great Britain is extremely small compared with
India’s. When India recognizes her own power, it will be difficult for
British statesmen to Justify their policy of non possumus when dealing
with the disabilities of British Indians in the self-governing Colonies.
They will, for instance, not look forward to another crisis which we see
distinctly coming in South Africa, unless the Minister of the Interior
removes the many points of soreness among the Indians here. The
Immigration policy is becoming simply intolerable.
Indian Opinion, 18-1-1913

264. LORD AMPTHILL’S COMMITTEE1
The major share of the expenses of this Committee, which
functions in England and which, as all agree, has done epic work for
us, has so far fallen on the Transvaal. It cannot go on like this for
ever. Moreover, the Committee has worked for all South Africa. In the
circumstances, it is palpably unfair that the Transvaal alone should
pay the expenses. Everyone realizes the utmost need to maintain the
Committee. Readers will see, in another section of this issue, the
suggestion in this regard made by Mr. Gokhale, that we should
accordingly get together a sum of £200 each year for the Committee
and so have £600 for three years.2 If readers of Indian Opinion show
the requisite enthusiasm, the collection should not take long. Those
who are willing to contribute are requested to send the money to us,
and we shall remit it to Mr. Gokhale. We hope contributions will also
be raised by the individual Committees 3 . There should be no need
here to speak of the importance of this work.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 18-1-1913
1

Vide also “Lord Ampthill’s Committee”, 29-6-1912.
Vide the entry for November 26 in “Diary, 1912”.
3
Local committees of the British Indian Association, Johannesburg
2

380

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

265. PARENTS’ DUTY
These days many parents think [much] on the subject of what
they should do about their boys. Among British families, one notices
that it is the tradition to make the handsome boy a soldier, the
intelligent one a doctor or a barrister, and the dullard a priest. There
are many exceptions to this rule, a big one being that, in a good
family, one member is prepared for public work. India is in such a
state today that all parents should prepare one of their boys for public
work—that is, work in the service of the community. Where there is
only one boy in the family, this of course does not apply. But many
families have more than one boy each. If they train one of the boys
for service to the country, the uplift of the country will become
possible in a short time. This is a matter worthy of the highest
consideration by all parents.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 18-1-1913

266. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-III]
CHAPTER 1. THE HEALTHY STATE

It is the common belief that, if a person eats and drinks
normally, moves about and does not call in the doctor, he is free from
illness. A little thought will show that this belief is erroneous. Numerous instances come to notice of a person who eats, drinks and goes
about and who ignores his ailments in the belief that there is nothing
wrong with him.
In truth, there are very few persons in this world who are entirely
healthy.
An English writer has observed that only he can be called
healthy in whose pure body dwells a pure mind. Man is not all body.
The body is merely his abode. Moreover, the body, the mind and the
sense-organs are so closely connected that, if one of them is affected
by illness or pain, the others also get out of order. The body has been
likened to a rose. What shows without is the body of the rose, the
fragrance is its soul. No one would care for a paper rose which does
not smell like the real flower. The fragrance is the test of the rose, so is
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

381

the test of a man his fragrance—the character of his soul. We will,
moreover, throw away a flower which looks like a rose but has an
unpleasant smell. Likewise, even if a man’s body appears to be all
right, if the soul inhabiting that body tends to bad conduct, his body
will hold no fascination for us. We thus see that one whose character is
unworthy can never be called healthy. The body is so closely bound
to the soul that one whose body is pure will be pure in mind too. In
the West a whole tradition has emerged, based on this principle. It
holds that those whose minds are pure can never be ill and one who is
ill can cure himself by cultivating purity of mind. this tenet should not
be rejected [out of hand]. It is sound, in fact, but the people of the
West who claim to be civilized misuse it. The essential thing we have to
learn from this tradition is that our mind is a potent means for the
preservation of health, and that purity of mind ensures the maintenance of good health.
This man has a bad temper and is tamasik 1 , that man is lethargic.
A third is deaf. All these defects are, in fact, only symptoms of
disease. Some doctors believe that even faults, such as stealing, are
diseases. Some wealthy women in England pilfer worthless articles
from shops. Doctors in that country ascribe this state of mind to a
disease termed kleptomania. There are a few who are not at peace till
they have shed blood. This, too, is a disease.
Arguing along these lines, we can describe only that person as
healthy whose body is whole and without defect; whose teeth are
sound; who has his ears and eyes; whose nose does not run; who does
perspire but whose perspiration does not smell; whose feet and mouth
do not give out a bad odour; whose hands and feet can perform
common tasks; who is not given to inordinate sexuality; who is neither
too fat nor too thin, and whose mind and senses are under control. It
is no easy matter to achieve or maintain this state of health. We do not
enjoy such good health because our parents did not. A great writer
has said that the offspring, if any, of men and women who are fit in
every way must surpass their parents. If this be untrue, those who hold
that the world is progressing must revise their view. One who is wholly
free from disease has no fear of death. The very fact that we all fear
death shows that we are not healthy. Death is for us a great
transformation and, according to the law of creation, should be a
1

382

Full of darkness
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

noble one. It is our duty to strive for this lofty kind of health. How
such health can be gained and preserved, we shall inquire hereafter.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 18-1-1913

267. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
P HOENIX,

Thursday [January 23, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

My heart yearns often to write long letters to you, but I am
obliged to deny myself the pleasure. Such is the life here. From 4.45
a.m. to 10 p.m., I do not think I waste a single moment in talk. I see
no visitors except on Sundays. But even Sunday is no free day with
me. On no other terms could the new scheme be worked here
effectively. My meal never now takes more than 15 minutes. Between
11 and 12, bathing and dinner are finished. Boys do no washing of
pots now. Miss West alone does it and she is at the school at the stroke
of 12.30 p.m. I do little personal correspondence now. Even my
London letters are only a few lines. Thus do I cope with the day’s
programme but only barely so. The tension does not irritate me. It
gives me greater pleasure.
How I wish you could stand this life. But I fear it is too much
for you, at any rate at this stage. How long I shall stand it remains to
be seen. But you will come and see things for yourself. Meantime you
are comparing notes and collecting your thoughts and yourself. I
know that you will not allow your head to guide you but your heart.
I suggest your putting the wagon and the mules at an auction
sale as also everything else not required there. Your books I am
keeping as they are in their cases. Only those tools which I require
myself I have taken out and not the others.
I am just now on my trial. The Government have rejected two of
the names given by us of educated entrants. This is a matter of
principle and I have told them that passive resistance will be revived if
they reject our nominees1 . So I might any moment have to abandon
work here which is moulding me and those who are with me.
Secondly, I have as a matter of principle boycotted the Congress as I
1

Vide “Does it Mean Passive Resistance?”, 18-1-1913.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

383

boycotted the Swami. This I have done because of Anglia. My step
may bring on a great deal of trouble. I must prepare myself for it.
God will help me. I know that I should be a coward if I took any other
step.
I am glad Geevers has at last left you. I have often blamed
myself severely for inflicting him on you. I cannot to my own
satisfaction sufficiently apologize for the serious blunder I committed.
Anyhow that incident opened my eyes to my weakness ≈ that of
vaulting ambition wrongly to serve.
With much love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

268. NONE TOO SOON
We publish elsewhere the report printed in a recent issue of the
Times of Natal to the effect that the Union Government have decided
to abolish the £3 tax exacted annually from time-expired indentured
Indians, their wives, and their children. The news, if true, is a welcome
relief, though it has come none too soon. It was high time that the
people of South Africa had washed their hands clean of this bloodmoney. We call it blood-money after full deliberation. A tax collected
from a poor man, his wife, and his children, manifestly for the
purpose of driving him and his family from a country for which he
and his had slaved for five years, or driving him into a further term of
slavery cannot be fittingly described by any other name. When the
abolition of the tax is an accomplished fact, the day should be
observed as one of rejoicing by the Indian community, throughout
South Africa, in that it will give relief to thousands of our dumb
countrymen. The credit will be Mr. Gokhale’s of this hateful impost is
abolished this year.
Indian Opinion, 25-1-1913

269. THE LICENSING QUESTION
A very significant reference appears in the address of the
President of the Natal Municipal Association, at the annual meeting of
that body at Utretcht, on the 20th instant. We are informed that the
384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Financial Relations Bill, which was dropped in the last session of the
Union Parliament, is to be reintroduced, with certain modifications,
this session, and that its objects are, briefly, to transfer to Provincial
Councils the revenue derived from dealers’ licences and the right to
legislate, in regard thereto, “which means that, if the Bill passes in its
present form the control of the licences will be placed in the hands of
the Provincial Councils”. If the effect of the Bill is to take from
municipalities the control of trading licences, it will undoubtedly be a
matter upon which the Indian community are to be congratulated. If it
means that the control of licences is to be transferred from the Union
Government to the Provincial Councils, undoubtedly the result will be
most injurious to the interest of the community. We feel that the Bill
has not received that consideration and criticism which it ought to
have at the hands of the Indian public, and it is very much to be
feared that it is in conflict with Section 147 of the South Africa Act,
which provides that “the control and administration of matters
specially or differentially affecting Asiatics throughout the Union
shall vest in the Governor-General-in-Council”, that is to say, the
Union Parliament and not the Provincial Councils. So far as Natal is
concerned, it is notorious that widespread hopes of adding a still
further burden to those already borne by the Indian population are
entertained as a result of the adoption by the Provincial Council of
Mr. G. H. Hulett’s resolution 1 , in 1911, as an act of revenge for the
stoppage of the importation of indentured labour from India. There is
no doubt that the question of trading licences was in the mind of the
Imperial Government when they insisted upon the inclusion in the
South Africa Act of the safeguards provided by Section 147. But if
this Bill passes in the form that, we understand, it is to be brought
forward, those safeguards will be rudely brushed aside, and since we
are told on the authority of Imperial Ministers, that the King’s power
of veto is little else than a sham and a delusion and its enunciation in
the Royal instructions a mere diplomatic blind, it follows that Indian
trading rights will be given an even more precarious character than
hitherto, and that they will be speedily extinguished, unless Indians
take up the challenge and offer a vigorous protest.
Indian Opinion, 25-1-1913

1

Vide 11th footnote of “Memorial to Secretary of State for Colonies”,
15-5-1911.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

385

270. THE INDIAN WOMEN’S BAZAAR
The Bazaar, which was to be held at the end of the year, of
which Mrs. Vogl is the moving spirit, will be held about the month of
May. Of course, the Bazaar will be held under the auspices of the
Indian Women’s Association. The readers of Indian Opinion who are
interested in Mrs. Vogl’s scheme and in the cause of Indian women’s
education, will, we hope, respond liberally and send what assistance
they wish to before the end of April. Helpers in India should send
their consignments about the end of March at the latest. The address
is: The Secretary, Indian Women’s Association, Box 6522, Johannesburg.
Indian Opinion, 25-1-1913

271. OUR NEGLIGENCE
Dr. Murison’s annual reports on [public] health are always
worth reading. We publish elsewhere a summary of the current report.
Dr. Murison and Dr. Adams, who have been engaged to conduct an
inquiry regarding tuberculosis, refer critically to our negligence. Dr.
Adams says that we do not bring cases of infectious diseases to the
notice of his department. We pay no heed to his instructions about
ventilation and water. He is also critical of some of our habits. His
criticism is such that we must accept it. There is no reason to suppose
that the whites always write about us in this fashion only out of
prejudice. We wish that we would give no one cause for criticism in
such matters. If only a few leaders would evince enthusiasm and take
in hand the task of imparting this kind of education to people, a great
change can be effected in our condition. This work can be done for
the most part by landlords 1 . But before they can do it, they should
stop being greedy.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 25-1-1913

1

386

The original literally reads: “. . . Zamindars who rent out houses . . . ”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

272. “CAN WE THUS ENSURE THE COUNTRY’S
PROGRESS?”
This line is from a well-known poem. It came to mind when we
read the following paragraph from Gujarati Panch:
Shrimant Sardar Balvantrai Bhai Saheb Scindia has set apart a sum of
two lakh rupees from which to grant a monthly allowance of Rs. 125 to each
Vaishnava who renounces the world and retires into vanavasa1 .

Shrimant Sardar has donated this money in the fulness of his
heart. It is true that some worthy Vaishnavas take to vanavasa. To
enjoy vanavasa—to embrace mendicancy2 —is a lofty state. However,
holding out the inducement of a monthly allowance to a vanavasi3 is
tantamount to a betrayal [of him]. Vanavasa and money are mutually
opposed. It is our guess that Shrimant Sardar must have set apart this
fund for the benefit of the vanavasi’ s relations. Even that, to my way
of thinking, is faulty. A vanavasi places no reliance on society for the
maintenance of his family. He commits his children to the Almighty.
If he takes out [as it were] an insurance policy thus taking man’s help
for his wife and children, he cannot be deemed to have taken to
vanavasa. Moreover, one does not calculate so before adopting fakiri
or vanavasa. When the power seizes him, no one in the world can stop
him.
There is a great likelihood of Shrimant Sardar’s [proferred]
help promoting fraud. Many who are Vaishnavas in name only will
come forward to adopt vanavasa, and their families will draw a
monthly allowance of Rs. 125 each. It can perhaps be argued that
these allowances will be granted each month only after proper
scrutiny. To this, our reply is that the family of a genuine vanavasi
will not submit to scrutiny. The true vanavasi will not himself give
“notice”. Such endowments are tantamount to fraud in the name of
religion. It is not by thus manufacturing vanavasis or patriots that [the
cause of] the country can be advanced. History records no instance of
any country having progressed in this manner.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 25-1-1913
1

Literally, dwelling in the forest. The reference is to the third stage,
vanaprastha , in the Hindu scheme of life. In this stage one retires from family life to
live a life of contemplation and detachment.
2
The original has “fakiri”
3
Dweller in the forest
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

387

273. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH[-IV]
2. OUR BODY

Earth and water, sky, fire and air
The play of these five elements, they call the Universe.
An almost full description of the human body is contained in
this verse. It says that the sport of Nature or her Creator with the five
elements—earth, water, sky, light and air—which he mingles, is what
we know by the name of the Universe. From the substance of which
this Universe is made has been fashioned this figure of clay which we
call our body. We have a saying among us, “as within the body so in
the Universe” 1 and, “as with oneself, so with the country”. If we
remember this clue [to the mystery of the Universe] we shall certainly
see that clean earth, pure water, fresh air and open space and bright
sunshine are essential for the preservation of the body, and that we
need not fear any of these elements. In fact, illness follows when the
body becomes comparatively deficient even in one of these.
It is imperative that we know at least this much about our body,
but this knowledge is not adequate for our subject.
The body is made up of skin, bone, flesh and blood. The
skeleton provides the principal support for the body and it is that
which enables us to stand upright and walk. The bones protect the
delicate parts of the body, the skull protects the brain and the ribs, the
heart and the lungs. There are 238 bones in the body by the doctors’
reckoning. We can all see that a bone is hard outside, but it is not so
inside; the inside is soft and hollow. The joint where one bone is
joined to another is covered with cartilage which is taken to be soft
bone.
Our teeth, too, are bones. During childhood, the milk-teeth first
appear and these fall out. Then permanent teeth appear, which, once
they drop out, do not grow again. Milk-teeth begin appearing between
the ages of six and eight months and have almost all of them appeared
by the time the child is bout two years old. Permanent teeth begin to
appear after the age of five and they have all grown by the time he is
1

388

The saying is, “

”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

between seventeen and twenty-five. The molars appear last of all.
If we feel our skin, we will find a number of knobs of flesh
underneath at many places. These are called muscles. Our nerves get
work out of them. It is because of our muscles that we can open and
close our hands, work our jaws and blink. All these actions are
performed with the aid of muscles.
Complete information about the body lies outside the scope of
these chapters. The writer himself does not possess this knowledge.
Only facts necessary for our purpose will be set out here. Having,
therefore, grasped the foregoing facts, we go on to the main parts of
the body. Among these, the stomach is the most important. If the
stomach were to slacken even for a moment, all our limbs would
languish. Even the most ferocious beast will not have the capacity to
endure the strain which we subject the stomach to. Its function is to
digest food and nourish the body with the food so assimilated. What
the engine is to machinery, the stomach is to man. This organ is to the
left, beneath the ribs. Having passed through many processes within it,
the food is then broken down into different fluids and their [nutritive]
element extracted, the remaining portion being expelled from the
intestines as excreta. Above the stomach is the left lobe of the liver. To
the left of the stomach is the spleen. The liver is to the right beneath
the ribs. Its function is to purify the blood and produce bile which is
needed for the digestive process.
Behind the ribs, in the hollow of the chest, are [located] other
useful organs—the heart and the lungs. The sac containing the heart is
to the left, between the two lungs. There are altogether 24 bones in the
chest including both those to the left and to the right. The heart
pulsates between the fifth and the sixth ribs. We have tow lungs, the
left and the right, which consist of bronchial tubes. These are filled
with air and purify the blood. Air reaches the lungs through the windpipe. This air must pass through the nostrils. Air which thus passes
through the nostrils is warmed before it reaches the lungs. Many
people, who are ignorant of the fact, breathe through the mouth and
so do themselves harm. The mouth is for eating, etc. Air must be
inhaled only through the nose.
We have briefly examined the structure of the body and got
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

389

some idea of its important parts. Now we shall examine the fluid—
blood—on which the functioning of our body depends. Blood
provides us with nourishment. It separates the nutritive part of the
food, expels the useless products—excreta—and maintains the body at
a constant temperature. It flows continuously through veins and
arteries. It is to this flow that the pulse-beat is due. In a young and
healthy person the pulse beats about 75 times a minute. A child’s
pulse is more rapid and that of an aged person slower.
The most important agent that keeps the blood pure is air. The
blood which enters the lungs, having circulated through the body, has
become useless as it now contains poisonous substances. The air
inhaled into the lungs absorbs these toxic substances and passes on the
oxygen it contains to the blood stream. This process goes on
constantly. The inhaled air, laden with the poisons from the blood,
then comes out and the blood, having taken up the oxygen, circulates
through the arteries over the entire body. One can imagine the extent
to which the exhaled breath is impure. Air has such tremendous effect
on our bodies that it will be necessary to consider the subject in some
detail in a separate chapter.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion. 25-1-1913

390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

274. LETTER TO HARILAL GANDHI
[PHOENIX, ]

Post Vad 4 [January 26, 1913] 1
CHI. HARILAL,

Medh has had a letter is which his father gives news of your
failure. You should have written to me.
I have not felt disappointed over your failure. Since you have
resolved to pass that examination, go on working for it again. Send
me your question-papers. You must have preserved them. Let me
know in which subject you failed.
I read in Mumbai Samachar2 that you were present at the
Gokhale meeting. Give me your impressions of it.
I am arranging to go there in six months. I should certainly be
able to go if a law satisfying to our demands is passed; so it appears. I
have therefore settled in Phoenix. I don’t wish to stir out from here
for five months.
There are in all 30 children to be taught, including those
in Phoenix.3 Jekibehn, Miss West, one Patel named Maganbhai4 , Kashi
and I do the teaching. I get up at 4.45 in the morning and wake up
the children at five. The press hands, the schoolchildren and I do
farming from 6 to 8. Between 8 and 8.30, the students and the press
hands have breakfast. At 8.30, all the press hands return to the land
and work there until 11. I take the children to the school, where they
are taught to read and write from 8.30 to 10.30. From 10.30 to 11,
again, they learn farm-work.
Between 11 and 12.30, people bathe and eat. From 12.30 to
4.30, work in the press where the older boys train for two hours; the
last two hours [are spent on] reading and writing in the school. I
cannot at all look after the school in the afternoons. I may be able to
do so, I think, when things settle down a bit.
1
The meeting referred to in paragraph 3 was convened by the Sheriff of Bombay on December 14, 1912 to welcome Gokhale on his return from South Africa.
2
A Gujarati daily published from Bombay
3
Gandhiji brought with him his students from Tolstoy Farm which was closed
some time in January, 1913. Indian Opinion, 18-1-1913.
4
A teacher in Phoenix, he returned to India in 1915 with Maganlal Gandhi and
others.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

391

At 5.30 the boys have dinner. After katha kirtan 1 from 7 to
7.30, the boys go to sleep. From 7.30 to 9, I go over Manilal’s
lessons. Das2 wants to start a press in Durban. Perhaps Virji, too, will
go there.
Send this letter for Chanchi to read. I have no time to write her
another.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati original in Gandhiji’s hand: S. N. 9538

275. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
P HOENIX

Friday [January 31, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

We are planting banana plants. Sam was superintending. His
holes were not in a line. He asked me if it would matter. I said ‘no’ so
far as I was concerned but that if you were here, you would certainly
insist on the holes being in a line. The next row of holes was straight. I
mention the incident to tell you how near you are to me in all I am
doing. I think of you continually during all the gardening operations
and often wish you were near to advise me. I relate the incident also to
show how we two would have acted in the matter. I knew the holes
were wrong and allowed them to be proceeded with. You would never
have allowed it. You would have had the wrong holes filled in. I do
not attach any permanent value to this work. To me it is useful only in
so far as it trains those who are engaged in it. The work itself is being
continually done and undone. One man builds, another destroys and
rebuilds according to his notions of rightness. Who is right? Who
knows? But we do know when we act to our souls’ profit and when we
do not. And that is all that matters on this earth. It would certainly be
a great thing if you would walk with Medh and Desai. Do if you can.
No, I do not work in the knowledge that I am always to be in it.
On the contrary, here I am preparing for my withdrawal. It is highly
likely that some of the programme here you would like very well.
1
2

392

Listening to mythological stories and devotional music
Purshottamdas Desai?
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I have an uneasy fear that you are buying there things for the
household which I have removed. If so, I shall feel deeply hurt.
More in my next. I have not had the time to go through the
accounts.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

276. A CORRECTION
In our issue of the 18th ultimo we referred to the recently
published rules regarding the Natal schools, and we stated that the
rules were framed for the first time prohibiting the entry of Indian
children into the Government Schools not specially set apart for them.
Our attention has, however, been drawn to the fact that similar rules
were framed some time ago and that we commented already upon
them at the time. We regret that we should have inferred from the
rules in question that the authorities had added a new grievance to the
heavy list already existing. The wrong is none the less a serious one
because it has existed for some time. The Provincial Government
might have taken the opportunity, seeing that they were recasting the
rules, of removing the defect instead of perpetuating it.
Our attention has also been drawn to the fact that a hasty
reader might conclude, from our remarks that Indian children in Natal
could not receive education in the Government schools beyond the
4th Standard. The friend to whom we are indebted for the caution
points out that what was formerly the Higher-Grade Indian School at
Durban provides for the education of Indian children up to the 6th
Standard. This we knew perfectly well. But we mentioned that Indian
children could not, in effect, receive more than elementary education.
And the late Higher-Grade School, whose name was always a
misnomer, gives no more than elementary education. The 6th
Standard of that school is the 6th Standard of an elementary school,
and hardly equal to the 4th Standard of a High School in India. This
school affords no scope for a lad who wishes to matriculate at the
Cape University. He may not be admitted to the ordinary High
Schools or the Natal University College. He must take private tuition.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

393

This is a handicap of which the community justly complains. Mr.
Merriman, the other day, suggested, at the opening of a Muslim
school in Cape Town, that the true solution of the colour question was
education. Quite so. But the Government of the Union puts every
obstacle in the way of Coloured children, whether Natives or Asiatics.
Indian Opinion, 1-2-1913

277. HERTZOGISM
If what the special correspondent of The Star says about General
Hertzog’s position in the Union Cabinet, when he was still a member
of it, be true, the news is disquieting. We printed, last week, the Star
correspondent’s report, according to which the visit of Mr. Gokhale
was a proximate cause of the rupture between Generals Botha and
Hertzog, the latter wishing that Mr. Gokhale should interview him, as
he was in charge of Native Affairs.1 In General Hertzog’s estimation,
evidently, Natives and Asiatics should be classed together. However,
General Botha’s voice prevailed. He wanted to handle Mr. Gokhale as
his visit bore an Imperial significance. General Hertzog, therefore,
became irritated and delivered his famous speech on Imperial
responsibility, which brought about his compulsory exclusion from
the Cabinet. It was no light matter for General Botha to dismiss his
colleague. He has yet to reckon with Hertzogism. We may still less
lightly dismiss the great General or his policy. He is still a powerful
force in South African politics. He apparently represents the extreme
wing of the anti-Asiatic party that would be satisfied with nothing less
than our complete segregation and national humiliation. The passive
resistance compromise, which almost threatens, as we hinted two weeks
ago, to break down, has still to be given legal effect to. Dealers’
1
The Star report quoted a friend of Hertzog as having said that, since as
Minister of Native Affairs, he was concerned with the Indian question, he should
receive Gokhale during his 1912 visit to South Africa. General Botha, who regarded it
as an Imperial question, felt that it should be gone into by himself as Prime Minister.
There then ensued a heated discussion in the cabinet; but a compromise proposal on
the Indian question was adopted. The Star correspondent’s source said that General
Hertzog must have had this incident in mind when he declared, in a speech at De
Wildt, that South Africa should come first and the Empire after. He thought that
General Hertzog’s exit from the cabinet was “a culmination of the ill feeling that had
existed between General Botha and General Hertzog for a considerable time”. Indian
Opinion, 25-1-1913.

394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

licences legislation is still a tangible grievance. Immi-gration administration continues to irritate the community. If Hert-zogism wins the
day, we have trying times ahead of us. But even if it does not, it is
highly likely that, so far as its anti-Asiatic programme is concerned, it
may be accepted in toto by General Botha. When every vote counts,
we who are voteless, may be safely brushed aside. But, though we are
voteless, we need not be voiceless, so long as we keep ourselves well
armed with the powerful, yet harmless, weapon of passive resistance.
Indian Opinion, 1-2-1913

278. GERMISTON INDIANS
It appears from [a report in] the East Rand Express that the
Indians in the Germiston Location will have to shift to a new Location
by the end of February. The Natives have all left. The Municipality
has paid them £1,500 by way of compensation. The Indians have not
shifted yet, though the Municipality is agreeable to paying them up to
£700. Our friend the Express states that the Indians are not entitled to
any such compensation. If the Municipality pays it, it will be an act of
grace and a matter of policy. The idea is not to the liking of the
Express.It argues that, if it is to be paid as a matter of policy, the cost
should be borne by the Transvaal Government. The Municipality is
then welcome to accept a share of the cost if it want to. The truth is
that, whatever the Municipality pays, it will not be an act of grace, but
it will be paid out of fear—fear of satyagraha, the London Committee
and of the Imperial Government. Suppose the slumbering Indians
wake up! Suppose Lord Ampthill discredits the Germiston
Municipality in public! Suppose the Imperial Government finds fault
with it! Any one of these fears the Municipality could face out; but it
is meek in the face of them all [together].
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 1-2-1913

279. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-V]
3. AIR

We have seen something of the structure of the body and have
learnt that it requires three kinds of nourishment: air, water and food.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

395

Of these, air is the most essential. Consequently, Nature has provided it
to such extent that we can have it at no cost. But modern civilization
has put a price even on air. In these times, one has to go off to distant
places to take the air, and this costs money. It is at Matheran that
residents of Bombay can get fresh air and only then does their health
improve. In Bombay itself, if one can live on Malabar Hill, the air is
much better. But one must have money to do this. If Durbanites want
fresh air, they have to go to live in Berea. That again means expense.
It would not, therefore, be quite true to say in modern times that “air
is free”.
Whether air is free or has to be paid for, we cannot carry on
without it for a moment. We have seen that blood circulates through
the entire body, is purified after returning to the lungs and flows out
again. This goes on all day and all night. Every time we breathe out,
we expel fouled air and, when we breathe in, we obtain from the air
without, oxygen with which to purify the blood. This respiration continues every moment and the life of our body depends upon it. When
we die of drowning, it only means we are unable to inhale oxygen and
exhale foul air. A pearl diver puts on a diving suit before he goes
down into the water and obtains air from a tube [one end of] which
remains above the water-level. It is because of it that he can remain
under water for a long time.
Some doctors have conducted experiments which have established that, if a person is kept without air for five minutes, the lifegiving breath leaves the body. At times a baby [lying] close to its
mother dies of suffocation. This happens because the mouth and nose
are smothered, and the baby gets no fresh air.
We see from all this that air is the most necessary nourishment
for us, one that can be had without the asking. We get food and water,
only by asking for or seeking them, but air, we take in involuntarily.
Just as we hesitate to take foul water or food, so ought we to in
the case of foul air. In fact we do not take in unwholesome food or
polluted water in the same quantities as we do in case of foul air. The
revulsion comes from the seeing. [For] we worship idols.1 Air cannot
be seen with the naked eye. We therefore have no idea of how much
foul air we take in. We hesitate to eat food touched by another; we
would think twice before drinking water which another has tasted
1

396

That is, we believe only in good or evil that is visible.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

before us. Even if we felt no aversion 1 within us [towards filth or
ugliness], we would never take the vomit of another. If vomit is put
even before one famine-stricken, he would die rather than eat it. But
we all inhale, without revulsion, the air “spewed” by another—that is,
exhaled by him. According to the rules of hygiene, spewed air is just
as bad as spewed food. It has been proved that, if air exhaled by a
man is introduced into the lungs of another, the latter dies
instantaneously; so poisonous it is. Yet people sitting of sleeping
cooped up in a small room inhale, all the time, air which is as impure.
Fortunately, air is constantly in a state of movement and agitation and
diffuses rapidly. Moreover, it can enter through the smallest of pores.
Consequently, even as we are huddled in a room and fouling the air
inside, some fresh air comes through a clearance in the door or chinks
in the roof. It is not wholly “spewed” air, therefore, that we [they]
breathe. The air exhaled by us is constantly being purified. When we
breathe the air inside us out into the open, the foul air diffuses instantly into the atmosphere, and Nature thus maintains the [required]
quantity of pure air. The atmosphere extends over a large area,
enveloping this small earth.
We can now see why so many people are ailing and emaciated.
There is no doubt that bad air is the cause of more than 99 per cent.
of diseases. Tuberculosis, fever and many diseases termed infectious
are all caused by the foul air we inhale. The first, the easiest and the
last means of ending them is to have fresh air, purest of the pure.
There is no other, vaidya or hakim, that can match it. Tuberculosis is a
sign of rotting lungs, foul air being the cause. Just as an engine is
damaged through being fed with bad coal, so are our lungs by foul
air. Hence, modern doctors who understand [this] will invariably
advise tuber-culosis patients, as the first step in the treatment, to spend
all the 24 hours in the open. All other remedies take effect after this,
but none will work without it.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 1-2-1913

1

For the same concept, vide “Nausea”, 2-2-1907.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

397

280. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
P HOENIX

Thursday night [February 6, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I have your long letter. It made me sad. I can entirely enter into
your feelings. I will not, therefore, strive with you. I quite see that you
should now proceed along your own lines. And I have no fear, so
long as your heart rules your head. You will come to India when you
feel absolutely impelled to do so. And to Phoenix too you would
come whenever you feel like it and not before. If you want me to
return any of your tools or books, please say so. I should feel deeply
hurt if you did not do so. I have told you that I have not even
unpacked your books and your tools too are still most of them in the
box.
My life is becoming harder day by day and I do feel that you
would not be able to bear it even if you tried. Just now I hardly speak
to anybody, so finely cut has my daily programme become. My meals
too are invariably taken whilst I am serving the boys and as a rule I
am finished by the time the boys are finished. There is not a
moment’s rest after the dinner. This I find absolutely necessary at
least for the present. Miss West has entered into the thing wholeheartedly and works away the whole day. I would certainly like you to
pay us, when you feel like it, a visit, examine the working and criticize.
I know that in many things there is room for improvement. Only I
cannot see it. I do need a friendly critic. West is excellent but he has
his limits. His resources are exhausted and he is himself immersed in
his own work.
Medh tells me you have advanced him £22. It was perhaps as
well. You were certainly not bound to do so. Only his is an exceptional case. I hope you will not allow it to be used as a precedent.
Of course when the proper time comes you should remind
Naidoo about the loan.
Can you remember anything about Mr. Doke’s father’s memoir
I had? I cannot find it among the books sent here. I should not
forgive myself if the book is lost. What about Just’s book?1 We have
to send it to Mr. Gokhale.
1

398

Return to Nature; vide also “Letter to G. K. Gokhale”, 14-2-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I shall say nothing about the Kaffir1 boy. I must now watch you
and wait. You are making an experiment with yourself. I can but pray
that you may come out of it quite successful.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

281. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
P HOENIX

Friday [February 7, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

We are about to finish the work of the week. Your letter is
pathetic. I feel now that I was unwise in hastening the packing of your
books and tools. I can quite understand how you must be stinting
yourself. I do not mind the stinting. It can only do you good. I am
simply blaming my hasty judgment. I ought to have left the packing
of these things to you. In that case, under the altered programme,
neither the books nor the tools would have come here. But now I do
beseech you to think out what you require and it can be sent to you or
you could take the things with you when you are here.
If you can have Mr. Sharpe as your companion in your walk, it
would be certainly good. But the walk ought not to be undertaken
unless you feel sure that you could be absent from your work for so
long a time.
In my opinion, now that you are living at Mountain View, you
should not think of building a house but you may, by your own
exertion, turn it into a nice orchard. That will give you perennial joy
and healthy occupation. But these things we can discuss when you are
here.
I do wish that you will leave off thinking about the synagogue.
It was not to be yours. Why should it now worry you? What does it
matter if your plan has been copied by someone else? Is it not rather a
matter of pride that it has so commended itself to the people? And
why be angry that Cohn has acted as he has done? May he not act
according to his nature? When we become angry that someone has
done an evil act, it really means that we might have done likewise. We
do not get angry that a snake acts as it does. Just consider this and tell
1

A term by which the native African communities in South Africa were
described The expression, however, is no longer in use.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

399

me whether there is a flaw in the thought. Now I must stop, as I am
interrupted.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

282. TWO IMMIGRATION CASES
Mr. Justice Broome has given judgment in two immigration
cases. They both deserve to be known. In one case the father has
complained that he had suffered a loss because the official had thrown
his son out [of the country] without inquiry. He had filed a suit for
compensation and had also pleaded that he might be allowed to
produce his son [in court]. The [claim of the] boy [to stay in the
country] was rejected by the official. The father then secured an
interdict from the Supreme Court to stay his son’s being sent back to
India. Meanwhile, additional evidence was produced before the
official, but he did not accept it. The official then took legal steps to
have the body deported. The case was adjourned so that a summons
could be issued. Meanwhile the official changed his mind. Assuming
he had the [necessary] authority, he deported the boy without issuing
a summons and obtaining the order of a court. The father’s contention was that the official had no such authority. The Court has rejected
this contention and ruled that the official is empowered to deport
anyone without the consent of the court. This ruling will have fearful
consequences. Such are the tyrannical powers vested in the official
that, if he chooses, he can extinguish the rights of every Indian [in the
country].
The second case was for the refund of the deposit money of
£100.1 The Court has ruled that, if the deposit was made because of
the Immigration Act, [the decision] to refund it or not lay within the
discretion of the Government. It can be refunded if the right of the
person in respect of whom it was tendered is established, and for
confiscating the money so deposited, the Government needs no order
from the Court. Arguing thus, the Court has dismissed the second case
1
Wherever an Asiatic immigrant, appealing against the decision of an
immigration official, wanted to have his domiciliary right tested by a court of law, he
had to deposit this sum.

400

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

too; the Court has only said that where a deposit is made in good faith,
the amount should be refunded on compassionate grounds.
The consequences of both these cases are fearful. There has
been a considerable accretion of official power, and a situation has
come about in which Indians might stop coming to this land out of
sheer fright. It is our duty to wage a vigorous campaign against this.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 8-2-1913

283. OUR PROBLEM AT THE CONGRESS
A detailed report of the Congress [proceedings] has arrived by
the post just received. We learn that, on the problem of Indians in this
country, there has been more discussion than before. In his address,
Mr. Mudholkar1 , the President, gave a full account of the situation in
this country and has lent support to Mr. Gokhale’s work. He has
pointed out the need for continued help to us and has declared that
indenture should be completely stopped. The Hon’ble Mr. Mazarul
Haq 2 , Chairman of the Reception Committee, stressed our problem in
his speech and even went on to say that, if the Union Government did
not settle the Indian question in a satisfactory manner, pressure should
be brought to bear on the Government of India to take retaliatory
measures. The Government of India, he argued, had plenty of means
to bring the Union Government to its senses. The resolution
concerning us came second [in the order of business]. That too shows
how much weight our problem had with them. We already know from
the cable that the resolution was moved by Mr. Gokhale. The
resolution was to the same effect as that passed by the Congress last
1

Rangnath Narsinh Mudholkar (1857-1921); President, Indian National
Congress, 1912, at Bankipore.
2
Maulvi Mazarul Haq (1866-1930); in 1888 established “Anjuman Islamia”,
an association of Muslims in England where he had gone for higher studies;
appointed Munsiff in Audh in 1893 but resigned in 1896; one of the founders of the
Muslim League, later became its secretary and presided over its Bombay session in
1915; elected to the Central Legislative Council under the scheme of Separate
Electorates in 1910; member of the 1914 Congress delegation to England; in 1916,
helped to bring about Congress-League accord at Lucknow; supported Gandhiji during
the 1917 Champaran campaign and took active part in the non-co-operation
movement in 1920; founded The Motherland and went to jail for his writings in 1921;
one of the founders of Bihar Vidyapith and the Sadaqat Ashram.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

401

year.1 The Allahabad Leader tells us that Mr. Gokhale, who spoke for
an hour, held the audience spellbound and that, when he came to
describe the plight of indentured labourers, tears came to his eyes and
his voice was choked with emotion. Our campaign also received the
support of the principal leaders. The Hon’ble Mr. Madan Mohan
Malaviya, the Hon’ble Mr. Mazarul Haq, Lala Lajpatrai2 , the Hon’ble
Harchandrarai Vishindas, Mr. Pramathnath Banerjee, Mr. Madanjit3
and Mr. C. Y. Chintamani were among those who supported it. When
our problem is being forcefully discussed in India, we here must
double our efforts. Help from India can only follow on our own
strength.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 8-2-1913

284. FRUITS OF GOKHALE’S LABOUR
Mr. Gokhale’s work continues to bear fruits. One of these is
seen growing in a far-away land. We have got a newspaper from Fiji
from which we reproduce a paragraph in the English Section. It
reports that the white owners of sugar plantations [in that island] have
passed a resolution that, in view of the agitation in India in the matter
of indentured labour, necessary changes should be made in the Fiji
law of indenture so as to drop the clauses providing for the
punishment of labourers, refusing to work, by imprisonment or fine.
That the venom is contained for the most part in these clauses, there is
no doubt. It is by these clauses that Indian labourers are greatly
afflicted, and they constitute the greatest difference between
1

Vide “Mr. Polak at the National Congress”, 6-1-1912.
Lala Lajpat Rai (1865-1928); social reformer, journalist and a “great public
character in the older hierarchy of Congressmen”; founded the Servants of People
Society; deported in 1907 for his political activities; went to England as member of
the Indian deputation, along with Gokhale, in 1906 and again in 1914 with the
Congress deputation; in 1920, elected president of the extraordinary Congress
session held at Calcutta to decide on non-co-operation.
3
Madanjit Vyavaharik; “the man who for long years brought up the South
African question before the Indian Congress”, he set up the International Printing
Press in Durban in 1898 at Gandhiji’s instance, and in 1903, started Indian Opinion
which Gandhiji took over in 1904; later founded and edited United Burma, an English
journal, with the object of uniting the Burmese and associating them with the Indian
National Congress; vide “Letter to Madanjit”, 3-6-1902, “Tribute to Madanjit”, 1510-1904 and “Madanjit’s Enthusiasm”, before 29-1-1907.
2

402

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

indentured labourers and workers. If a common labourer makes a
mistake, he is dismissed. But when an indentured labourer defaults, he
goes to gaol, and on his release, he is back where he was. Even if these
changes are made [in the law, ] it is not desirable that the system of
indenture should continue. Whatever the form it takes, the system
deserves to be ended outright. But it is no small matter that the white
owners, on their won, propose—in law which is to their advantage—
changes by which they may lose. Such is the sturdy fruit that even a
single man can raise by sincere effort.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 8-2-1913

285. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-VI]
We consume air not only with the lungs, but some portion of it
is also taken in through the skin. On the skin, there are pores, minute
and innumerable, through which we draw air.
Everybody ought to know how a thing so essential may be kept
clean. Indeed, as soon as a child’s understanding is adequate, he
should be taught about the importance of air. If the readers of these
chapters perform this easy but important task and, having acquired
some general knowledge about air, live according to it, pass on the
knowledge to their children and make them act in accordance, I shall
regard myself as having fulfilled my task.
Latrines, Open spaces, narrow lanes [dirtied through misuse] and
urinals, where these are separate, are the principal agencies for
defilement of air. Few are aware of the harm that can be caused by the
filth from latrines. When a cat or dog defecates, it generally paws a
hole and, having defecated into it, covers the faeces over with earth.
Where modern water-closets do not exist, this method ought to be
followed. We should keep a pail full of dry earth or ash in our
latrines. Every time the latrine is used, earth or ash should be
sprinkled over the faeces so as to cover them over completely. This
will stop the smell, and it cannot then happen that flies and winged
insects, having sat on the filth, come in contact with our bodies. One
whose nose has not become defective or inured to stench can easily
realize how much foul odour, filthkept uncovered can spread. If filth
from a latrine were mixed in our food in our presence, we should be
sick. But there is not an iota of difference between air laden with the
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

403

stench from a latrine and food mixed with faeces. If there is, it is only
that the latter is visible to our naked eye, while the former is not. Seats,
etc., in closets should be kept absolutely clean. We are ashamed to do
this kind of work ourselves, or fret at having to do it, instead of which
we should feel disgust at having to use dirty latrines. Why should we
not ourselves clean up the filth excreted by our own body, which we
make another person take away? There is absolutely nothing bad
about doing this work oneself; having learnt this for ourselves, we
must teach it to our children as well. When the pail is full, the contents
should be thrown into a pit, a foot or two deep, and should be well
covered over with earth. If one is in the habit of going to the fields to
defecate, one should go far from where people live. There, one should
dig a shallow pit with a spade to get one’s business over with and
should fully cover the faeces with the earth dug.
We urinate any and everywhere and this fouls the air; it is a habit
that must be wholly given up. Where no special place is available for
urination, we should go far from where people live; having made
water on dry ground, we should sprinkle the spot with earth. There are
forceful reasons, however, why excreta should not be buried too deep.
One is that the heat of the sun cannot then do its work and the second
that it may affect the neighbouring springs.
We spit on the carpet, on the floor, in the courtyard and wheresoever we can. Spittle is often poisonous. The sputum of a tubercular
patient is extremely dangerous. Germs rising from it get into the air
inhaled by others and do great harm. Over and above that, the house
is dirtied, but that is another matter. In this regard our duty is not to
spit any and everywhere inside the house, but to keep a spittoon.
Outdoors, one should spit, if one has to, on dry ground where there is
plenty of dust. The sputum will mix with the dry earth and the
damage will be less. Some doctors are of the opinion that tubercular
patients should spit only into receptacles containing germicide. Even
if a patient spits onto the dust on dry ground, the germs in his sputum
are not destroyed. This dust carrying the germs rises into the
atmosphere and infects others. Whether this opinion is right or wrong,
we can at least learn this much from it: spitting any and everywhere is
a dirty and injurious habit.
Some people are in the habit of throwing food, refuse and
peelings, etc., all over. If this garbage was buried in the ground near
the surface, it would not foul the air; also it would in due course make
404

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

useful manure. One should never throw out perishables. It has been
found from experience that these suggestions are easily put into
practice, once they are understood.
We have seen how air is fouled through our bad habits and how
this can be stopped. We shall now consider how it should be inhaled.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 8-2-1913

286. LETTER TO G. K. GOKHALE
P HOENIX,

February 14, 1913
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

Dr. Gool 1 just tells me that your umbrella was traced and that
Mr. Joshi whom you met in Cape Town kindly took it with him when
a few days ago he went to India. Your cap too has been found. Kotwal
will hand it to you upon reaching India. He will be leaving shortly.
The newspaper criticism in India is now all before me. It makes
painful reading. But I was prepared for it especially after our chats. I
see that you are dealing with it in your own way. That criticism has
produced its reflex action here. Aiyer has been writing violent articles
in his paper. I am not sending you all the cuttings but you might like
to see the Advertiser article. The Advertiser reproduced Aiyer’s
reproduction.
The Botha ministry has its own internal troubles owing to
General Hertzog’s defection.2 The Star correspondent, you might
have noticed in Indian Opinion, paid you [a] compliment by stating
that General Hertzog quarrelled with his brother ministers because
General Botha said that, as the Indian question was an Imperial one,
you should be seen not by General Hertzog but General Botha
himself.3 These internal troubles of the Ministry have disorganized the
parliament and it is highly likely that the promised legislation will
again be postponed. If that happens I shall be in a quandary and may
not be able to leave for India about the middle of this year.
The ministers are certainly not carrying out their assurances.
1
2
3

Dr. A. H. Gool
Vide “Hertzogism”, 1-2-1913.
Vide footnote of “Hertzogism”, 1-2-1913.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

405

The Immigration Acts are being administered with an ever-growing
severity. Wives of lawfully resident Indians are being put to great
trouble and expense. All the case are collected in Indian Opinion.
I take it that you will form there a permanent committee and on
your going to London, reorganize the London body1 .
Mr. Petit has cabled £400 telling me that the sum included £80
given to him by you.
Mr. Kallenbach has now secured a copy of Just’s book, Return
to Nature. It was posted to you yesterday. I hope you will find time to
read it.
Could the quack physician know the exact condition of his
patient and whether he is carrying out his directions which he
undertook to do!
I wonder if the Souvenirs were received in time for distribution
at the Congress.
I remain,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

[PS.]
Could you do anything for Mrs. Vogl’s Bazaar? If some of the
ladies you know would send work, we shall feel thankful. The Bazaar
will be held in June.
From the original in Gandhiji’s hand: C. W. 925. Courtesy: Servants of India
Society

287. MR. GOKHALE’S INDIAN SPEECHES
The return of Mr. Gokhale to India after his triumphant tour in
South Africa has brought the Indian question of South Africa to the
front as perhaps it has not been before except during Mr. Polak’s stay
in India. But the public in India, during Mr. Polak’s stay there was
invariably sympathetic and uncritical. This in a way was a drawback.
Mr. Gokhale’s landing in Bombay led, on the one hand, to the unique
demonstration there as described by the Times correspondent, and to
criticism of Mr. Gokhale’s work, on the other. The criticism, in our
humble opinion, was hasty and ill-conceived. What Mr. Gokhale never
did was imputed to him, and the very compromise, which was
1

406

South Africa British Indian Committee, London
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

universally approved two years ago, was now condemned, because Mr.
Gokhale had, on local examination, confirmed his original attitude
towards it. Mr. Gokhale, therefore, immediately upon landing, had to
enter into a defence of his own action and the part Mr. Gandhi had
played in the compromise.1 Mr. Gokhale’s defence was, as was only to
be expected, convincing. He returned to the subject at Poona, where,
too, a great demonstration of welcome was held. But the most
crushing reply to this critics was made by Mr. Gokhale at Bankipore, 2
where he held the Congress audience spellbound for more than an
hour. The result of the discussion is that the very papers that either
themselves adversely criticized Mr. Gokhale’s South African achievement, or allowed their regular correspondents to offer irresponsible
and ill-informed criticism, have veered round, acknowledged their
mistake, and admitted that Mr. Gokhale was right, that he had not
surrendered a single principle, and that he had dealt with the problem
in a calm, statesmanlike, and patriotic spirit, as he alone could do. He
said or did nothing new, but he did the same thing that was done by
the local Indians in his own original manner, and threw the weight of
his great influence and prestige in our favour. He did not speak or act
for India, because he was not its accredited agent, and yet he spoke
unofficially both for India and, indeed, the Empire. For Mr. Gokhale,
in spite of his critics, remains the idol of his people, and commands
the respect of the Empire as no other living Indian does. We hope to
be able shortly to reproduce Mr. Gokhale’s speech at the Congress,
and an epitome of the criticism, adverse and otherwise. The ferment
created by Mr. Gokhale’s visit to South Africa and his return has
done good in that the reacceptance of the compromise by the
majority of his critics will, being now informed, add greater weight to
any further agitation that may go on in India in our favour. And,
Heaven knows, we want all the assistance still from the Motherland that
she can give us! We are but at the fringe of our troubles.
Indian Opinion, 15-2-1913

288. WHAT A FINE SUGGESTION!
The Estcourt Magistrate has made the suggestion that the £3 tax
should be levied from every Coloured person, that is, every Indian and
1
For the text of Gokhale’s speech at Bombay, vide Appendix “Gokhale’s
Speech at Bombay”, 14-12-1912.
2
Vide footnote of “Mr. Gokhale at the National Congress”, 4-1-1913.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

407

Negro. A Coloured servant of a white, however, should be allowed a
remission of 10s. This, the Magistrate says, will make the Indians and
Negroes work more. The gentleman has moreover suggested that no
fresh licences should be issued to Asiatics; that the shifting of business
from one place to another should not be allowed; that no firm should
be authorized to admit fresh partners; that, when the owner of a
business dies, it should be placed under a white trustee who should sell
off the assets and close the business; and that the licences of Indians
who cannot keep their books in English or Dutch should be
terminated. If no such law is passed, the Magistrate goes on to say,
Indians’ control [of business] will become established. Though it is
only this Magistrate who has spoken out, there are hundreds of other
whites who think like him. They have not so far got what they want,
for there is some spirit left in us yet. If that remains the same while the
whites with these views increase in number, it is as clear as the rule of
three that the hour of our doom is not far off.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 15-2-1913

289. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-VII]
We saw in the previous chapter that the correct way of inhaling
air is through the nose—not the mouth; few really know how to
breathe correctly. Many people breathe through the mouth. This
habit is injurious. If very cold air is inhaled through the mouth,
one catches a cold and the voice drops. Dust particles in the air enter
the lungs of one who breathes through the mouth and they
often do much damage. One immediately experiences this at first
hand in a large city like London. Thanks to the large number of
chimneys, frequent “fogs”—yellow mists—form in that city in
November. Minute black particles are suspended in the fog. They
will be found in the sputum of one who inhales air laden with this
dust. To avoid this happening, some women, who are not accustomed to breathing through the nose, tie a gauze mask over their
mouths. This gauze serves as a kind of strainer. The air passing
through it is cleared. If this mask is examined after use, these particles
are seen. God has placed a similar filter in our nose. Air breathed in
through the nose reaches the lungs only after it has been cleansed.
Moreover, this air goes down after it has been warmed. Keeping these
408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

facts in mind, everyone should learn to breathe in only through the
nose. This is no difficult matter. When we are not talking, the mouth
should be kept shut. Those who have got into the habit of leaving
their mouths open should sleep at night with a bandage over the
mouth. Breathing then will necessarily be through the nose. One
should also take about 20 deep breaths through the nose, morning
and evening, standing in the open. By so doing the habit of breathing
through the nose is formed. Even if a healthy person who is
accustomed to breathing through the nose does this, his chest will
become strong and broad. This experiment should be tried by
everyone. One should measure one’s chest before commencing this
experiment and again a month later. One will find that the chest has
become appreciably broader even in so short a period. Sandow and
others get people to exercise with dumb-bells, and the principle
underlying it is the same. Exercising briskly with dumb-bells makes
one breathe hard and deep. And this makes the chest broad and
strong.
Together with the knowledge of how to breathe, it is also
necessary to develop the habit of inhaling fresh air day and night. Our
normal custom is to remain confined in our house or shop by day,
and at night to sleep in a room that is like a safe. If the room has
doors and windows, we shut them. This habit must be strongly
deprecated.
It is imperative that we inhale pure air for as long as possible,
especially while sleeping. Everyone who can manage to do so should
accordingly sleep in an open veranda or on the terrace, outside the
house or on the balcony. Those who do not have the good fortune to
be able to do this should keep as many doors and windows open as
possible. There is no need to fight shy of air, which is our staple diet
twenty-four hours of the day. The notion that the fresh or raw air of
morning causes illness is a mere superstition. It is possible that one
who has spoiled his lungs through bad habits may contract a cold by
sudden contact with fresh air, but one should not be afraid of this
cold. In Europe, at various places, they have now put up, for persons
suffering from tuberculosis, spacious buildings, which admit plenty of
fresh air. The chief cause of the pestilence of plague in our own
country is our bad habit of fouling the air and inhaling this defiled
air. That even the most delicate of persons can only benefit from fresh
air is a certain truth. If we learn not to foul the atmosphere and to take
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

409

in only fresh air, we will, without any effort on our part, be spared
many diseases, and the charge of slovenliness made against us in lands
such as South Africa will to some extent be obviated.
Just as it is needful to sleep in the open, so it is not to cover
one’s face during sleep. It is the habit of many Indians to sleep with
their faces covered. By so doing, we inhale the foul air we have
exhaled. Air is a thing that finds its way through the smallest of
passages. However we muffle ourselves, some air does get in. If this
did not happen, we would die of asphyxiation whenever we sleep
covered right up to the head. But this does not happen, since some air
from without, with oxygen in it, does enter; however that is not
enough. If one feels cold in the head, one can cover it separately as
with a Balaclava cap, leaving the nose uncovered. However cold it may
be, one should never sleep with the nose covered.
Air and light are so closely connected that a word or two must
be said about light in this chapter itself. As we cannot live without air,
so we cannot do without light. Hell is conceived as absence of light.
Where there is no light, the air is always unwholesome. When we enter
a dark room, we are bound to become aware of the smell. We cannot
use our eyes in the dark; and this proves that we are born to live in the
light. The darkness that Nature has thought necessary for us, she has
given us by creating the comfort-giving night. Many people have got
into the habit of sitting or sleeping, on the hottest of days, in cellarlike rooms, having shut out light and air. Those who live without air
and light look weak and lustreless.
In Europe nowadays, some doctors cure their patients by
prescribing plenty of light and fresh air. It is not only the face that
they expose to light and air; the patient is almost stripped and they
then bring fresh air and light to play on the skin all over the body.
Hundreds of persons are cured by this treatment. In order to allow
light and air to enter and leave freely, the windows of the house
should be kept open day and night.
On reading this, people will wonder how it is that, if light and air
are so necessary, many who remain confined to their rooms do
not suffer any harm. It must be said that those who entertain this
doubt have not thought about the matter. Our subject is not how to
exist anyhow, but how to live, if possible, in perfect health. It has
been conclusively proved that, where people get insufficient air
and light, they are unwell all the time. City-dwellers are more delicate
410

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

than village folk because they get less light and air. Among our
people in Durban, diseases such as tuberculosis are prevalent and the
Medical Officer ascribes it to the fact that we live in such conditions
that we either cannot get or do not take in fresh air. The subject of air
and light has so close a relation to good health that one should pay
great attention to understanding it.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 15-2-1913

290. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
P HOENIX,

Monday [February 17, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I do hope the mules have been found. I congratulate you upon
your pickaxe work. You know how deeply hurt I would feel if you
buy any tools of which I have a supply here. I shall certainly pack up
your tools and send them. But I should be considerably helped if you
could let me have a list of the most important ones which may be sent
at once. The rest you may take with you when you come. I do not go
to Durban and as a rule nobody does now. Other arrangements have
been made for Town work. So we should not know who is going to
Johannesburg.
Mr. Gokhale absorbed so much of my time because his possibilities are great and he has a very lofty character. I love India even
impersonally. He is the man who can render her the highest service.
Naturally I want to see him as perfect a being as possible. He is my
political teacher. For that reason also I would like to contemplate him
in his perfection. Hence my almost exclusive service to him. Am I
understood? I may not have convinced you. But I want to clearly
explain my position. Conviction may then come.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National

291. GOHKALE IN INDIA
Mr. Gokhale has made three noteworthy speeches in India and
reports of these along with comments have reached us. The speeches
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

411

were made in Bombay, in Poona and at the Congress at Bankipore.
The speech at the Congress has been considered the best. It lasted,
they say, an hour and was listened to with rapt attention by the
audience; such great effect did it have. As soon as Mr. Gokhale
landed at Bombay, he found two groups. One, headed by Sir
Pherozeshah1 , considered that Mr. Gokhale had returned after having
given away Indians’ rights. He had not done right [they argued] to
assent to the settlement arrived at through Mr. Gandhi. One writer
even went to the extent of remarking that the money sent to South
Africa had all been wasted. This group was of the view that Gokhale
should not only have secured Indians’ legal rights to enter South
Africa but should also have asked permission for unlimited
numbers—[indeed] for any Indian who may wish to do so. It made no
difference to this group that, in case such freedom was denied, all the
Indians might have to quit. That this group is a very small one is
shown by the meetings that Gokhale addressed in Bombay and Poona
and at the Congress for, at these, no one came forward to oppose him.
However, a paper like The Bengalee was misled by this group. After
Mr. Gokhale’s Congress speech, newspapers which had earlier made
adverse comments showed regret and said that they had written under
a misconception.2 Speaking at the Congress, Mr. Gokhale has
explained [his case ] so well that nothing can now be said against his
action. What is more, it should now be conceded that what he did was
best.
We think that it has been all to the good that there was
difference of opinion in India and that Mr. Gokhale’s action had
1
Sir Pherozeshah Merwahnji Mehta; “uncrowned king” of Bombay who
“roared like a lion in law courts”; was associated with the Congress since its
inception and presided over its sixth session at Calcutta in 1890; elected President of
the 24th Session of the Congress (in 1991) but resigned dramatically six days before
assumption of office; did much committee work for the Congress, particularly in
connection with the protest against the Public Service Commission
recommendations in 1892; member of the 1894 deputation to Lord Elgin; in 1896,
met Gandhiji for the first time “as a loving father would meet his grown-up son” and
helped him to call a public meeting in Bombay which both of them addressed; in
1901, advised Gandhiji against going to South Africa; first sceptical of satyagraha
because he thought that nothing could be done for Indians abroad unless the country
was free, but declared at a Bombay meeting in 1914 that “his blood boiled at the
thought of these women lying in jails”.
2
Vide “Mr. Gokhale at the National Congress”, 4-1-1913 and “Gokhale’s
Speech in India”, 4-1-1913

412

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

been criticized. This gave rise to a great debate all over the country on
our problem, which led to a better understanding of the true significance of our campaign. Those who had so far had only a superficial
understanding now began to go deeper into the matter. Had they gone
into it at the ourtset, there would have been no misunderstanding at
all. Why should the selfsame men who approved of the settlement two
years ago censure Mr. Gokhale now for accepting that very
settlement. Why should they now oppose it? But everyone would want
to know what a man such as Mr. Gokhale had done and be led thus to
reflect over the matter. While doing so, people may in their impatience
in fault. This is what had happened this time. The result, however, has
only been beneficial. It is certain that our problem has assumed
greater importance than before in India as in England.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 22-2-1913

292. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-VIII]
4. WATER

We have seen earlier that air is food. The same is true of water.
Air enjoys the first position, and water comes second. Without air man
can survive only for a few minutes, whereas he can live without water
for hours, even for days on end, depending on the country. Even so, it
is certain that one cannot subsist without water for as long as one can
without food. If, however, a person can have water, he can live for
many days without food. Water makes up more than 70 per cent. of
our body. Without water, it is believed, the body would weigh 8 to 12
lbs. In all that we eat, there is more or less water.
Yet we take proportionately little care of a thing which, for us, is
very important. Diseases like the plague beset us because of our
carelessness in the mater of air. Similar results follow from our
carelessness regarding water. Typhoid often breaks out among troops
in battle and the cause, it has been proved, is polluted water, because
on the front soldiers have to drink whatever water they can get.
Typhoid breaks out also among those who live in cities, and the cause
is mostly bad water. Drinking bad water often gives rise to diseases
like stone.
There are two causes for contamination of water—one, that the
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

413

water is found in places where it cannot remain pure, and two, that we
sully the water. We ought not to drink water which is stores in or
comes from a dirty place, and for the most part, we do not; but we do
not hesitate to drink water which has been polluted by us through
neglect. For instance, we throw whatever we like into a river and then
proceed to use that very water for drinking and washing. The rule is
that one should never drink water from the place where one bathes.
River-water should be drawn from a spot up stream where no one
bathes. In every village, therefore, the river should be divided into two
sections—the lower section for bathing and washing and the upper for
drinking. When an army camps in the vicinity of a river, the direction
of the river-flow is ascertained and a flag put up [at a given spot] on
the bank. Anyone who bathes in a place higher up is punished. Where,
in our country, these arrangements do not exist, careful women dig
pits in the river-bed and take water from these; this practice is very
wholesome as the water gets filtered as it passes through the sand.
Well-water is sometimes dangerous to drink. In shallow wells, the
liquid from the excreta absorbed into the surrounding ground seeps
in and pollutes the water. Sometimes dead birds fall into them; often
birds build their nests within. Moreover, if there is no masonry round
the well [at the top], dirt from the feet of persons drawing water falls
into the well and fouls the water. It is therefore necessary to employ
the utmost care in using well-water for drinking. Water stored in tanks
is oftentimes bad. To prevent deterioration of such water, the tanks
should be cleaned from time to time and kept covered; the roof and
other places from where [drinking] water comes should be kept clean.
Few, however, make the effort to maintain such cleanliness. The
golden rule is therefore to rid the water of impurities to the extent
possible; to boil it for half an hour; to let it stand for a time; to pour it
into another vessel without disturbing the water and then to drink it
only after straining it through thick, clean cloth into a third vessel.
One who does this is, however, not released from his duty towards
others. Water which is maintained for public use is in the nature of
property which jointly belongs to him and to all others living in the
locality. He is obliged to use it like a trustee. He must, therefore, do
nothing which might foul the water in any way. He must never foul a
river or well. He must not bathe or wash clothes near any source of
drinking water or defecate in the vicinity. He may not cremate dead
bodies near by or throw the ashes into the water.
Even after taking these precautions, we do not get water that is
414

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

perfectly pure. It contains a certain amount of salts and, occasionally,
rotten vegetable matter. Rain water is regarded as the purest of all, but
before it reaches us the dust particles, etc., in the atmosphere get
mixed with it. Absolutely pure water has a different effect on the
body. Knowing this, certain doctors prescribe distilled water for their
patients. This water is made by boiling water into steam and cooling
the latter. Anyone suffering from constipation may, if he chooses,
have first-hand proof of the efficacy of distilled water. Such water is
sold by all chemists. A book has recently been published on the
subject of distilled water and its uses. The writer believes that a large
number of diseases can be cured by the use of water so processed.
This is an exaggeration, but it is not improbable that absolutely pure
water has considerable effect on the body.
Not everyone knows that water is of two kinds, hard and soft;
but the fact is noteworthy. Hard water is that in which soap does not
readily lather but remains insoluble. This means that the water
contains salts in large quantities. It is difficult to use soap with hard
water, as it is with brackish water. With hard water, cooking too is
difficult and, for the same reason, drinking it should, and does, make
it difficult for us to digest our food. Hard water always tastes brackish
whereas soft water is either sweet or tasteless. Some believe that, as the
substances dissolved in hard water are nutritive, its use is beneficial,
but we generally find that soft water is the right one to use. Rain is
Nature’s purest form of water. It is of course soft and all agree it is
good to use. If hard water is boiled on a chula for half an hour, it
becomes soft. After it is taken off the fire, it should be processed as
described earlier.
When to drink water and how much—the question sometimes
arises. The simple answer to this is that water should be drunk
when one feels thirsty and enough to quench one’s thirst. There is
nothing wrong in drinking water during or after a meal. Those who
drink in the course of a meal should, however, remember that water is
not to be drunk for washing down the food. If food does not go down
by itself, that is either because it has not been properly chewed or
because the stomach does not need it.
In fact, it is not—and it should not be—generally necessary to
drink water. Just as our bodies consist of over 70 per cent. of water, so
does our food. In some foods, the proportion of water far exceeds 70
per cent. There is no food that is wholly devoid of water. Furthermore,
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

415

much water is used in cooking. Why then does one feel thirsty? A
complete answer to this question can be had only by reference to the
constituents of our diet. Here, it may be simply said that those whose
diet does not contain things like spices and chillies, which create an
unnatural thirst, need only a little water. Those whose diet consists
mainly of fresh fruit will seldom want to drink water by itself. If a
person is constantly thirsty without reason, we may take it that he
suffers from something or the other.
One notices that some people drink water indiscriminately,
having superficially observed others doing so without any apparent
ill-effects. The answer that was given to a similar question in the
chapter on air applies here also. Moreover, the blood in our body
possesses such wonderful properties that it destroys a number of
toxins itself. But a fine sword is damaged if not burnished after use,
and so with blood. If we get blood to do the work of a watchman, but
do not look after it, it is not surprising that its power is sapped and
finally lost altogether. Thus, if one always drinks bad water, the blood
will in the end certainly stop doing its work.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 22-2-1913

293. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
P HOENIX,

[February 25, 1913]
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Your letter calls for a long reply. I see that you are very happy.
The remedy is not in Palestine, not in studies in London. It lies in two
things: either in applying yourself entirely to your office and
studying whilst in practice or in your living with me and coming to
India. The first is hardly feasible for you as you are; the second is, as
you yourself say, the course for you but it is hard. There’s the rub.
You want to avoid difficulties and yet do the right thing. The two
things are inconsistent. You would study in London. That is an easy
life and pleasant. No worry of office. You would go to Palestine and
there (at the bottom of the idea) have an independent and simple life,
such as you have come to appreciate. It won’t do. You have to see
happiness in unhappiness and feel that life is made up of wordly
miseries which rightly understood hammer us into shape. You cannot
416

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

serve God and Mammon. The Mammon of ease, self-pride, luxury
should be permitted to do its worst and inflict all the hardships it can
by depriving us of its gifts. Then and then only could God be
enthroned in our hearts. Thus far I can see quite clearly. Whether you
should go to India with me or whether you should continue your
practice is a difficult question to answer. It largely depends upon
yourself. My suggestion is, come down here for a brief visit. See
things for yourself. We would compare notes. And then you may
tentatively decide. You could usefully occupy yourself doing gardening in the morning. The afternoon you could devote to study. We
could chat on Saturdays and Sundays and thus you could pass a
fortnight, longer if you wish. What you should do is to think for
yourself but not independently of me. We would discuss, thrash out
and then you will finally decide what to do.
The charge of your being able to do things with me which you
would not continue for long without me is not without foundation.
Only the analysis made by those who bring the charge is faulty. You
are not hypnotised. You are acted upon by what is good in others. My
life seems to stand your scrutiny and therefore you often prefer my
judgement to your own. And that is what every one of us does. We
worship our idols. I surrender my judgement to Mr. Gokhale’s in
matters in which I told him to be my superior. I surrender my
judgement to yours in gardening, architectural and several other
matters. But it would be false in either case to consider me as
hypnotised either by Mr.Gokhale or by [you]1 .
I shall pack up the tools and send them to you, I hope before
the week is out.
More later. The time for the evening school is on.
With love,
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

The original has “me”.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

417

294. LETTER TO H. L. PAUL
JOHANNESBURG ,

February 25,1913
DEAR MR. PAUL,

Yes I am simply buried in work. I am keeping Miss N. informed
of everything.
As to Mr. Serridge I am sorry nothing can be done just now.
There is no Indian school here worthy of the name. But what I suggest
is that he should forward his application through the Superintendent
there. And if the Superintendent back it strongly, Mr. S. would stand a
fair chance when the proper time comes.
I am sorry you are keeping in the same sorrowful mood. 1 You
should try to get rid of it. The sorrows come not to make men
despondent but to chasten.
Yours truly,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the original: C. W. 4902 Courtesy: Eugene Joseph Paul,
Pietermaritzburg

295. JOHANNESBURG SCHOOL
It was only recently that this school was started, but there seems
to be trouble already. Everyone has been under the impression that
Tamil and Gujarati will be taught during school hours. We now hear
that Tamil can only be taught outside school hours, which means it
cannot be taught at all. If the Government does that, that will be a
great injustice. In a talk with member of the School Board, Mr.
Gokhale was given a clear promise that the Government would
arrange for the teaching of any Indian Language if there was a
considerable number of students of that Language [group] in the
school. Tamil is an important Indian Language. A fair number of
boys who know that language have joined the school. It is the
Government’s duty to give these boys a fair knowledge of that
Language. The new Committee that has been set up would do well to
agitate in this regard. Justice will not be difficult to get. When children
1

418

Following the death of Clement, addressee’s son
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

are not taught through their mother tongue, they only acquire a
parrot-like knowledge. A boy studying in a Government Indian
school, where the teacher did not know the mother tongue of the
pupil, had been taught the English word for popat [i.e., parrot], but he
did not know that the word denoted popat in Gujarati. When,
therefore, he was asked to explain the English word, he did not know
it. He only knew that it was a kind of bird. This is the state of many
Indian children in schools in this country, for the Government have
evolved an erroneous system. They impart knowledge only through
the English language. For all that they [the pupils] learn turns out to
be parrot-learning. It is assumed all round that the Johannesburg
school would be free of this defect. It is the Committee’s responsibility to bring about that state of affairs.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 1-3-1913

296. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-IX]
5.

DIET

Air, water and food constitute our nourishment. But as a rule we
look upon food alone as nourishment, and by food we only mean
food-grains. We will not believe that a person lives on food unless he
eats wheat and rice.
The truth is that air is the principal form of nourishment. We
have seen that we just cannot exist without it, also that we are taking in
this essential form of nourishment every moment, whether we are
aware of it or not. Water comes next in importance to air but before
food, and so nature has seen to it that this also is more readily
available than food. Food occupies the third and last place.
Food is unite a complicated subject to write on. There is
much difference of opinion regarding what food to take and
when. Habits differ from nation to nation. The same item of food
affects different individuals differently. It is difficult, even impossible,
to be dogmatic in this matter. In certain parts of the world men
kill human beings and eat their flesh ; for them it is food. There are
also some who eat excreta. That is food for them. Some live entirely
on milk; for them milk is food. Others, again, live on fruit and for
them that is food. In this chapter the term “food” covers all these
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

419

things. Although it is difficult to lay down what food should be eaten,
it is necessary for each one to come to some decision for himself. It is
of course superfluous to observe that the body cannot function
without food. We are ready to suffer innumerable hardships, even
commit sins, in order to obtain food. Under these circumstances it is
necessary to inquire into the purpose of taking food. We shall then be
able to determine what food we should take. All will agree that out of
every 100,000 persons 99,999 eat merely to please their palate, even if
they fall ill in consequence. Some take a laxative every day in order to
be able to eat well, or some powder to aid digestion. Some, having
gorged an enormous meal with great relish, vomit it out and are ready
again for other delicacies. Some eat large quantities and then miss a
couple of meals. Some die of thoughtless overeating. The author has
himself come across all these types. There has been such a
transformation in his own life that he can now laugh at many of his
past follies and is ashamed of some others. There was a time when the
author would drink tea in the morning, have breakfast two or three
hours later, a regular meal at one p.m., then tea at about three o’clock
and a full meal between 6 and 7 in the evening. His condition in those
days was pitiable indeed. He used to get oedema. A medicine bottle
was always at his side. He would often have a laxative in order to be
able to eat, and afterwards a dose from another bottle by way of tonic,
as a matter of routine. He feels that he now has three times the energy
for work that he then had, although he must be said to be no longer in
his prime. Such a life is indeed to be pitied, and is if we go deeper into
the matter, low, sinful and despicable.
Man is not born merely to eat, nor does he live merely for the
sake of eating. He is born in order to know his Maker and he lives to
this end. This cannot be done unless one keeps one’s body alive and
the latter cannot exist without food. This is why food is a necessity.
This is the ideal attitude and it will do for those who believe in God.
But even the atheist will admit that one must eat with due regard to
one’s health and with the object of keeping the body fit.
Consider beasts and birds. Cattle do not eat for the satisfaction
of the palate, nor do they eat like gluttons. They eat when they are
hungry—and just enough to satisfy that hunger. They do not cook
their food. They take their portion from that which Nature proffers to
them. Then, is man born to pander to his palate? Is he alone fated to
be always ill? Among the animals which are not domesticated, there is
420

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

no starvation; they have no rich and poor, nor is there one group that
eats ten times in a day and another that can scarcely eat even once. All
these distinctions are to be found only in our species, yet we regard
ourselves as superior in intelligence to animals. It is, however, evident
from all this, that if we make our stomach our God and spend our
lives in its worship, we must surely be inferior to them.
If we think carefully, we shall discover that the root cause of the
many evil things that we do, such as lying, pleasure-hunting, perjury,
theft and so on, is our failure to restrain the craving of our palate. If
we could keep it under control, we would find it easy enough to rid
ourselves of the other cravings. In spite of our knowing this, we fail to
regard over-eating or taking too much pleasure in food as a sin. If we
steal or fornicate or tell a lie, others regard us with contempt. Among
books on ethical subjects, many fine ones have been written on lying,
stealing, adultery, etc., but there is no book about the kind of person
who cannot control his palate. This subject is not, as a matter of fact,
considered as falling under ethics. The reason for this is that we are,
all of us, in the same boat. How will the pot call the kettle black? Even
our great men do not appear to have succeeded in mastering the
desire for tasty food. Consequently, indulging one’s palate has never
been considered to be wrong. The most that books recommend is that,
in order to control the senses, it is desirable to limit the amount of
food eaten. But it has never been said that the pampering of our palate
makes us prone to other weaknesses as well. Thieves, cheats and
sensual men are shunned by respectable people. But these same
respectable people must be indulging in pleasures of the palate
hundreds of times more varied than those of ordinary men and
women. A man’ s gentlemanliness is supposed to consists in the
richness of his meals. Thus, just as in a thieves’ settlement stealing
would not be a sin, so we, being all of us slaves of the palate, do not
frown upon such slavery or even notice it. On the contrary, we are
happy with it. At a wedding we give feasts to minister to the pleasures
of the palate, our own and those of others. Some give dinners at
funerals, too. On festival days, there must be sweets. When a guest
comes, tasty dishes must be prepared. Not to invite neighbours and
friends to partake of meals and not to go to them for the same
purpose is frowned upon as grossly unsocial conduct. Unless we press
the invited guest to overeat, we are considered to be extremely stingy.
On every holiday, we feel bound to prepare special dishes. On
Sundays, we seem to think that we have the right to eat till we are sick.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

421

What is, therefore, in the nature of a great fault has been transformed
by us into an essential social obligation. The serving of meals is
accompanied with numerous formalities of hypocritical nature, so that
our slavery, our animality is completely hidden from ourselves. How
shall we free ourselves from this darkness? This problem lies beyond
the scope of simple hygiene. We can, therefore, only pose it and leave
it there; it must be considered, however, to the extent that it bears on
the problem of health.
Let us now look at the subject from another angle. It appears to
be a universal law that the food needed by living creatures, whether
human or animal, is provided by Nature from day to day. There is
nothing strange in this. In Nature’s kingdom no insurance is required.
No one is found remiss in his duty, none sleeps, no one is lazy. The
water-wheel of her processes is in perpetual motion without so much
as a moment’s pause. And so Nature does not have to lay by a store
for a year or even for a day. By this inexorable law are we governed,
whether we wish it or no. If we understand and abide by it, not a single
family will have to starve even for a day. Now, it is obvious that, if just
sufficient food is produced every day and if one person eats more
than his share—eats more than he needs, there is bound to be a
shortage to that extent, and, therefore, insufficient food for another.
This is the simple explanation why large numbers of people have to
go without food. In God’s creation, in the kitchens of thousands of
kings and hundreds of thousands of rich men, food is prepared that is
far in excess of what they and their servants need. This excess has
been taken out of the mouths of others. Will not these others then go
hungry? If two wells are served the same current of water, and if this
current carries just sufficient water for the two, it is quite plain that an
excess of flow into one will mean shortage for the other. If this rule is
correct—a rule which is not a figment of the author’s imagination but
one which has been propounded by highly intelligent men—it means
that, whatever we eat after our hunger has been satisfied is stolen food.
Akha1 , the goldsmith, has truly sung: “Like unto unprocessed
mercury swallowed in place of food is wealth stolen from another.”
Whatever we eat for the sake of its taste alone is to be paid for by the
body through toxic reactions, either visible or invisible; we lose our
1

422

A Gujarati poet of the 17th century
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

health to that extent and suffer. After this discussion, it will be easier
for us to consider what and when to eat.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 1-3-1913

297. LETTER TO SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR1
March 4, 1913
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter 2 of
the 24th ultimo regarding the procedure adopted at the Ports in
respect of those British Indians who come from India and who have
residential rights in the Transvaal.
In the humble opinion of my Association, the reply is highly
unsatisfactory, for it ignores the real state of things obtaining at the
Ports.
Your letters seem to suggest that Indian passengers arrive from
India with unsupported claims for the Transvaal and that such persons
are detained on board pending investigation by the Registrar. If
persons having unsupported claims were in the habit of coming in any
numbers, and if they were allowed to remain within the borders of the
Union, though under detention, my Association would have no cause
for complaint. But it is the experience of my Association that Indians
with unsupported claims do not, as rule, come, and that those who do
come are not detained, but sent away by the vessels that bring them.
In the case of the brothers Dayal, their claims were, as the
Hon’ble the Minister is aware, fully supported, yet the boys would
1

This letter was presumably drafted by Gandhiji.
This letter from the Under-Secretary for the Interior was in reply to an earlier
request by the Chairman, BIA, that Indians arriving from India and claiming rights of
residence in the Transvaal be issued visiting permits at the port of arrival against a
security deposit to enable them to prove their claims. The Under-Secretary said: “The
practice in Natal is to allow the promptest landing, on visiting passes, of all
Transvaal Indians whose papers are found, upon arrival of the parties, to be in order,
and to detain on board under a restriction order all those passengers having
unsupported claims to go to the Transvaal until such claims are admitted by the
Registrar. In this connection, every facility is afforded to claimants to submit their
cases, and if Indians come to Natal without procuring proper admission papers, they
have no one but themselves to blame for any inconvenience they may suffer, and it is
regretted that present arrangements in this connection cannot be disturbed.” Indian
Opinion, 8-3-1912.
2

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

423

have been sent away, had not the Supreme Court intervened1 . What my
Association submits is that the relief which the Supreme Court grants
should be accorded to such applicants without their having to call in
its intervention.
To explain its position better, it is perhaps necessary for my
Association to set forth the classes of persons who have Transvaal
claims.
Those Indians who are registered under the Asiatic Act and hold
registration certificates form one class. These are able to produce
documents to prove their right of residence in the Transvaal.
Those Indians who are not yet registered but who have a right to
be registered form the other class.2 These cannot always have
documentary proof, and never such as could be effectively checked
by the Port Immigration Officers, for a majority of them can support
their claims only by producing evidence of witnesses in the Transvaal.
Such was the case with the brothers Dayal. Their title to registration
was based on the fact that they were in the Transvaal on the 31st May,
1902. My Association suggests that it was not possible for them to
prove their claim, unless they were enabled to bring forward evidence
that was available only in South Africa. It is for such persons that my
Association seeks protection, which has been cruelly and vexatiously
denied hitherto by the Immigration Officers at the Port; and my
Association trusts that the relief requested will be granted.
A. M. C ACHALIA
C HAIRMAN ,
BRITISH INDIAN ASSOCIATION

Indian Opinion, 15-3-1913

1

Vide 1st footnote of “An Act of Grace”, 11-1-1913.
For the categories of Indians whom Gandhiji considered eligible for
registration under the Provisional Settlement, vide “Letter to E. F. C. Lane”,
4-5-1911.
2

424

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

298. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
Unrevised

PHOENIX,
Wednesday night [March 5, 1913]

MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

Your letter calls for a prompt reply. You are in a self-searching
mood and are therefore hypercritical of yourself. I do not mind it at
all if you make good use of this self-examination. But it has its limits.
Carried too far, it makes one morbid and sometimes leads to loss of
mental balance. If you have wasted 42 years then do not waste the
43rd. Let the past be a beaconlight. But you seem to have become
prostrate before the enormity of your own wickedness and so almost
seem to wish to remain in it. But why all this imputation of vice and
weakness to yourself? Are your contemporaries stronger and better? I
deny. They are more amenable to the voice of Satan than you are.
Have you wasted your life in that you have overcome ten thousand
temptations and succumbed to the ten thousand and first? By all
means avoid now the second mistake after the ten thousand and first
and take courage from the fact that you had strength to resist ten
thousand attacks. Find out the cause for the stray mistake made and
you will certainly avoid it. The true remedy is to compel yourself into
ceaseless activity. Refuse to believe that you are weak and you will be
strong. Believe continuously that you are wicked and you will sink.
Have you never done a good turn to anybody? Have you never
given a helping hand to a stranger? Have you never denied yourself
pleasure of life? Why do you attract Mrs. Mayo to yourself or Maude!
Why do you gain the ear of Liddle when others fail? Why have you
been often saved against yourself? I do not suggest that you may pat
yourself on the back for these things. But you must use these good
points to enable you to go forward. A man in the midst of plaguestricken patients gets frightened and has the plague himself. You
imagine yourself to be in the midst of plague-stricken companions
conjured up by your imagination and may well end by getting the
plague yourself. Why not think that these companions are passing
phantoms that will disappear before the other healthy-thought
companions you may create for yourself. And after all, this heartsearching is a species of subtle pride. At the bottom, there is a desire
to shine, to be considered, rather than be, good. If this is not true, you
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

425

know yourself that you are good because you try to avoid evil. The
world, however, knows only your failures. Are you pining to show the
world your successes? If you are, you are on the wrong track. But I
know that you are not consciously pining. I do know, however, that
you are desirous of showing to yourself service. But why desire so?
The only legitimate desire we can have is to perfect ourselves. If we
keep that as our goal, we shall never despond, we shall never weaken;
we shall ever go forward and never go mad. You are made for this
better state. For Heaven’s sake do not unmake yourself by thinking
evil of yourself as you have the knack of doing when the mood comes
on you.
With love,
UPPER HOUSE

[PS.]
I have your books in mind. I am letting West read them.
From the original: Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

299. WELCOME1
In common with our countrymen we extend a hearty welcome
to Mr. Hajee Dawad Mahomed. It is the dearest wish of a devout
Mahmomedan to be able to pay a visit to holy Mecca and to be called
a “Hajee”. Mr. Hajee Dawad Mahomed has had his wish fulfilled.
And he now returns to the land of his adoption to take up the work of
serving his countrymen. We wish him long life and success in his
arduous task.
Indian Opinion, 8-3-1913

1

Vide also “Speech at Durban Farewell to Pilgrims”, 29-6-1912 and “Dawad
Mahomed”, 6-7-1912.

426

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

300. GOGA’S CASE
Mr. Goga has lost again. 1 In our view, however, Mr. Goga has
won. We congratulate him on his untiring efforts. We are sure that he
will succeed if he fights to the finish. Once again, he has filed an
appeal against the decision of the Licensing Board. This time the
judgment of the Supreme Court may possibly go against him. We
would advise Mr. Goga to move [the court at] Bloemfontein if he
loses in the Supreme Court, and, should he fail there too, to take the
matter even to England. Meanwhile, other Indians would do well to
declare their support to Mr. Goga. They should hold meetings and
make representations to the Government. Satyagraha can also be
employed in a case like this. If we are brave enough, we can collect
such cases and hold mass meetings in every town and so convince the
Government that Indians will permit neither themselves nor the
Government to rest in peace till the Licensing Act is repealed or
amended.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 8-3-1913

301. BHAWANI DAYAL’S CASE 2
The British Indian Association at Johannesburg is still pursuing
this case. The latest communication3 from the Government must be
considered unsatisfactory. It is clear enough from the letter that the
Immigration Officers do not supply all the information to the
Government and that the latter too anxious to obtain it. If the
Government had acquainted itself with all the facts, it could
1
M. A. Goga, an Indian trader of Ladysmith, had been refused transfer of his
trading licence to himself and his son by the Borough Licensing Officer, the
Ladysmith Chamber of Commerce appearing as objectors. On appeal, a Full Bench
quashed the proceedings and mulcted the Chamber in costs (£59). Goga’s application
for transfer was then heard de novo by the Licensing Officer and rejected. On appeal
the Borough Licensing Appeal Board upheld the officer’s decision. For Goga’s earlier
cases concerning trading licences, vide “Goga’s Licence”, 2-3-1907, “Statement of
Natal Indian Grievances”, 10-8-1909 and “Indians Under the Union”, 13-8-1910.
2
Vide also 1st footnote of “An Act of Grace”, 11-1-1913 and “Letter to
Secretary for Interior”, 4-3-1913.
3
Vide 2nd footnote of “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 4-3-1913.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

427

not betray the ignorance that we find it does in its latest
communication. The Government forgets that the immigration
officers, if they are not satisfied with [the claims of] immigrants from
India, do not keep them on board the ship but deport them. It seems
to be under the impression that such Indians are detained on the ship.
If this were done, we would indeed be spared the enormous
expenditure and inconvenience to which we are put. Mr. Cachalia’s
letter 1 has now made all these things clear. The Government will have
a difficult job replying to this letter, or it will have to admit that the
Government is bent on harassing even old-residents. In this case, Mr.
Polak had asked for payment of the costs by the Government.
Whether costs are granted or not, the Government is going to realize
that its high-handed attitude may be advertised all over the Empire.
[From Gujarati]
Indian Opinion, 8-3-1913

302. GENERAL KNOWLEDGE ABOUT HEALTH [-X ]
In considering what food we should eat, let us first ask what we
should not eat. If we designate as food all that enters the body byway
of the mouth, then alcohol, cigarettes, tobacco, hemp, tea, coffee,
cocoa, spices—all are food.
All these should be avoided. The author has found this to have
been borne out by experience. Some of these articles he has
consumed himself; regarding the rest he has observed the experience
of others.
It is necessary to write about alcohol and hemp. All religions
regard them as bad. There is hardly anyone who will defend their
consumption. Alcohol has brought destruction to entire families.
Millions of drunkards have been ruined. Under the influence of drink
a man ceases to be himself. Such a one sometimes forgets the
difference between mother and wife. This vice corrodes the intestines
and, in the final stages,the victim becomes a burden upon the earth.
Drunkards may be seen rolling in the gutters. A respectable man turns
into a man of straw when he gets drunk. It is not that a person falls
into such a state only when he drinks. An alcohol addict, one will
observe, is feeble-minded even when sober. He has no control over his
1

428

Vide “Letter to Secretary for Interior”, 15-3-1913.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

mind, which wanders like a child’s. Alcohol, as also hemp, deserves to
be entirely avoided. There is no room for two opinions on this. Some
think alcohol may be taken as medicine. However, doctors in Europe,
which is the home of wine, say that even this is not necessary. At first
alcohol was used there for many ailments, but that has now been
stopped. As a matter of fact, this whole argument is advanced with
dubious motives. if wine can be used for medicinal purposes [the
argument runs], there can be no objection against its use as drink
either; that is the game of these advocates of drink. But aloes and
crotons are good medicine; yet no one suggests that they be used as
food. It is possible that alcohol may prove beneficial in certain
illnesses, but the havoc that it has wrought is so great that it is the duty
of every thoughtful person to give up even its medicinal use, at the
cost of his life if need be. If, by using alcohol for preserving the body,
we are likely to harm the best interests of hundreds of people, our
duty requires that we sacrifice the body instead. There are in India
hundreds of thousands who do not take alcohol in spite of the
doctor’s orders. They are not willing to prolong their lives by taking
alcohol or anything else to which they have an objection. The great
people of China, enslaved by opium as they are, will soon perish in
spite of the freedom that they have achieved. The garasias1 among us
have lost their patrimony, thanks to their addiction to opium.
The reader will easily recognize the harm in alcohol, hemp and
opium, but not so readily that in cigarettes and tobacco. These have
spread their tentacles so firmly over the human race that it will take
ages to free it of them. Young and old, all alike have got into their
clutches. Even people regarded as virtuous have taken to smoking and
the habit is not regarded as something to be ashamed of. It is quite a
popular form of hospitality among friends. Instead of being checked,
the habit is spreading. The ordinary man is not even aware of the fact
that cigarette dealers use every kind of trick in the manufacture of
cigarettes to confirm the hold of the addiction over its victims.
Various kinds of perfumed solutions2 and even opium water, are
sprinkled on the tobacco. As a result of these practices, cigarettes
acquire a stronger and stronger hold over us. Thousands of pounds
are spent on advertisement in order to popularize them. Cigarette
1
Landowners inheriting shares of state lands in virtue of relationship with the
ruling family.
2
Literally, “acids”

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

429

companies in Europe run their own printing presses. They purchase
bioscopes and offer all kinds of prizes, start lotteries and spend money
like water on advertisements. The result is that even women have
begun to smoke. Poems have been written about the cigarette, which
has been called the poor man’s friend.
It is impossible to estimate the harm done by smoking. A
smoker becomes so brazen-faced that, indifferent to the feelings of
others, he will light his cigarette even in another’s house without so
much as asking for permission to do so. He respects no one’s
presence.
It has been observed that cigarette or tobacco smokers will
commit many other crimes in order to obtain these things. Children
steal money from their parents, In gaol, prisoners treasure stolen
cigarettes at great risk. they can get on without food but not without
cigarettes. During war, soldiers addicted to smoking are in a pitiable
condition if they do not get cigarettes. They become practically
useless.
The late Tolstoy, writing on this subject, tells the story of a man
who planned to kill his beloved. He drew his knife and got ready to
use it. Then he relented and turned back. After this, he sat down for a
smoke. The fumes of the cigarette entered his head, the poison
affected his brain and he finally committed the murder. It was
Tolstoy’s firm belief that the cigarette is so subtle a form of intoxication that it should be regarded as in some ways a greater menace
than even drink.
Smoking is also very expensive and, indeed, every smoker feels
the strain of the expense to a greater of lesser degree, depending on
his means. Some people spend five pounds or seventy -five rupees a
month on cigarettes. The author has himself come across such a case.
Smoking weakens the digestion, renders food tasteless so that
more and more spices have to be added to it. The smoker’s breathe is
offensive. The smoke that he exhales pollutes the atmosphere. At
times he gets small ulcers in the mouth. Gums and teeth become black
or yellow, and some persons have even contracted serious diseases in
consequence. It seems strange that people who disapprove of drinking
see nothing wrong in smoking; when, however we remember how
subtle is the poison of smoking, we see easily enough why it is that
men who hate alcohol are nevertheless ready to enjoy smoking. Those
who wish to remain healthy should definitely give up the cigarette.
430

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Drink, tobacco, hemp, etc., not damage physical health but also
impair mental fitness and entail wasteful expenditure. We lose all our
moral sense and become salves to our weakness.
About tea, coffee and cocoa, however, it seems extremely difficult to explain the truth and convince anyone that they are harmful.
One must say, all the same, that they, too, are harmful. These also
contain some kinds of intoxicants. If milk and sugar were not added
to tea and coffee, they would have no nutritional value whatever.
experiments in living exclusively on tea and coffee indicate that they
contain no nourishment for the blood. Only a few years ago, tea and
coffee were generally not drunk among us. They were only taken on
certain occasions or with medicine, but, tidy in the wake of modern
progress, they have become a daily necessity. They are offered even
to a casual visitor and frequent tea-parties are given. During Lord
Curzon’s regime, tea wrought terrible havoc. That gentleman, seeking
to promote the interests of tea merchants, introduced tea into every
household so that those who were previously accustomed to wholesome drinks now take tea.
Cocoa has not yet become so popular because it is slightly more
expensive that tea. Fortunately for us, we have not yet made friends
with it, but it holds strong enough sway in fashionable homes.
Tea, coffee and cocoa, all have a certain property that weakens
out digestive powers, They are intoxicants because they form a habit
which cannot be broken. When the author was in the habit of drinking
tea, he felt lethargic if he did not get tea at the usual hour—this is the
conclusive test of an intoxicant. On one occasion, about 400 women
and children were gathered together at a function. The organizing
committee had resolved not to provide tea or coffee. The women in
the gathering were in the habit of taking tea at four every afternoon.
A message was soon conveyed to the organizers that, if tea was not
served, the ladies would fall ill and be unable to move. And so the
resolve had to be set aside. As arrangements wee being make for
serving tea, excited messages poured in demanding that the organizers
should hurry up, The ladies’ heads had begun to ache and every
moment felt like a month to them. It was only after they had their tea
that these worthy ladies’ face brightened up and they calmed down.
This incident has been described exactly as it happened. One woman
had suffered so much harm because of the tea habit that she could not
digest any food and had constant headaches. Her health, however, has
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

431

greatly improved since she, with a strong effort of will, gave up tea. A
physician in the employ of Battersea Municipality in England has
discovered that thousands of women in that area suffer from nervous
disorders, which he ascribes to their addiction to tea. The author has
come upon innumerable examples of the harm done to health by tea
and he is personally convince, therefore, that tea is very injurious to
health.
As regards coffee, there is a couplet which has become well
known:
Counters phlegm and wind, 1 but lower vigour and strength
And turns blood to water—two merits against three faults.
This verse sounds quite convincing. Coffee may have the virtue
of counteracting phlegm and wind. But so have some other
substances. Those who wish to drink coffee for the first two reasons
should take a little ginger juice; it will serve the same purpose as
coffee. But a preparation detrimental to vigour which needs to be
fully conserved, one reducing strength and turning blood into water,
surely deserves to be wholly shunned.
Cocoa shares the defects of coffee. Like tea, it also contains a
substance which has the effect of making the skin quite rough.
For those who include morals in their conception of good
health, there is a further argument against these three beverages. Tea,
coffee and cocoa are produced for the most part by indentured
labour. In cocoa plantations,. Negro workers are subjected to such
inhuman treatment that if we witnessed it with our own eyes we would
have no desire to drink cocoa. Volumes have been written on the
tortures inflicted in these plantations. To be sure, if we made searching
inquiries regarding the origin of the various articles of our diet, we
should feel called upon to reject 90 per-cent of them!
In place of these three drinks, a harmless and nourishing
beverage can be prepared in the following manner. Those who like
can certainly call it tea. Many coffee lovers cannot distinguish it from
coffee. Wheat should be well cleaned and roasted in a pan. It should
be kept on the fire till it becomes red and is about to turn black. It
should then be taken off the fire and ground rough in a coffee-mill.
A teaspoon of this powder should be put into a cup and boiling water
1

The original has kaph and vayu—terms in Ayurveda, a system of Indian
medicine.

432

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

poured over it. Boiling this mixture for a minute improves the flavour.
Milk and sugar to taste may be added but it can also be taken without
them. Every reader will find it worth while to make this experiment. If
he acquires this habit and gives up tea, coffee and cocoa, he will save
such money and also be spared the risk to his health. Those who do
not want the bother of roasting and grinding the wheat may send 9d.
to the Manager, and they will receive one lb, of the prepared wheat
powder.
[From Gujaraji]
Indian Opinion, 8-3-1913

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

433

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
SUMMARY OF THE PROTECTOR’S REPORT
The Report of the Protector of Indian Immigrants for the year 1910 shows that
considerably more than double the number of men, women and children were
introduced into Natal under the indenture system during 1910 than in the previous
year, the figures being 5,858 and 2,487 respectively. There were sixteen deaths
during the voyage, which, says the Protector, “is considerably above the average, and
was largely occasioned by the number (eight) who died on the s.s.Umhloti’s sixth
voyage from Madras.” It will be remembered that the Umhloti was the boat on which
the outbreak of “spotted fever” occurred. Some light may be thrown on the outbreak
when we read what the Protector says: “The Surgeon-Superintendent informed me that
several of the children were embarked in a very weak state, and this had to be, or a
considerable number of Indians would have had to be kept back.” So we see that the
agents were so anxious to get off a large shipment that they were prepared to run the
risk of sickness and death on the voyage, and, as it happened, an outbreak of a serious
disease. We are also informed that there were several deaths among the Indians of this
shipment after landing including eight from cerebro-spinal meningitis or “spotted
fever”. There were 14 deaths during the year from this disease. We venture to think
that the Protector’s reply to our enquiries at the time, that “there was no need for any
alarm”, that “a few had died” and that “it was expected that the disease had run its
course”, was hardly a sufficient one in view of the above facts.1
1

Some deaths due to “spotted fever” were reported among a batch of indentured
Indians (intended especially for Sir Liege Hulett’s estate) on board s.s. Umhloti which
reached Durban in September, 1910. Official information being unavailable, Indian
Opinion wrote on September 22 to the Protector of Indian Immigrants,
Polkinghorne, seeking confirmation of the report. Replying on September 24,
Polkinghorne admitted that “a few” deaths had occurred but assured that there was “no
need for any alarm”. The Editor wrote again enquiring about the number of those dead,
affected or detained owing to the disease. In reply, Polkinghorne referred him to a
Natal Mercury news report. Indian Opinion of October 1 commented strongly on this
reply, at which the Protector declined to give any further information to the Editor.
On October 26, the Natal Indian Congress wrote to Polkinghorne who said he would
supply the desired information provided they did not publish it in Indian Opinion.
The Congress wrote to him on October 31 saying that, as the matter was a public one,
they would certainly hand over Polkinghorne’s reply to the Press and that Indian
Opinion could not be prevented from taking a “copy from the local dailies”; vide
“Indentured Indians’ Plight”, 1-10-1910 and Indian Opinion, 1-10-1910 &
19-11-1910.

434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

There were 1,955 deaths during the year, being an increase of 268 on the
previous year. The Chief causes of death were diarrhoea 249, tuberculosis of the lungs
189, bronchitis 133, and pneumonia 283. There were 24 suicides, being a decrease of
10 on the previous year. Why there should be even 24, which is a very high figure,
remains a mystery which the Protector does not enlighten us upon. The high figures
for diarrhoea, tuberculosis, and pneumonia call for attention from those in authority.
The very high death rate of 22.15 amongst free Indians is explained by the fact that
all children of indentured parents are classed as “free”. The death rate of Indian
Children (noted in last year’s report as being so exceptionally low, 6.56) has this
year risen to 23.33. The weather conditions of the latter half of the year, the Protector
thinks, may probably account to some extent for this increase. We are not aware that
the weather conditions were so severe as to make [for] such a huge increase in the
death rate. Seeing that the heavy death rate among children was “under
consideration”, we should have thought the Protector would have been able to give
some substantial reason for this excessive death rate.
There is a distinct indication that wages are on the increase, says the
Protector. This, of course, applies only to re-indentured Indians. There was no
indication that the rate of wages of first-indentured men would be increased.
Consequently there were applications for 15,114 more men. The Protector anticipates
that, owing to the increase in the percentage of those re-indenturing, there will
probably be at the end of 1911 as many men under indenture as there have been for the
last two years. It is possible that this may be found to be the case, as, apart from the
increase in wages offered, the £3 tax still remains as a compelling force upon them to
give up their liberty. We are glad to note that, in the opinion of the Protector,
“employers generally are now more careful in the management of their Indians, and
are more willing to dismiss overseers and sirdars for wrongful conduct towards the
Indians, and less inclined to screen them than in years gone by.” This is satisfactory
as far as it goes, and we have, no doubt, to thank for this very largely the efforts of
those who have endeavoured to give publicity to the evils of the indenture system.
The question of overwork still remains unsettled to the satisfaction of the Protector.
This is due in a measure, he thinks, to the inherent difficulty of settling what is a fair
task. He might have added that the task system is altogether unfair. What we have
seen is that whilst a strong man or woman cutting cane finishes the set task early in
the afternoon, the weaker ones have to work until dark night. And in the work of
filling carts, the question of finishing the task depends largely on the number of carts
and the distance to travel. Even if every other condition was satisfactory, the task
system would make life a burden to many an indentured Indian. It can easily be
imagined that those who fail to finish their task fall under the displeasure of the
managers and sirdars, and where ill-treatment is complained of, the task system will
invariably be found to be the cause.
The Deputy Protector, in his report, says that a number of deserving women
have been relieved of the payment of the annual £3 licence under Act 17 of 1895, and
he understands that women generally are not unduly pressed for payment. The
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

435

Protector adds that 485 women have been granted exemption passes by the
Magistrates. Surely it must be evident that, whatever this figure represents, women
should not be asked to pay it at all. It is bad enough that men should have to pay for
the privilege of remaining as free men in a country which they have done so much to
build up, but for women and girls over the age of thirteen to be taxed to such an extent
to monstrous. We know of several cases in which the Magistrates have refused to
grant exemption certificates to Indian women. Why should such a matter be placed at
the mercy of a Magistrate? At Verulam, the Magistrate wisely exercises a wide
discretion, exempting all women claiming exemption; but at Stanger the Magistrate
has scarcely exempted a single poor woman of his district.
This year has seen the stoppage of further supplies of indentured Indians from
India, and for this we are thankful. We believe that the resident Indian population will
benefit by the action of the Indian Government. The Natal Mercury thinks that, now
that Indian immigration is stopped, the European population will increase at a greater
ratio than the Indian, as in the one case there will be the open door to immigrants,
and in the other it will be closed. Whether that will be so or not remains to be seen,
but, there it will now be no excuse whatever for persecuting the resident indian
population. They are here for good or ill, and it depends very largely on the European
community what the future will be. If South Africans act up to the traditions of the
British Empire, there is no reason to fear but that all sections will find room in this
country. For ourselves we shall not rest until the identure system in abolished, We
believe in freedom for all. We want to see the Indian community of South Africa a free
and happy people, and this can never be, so long as there are thousands of men,
women and children living in what, even under the best conditions, can only be
described as semi-slavery.
Indian Opinion, 11-11-1911

APPENDIX II
CORDES’S LETTER TO GANDHIJI
[ADYAR,
November 12, 1911]
MY DEAR GANDHI,
I send you the trust deed duly signed and witnessed.
I shall be passing Calcutta on the 16th of December and have written to
Natesan to find out whether I can get a chance of a handshake with you onold
Aryavartha’s soil. I hope you will be as pleased as I was personally. We are the best
of friends. And from man to man be it said that I have not met your equal as regards
outward virtues. I know that young Krishnaji is your equal, in fact he surpasses you in
sweetness already but I spoke of grown-ups. You are a mystic & those I am privileged
to know & love now are occultists who see & are not content to go on without it. My

436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

brother, the Doct . . .1 is like you a true mystic \& abhors astral visions, etc. I wish he
were as magnanimous as yourself. However we shall see each other at Calcutta ere this
meets your eye on your return. If not, it is meant to take the place of the brotherly
handshake. wishing you a merry Xmas at Phoenix near old Kallenbach if possible.
Fraternally yours,
J OHN H. CORDES
[PS.]
Kindest regards to dear Manilal, Ramdas & Devdas, Maganlal & the others,
Mrs. Gandhi & the ladies & kiddies.
From a photostat of the original: S. N. 5592

APPENDIX III
LORD CREWE’S SPEECH ON INDIANS IN DOMINIONS AT
IMPERIAL CONFERENCE
LONDON,
June 19, 1911
A
The Imperial Conference met in London on June 19, 1911 with Rt. Hon’ble L.
Harcourt, Secretary of State fore the Colonies, in the chair, Gen. L. Botha (Prime
Minister of the Union), F. S. Malan (Minister of Education) and Sir David de Villier
Graaff ( Minister of Public Works, Posts and Telegraphs) attended on behalf of the
Union of South Africa. A memorandum about the problem of Indian subjects of the
Empire in the Colonies was also circulated.
The agenda for discussion included a resolution by the New Zealand Prime
Minister who sought to confine Coloured races to their zones and later changed his
resolution to deal with rights of self-governing Colonies “with wider legislative
powers” in respect of British and foreign shipping.
The proceedings of the Conference began with some general remarks by the
Earl of Crewe, Secretary of State for India, on Indians within the Dominions. Extracts
from his speech are given below:
. . . if there was any question which seemed to threaten not merely the well being, but
the actual existence, of the Empire as an Empire, it was this difficulty between the
white races and the Native races, because I ventured to point out, as between the
Dominions and the Mother Country there could be no question, whether it was a
question of commerce or a question of defence or any other of the questions which we
now discuss, which could not be solved by good-will and by good sense on both sides
. . . I understand that this memorandum which I have before me has been circulated to
all the members of the Conference, and those who have read it will recognize that it
1

Two words illegible here

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

437

deals both with the general principles of the question, and also with special instances
of difficulty which have arisen in the various Dominions with regard either to the
ingress of Indians or to the treatment of Indians when they are there . . .
Now I desire to say first, that I fully recognize—as His Majesty’s Government
fully recognize—two fact: the first is, that as the Empire is constituted, the idea that
it is possible to have an absolutely free interchange between all individuals who are
subjects of the Crown—that is to say, that every subject of the king whoever he may
be or wherever he may live has a natural right to travel or still more two settle in any
part of the Empire—is a view which we fully admit, and I fully admit, as representing
the India Office, to be one which cannot be maintained. As the Empire is constituted
it is still impossible that we can have a free coming and going of all the subjects of
the King throughout all parts of the Empire. Or to put the thing in another way,
nobody can attempt to dispute the right of the self-governing Dominions to decide to
themselves whom, in each case, they will admit as citizens of their respective
Dominions.
That is one of the facts which on behalf of His Majesty’s Government I fully
recognize. I also recognize this—that we are or may be easily prone in this country to
underrate the difficulties which confront the Dominions in this matter, because we are
not troubled to any extent by a similar problem here. It so happens that there never
has been any influx of Coloured races into this country on a scale which has awakened
any of the difficulties, which, as I well know, confront you gentlemen in the different
self-governing Dominions . . .
. . . Many have now abandoned, for instance, the theory that labour can be
regulated simply by the conditions of supply and demand. There are many nowadays,
too, who have abandoned the theory that the remuneration of labour need necessarily
stand in any very close relation to the value of the work done, and that being so, it is
clear that the rivalry of cheap labour such as may be introduced from India seems a
greater hardship than it did in the days of a harsher political economy which was
generally accepted . . . during the greater part of the nineteenth century . . . we are
certainly approaching, if we have not already arrived at, the time when organized
labour will seriously object to the importation of any kind of lower paid labour,
whatever its colour and whatever its nationality, if it is of a competitive character.
This is one of the main difficulties, indeed, which is connected with this question
ofIndian immigration . . . But as to the existence of the colour difficulty in its crudest
form there can, of course, be no question whatever.
. . . It is one of those prejudices or beliefs which become stronger as people
become more educated and more generally superior, and in this respect it differs from
most of the easy and foolish prejudices which are held against the Native races. I am
disposed to go so far as to say that in most respects the less a white man has
individually to be proud of, the prouder he is apt to be of his whiteness, and the more
he considers himself . . .
. . . among the observations made by Mr. Chamberlain in his address to the

438

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Conference in 1897. Those word are, if I may venture to say so, well worth weighing.
I will not attempt to enlarge upon or in any way to develop what Mr. Chamberlain
there so admirably said. I might, however, venture perhaps to remind you that, on the
point of the national claims of Indians grounded on their past history . . . this at any
rate is not a moment when we desire to ignore those considerations, The ceremony of
Thursday next, to which we are all looking forward, depends to a great extent for its
meaning upon the long line of British sovereigns, through the Stuart, Tudor, and
Plantagenet dynastics back to the time of the Norman Conquest and dim ages of the
Saxon monarchy’; and yet there are to be found in India those whose pride of descent
is no less well founded and no less real than that of the King of England himself.
Then, again, as regards history we must never forget that not merely has India
produced a great number of remarkable men both in the public service, and, to go back
further, notable in ancient literature, but that she is most closely linked to a great
number of the most famous men of our own race—statesmen, soldiers and others.
Now, of course, these considerations do not appeal to everybody . . . If “A man’s man
for a’ that” is to be our motto, the claim of a large number of Indians is a real and solid
claim indeed. Whether we value intellectual culture, whether—apart from questions of
creed—we value the religious mind, whether we value that remarkable devotion to and
understanding of the things which are not seen which is so exceptionally deep in
India and which, I think, appeals to many people in these harder and material days,
whether, again, we value simple intellectual force, uncertain in its exercise in some
directions I admit, but which in others produces as keen and fine an instrument as you
can find in any part of the world—whether we value all of those things or any of them
it is undoubtedly the fact that India and Indians can establish a high and real claim for
our consideration, apart from all others.
. . . India must admit the main postulates with which I opened
those observations, that is to say the undoubted liberty of the self-governing
Dominions to lay down the rules of their own citizenship, and I can say cheerfully
on behalf of the India Office and the Government of India that we will always do
our best to explain to the people of India how the position stands in this matter. We
will not encourage India in any way to develop what, as circumstances are, can only
be called extravagant claims for entrance into the self-governing Dominions, and we
will do our best to explain to them what the conditions of the Empire really
are . . . . all sections and shades of Indian Opinion . . . combine when it is a question
of Indian disability in any part of the British Empire. It cannot be denied that this
difficulty is a very real asset, and a valuable asset in India to those who are opposed to
our rule there . . . If, they ask, Indians are to suffer from disabilities in various part of
the Empire, what good in the British connection at all? . . . I may point out also that
the growing tendency to apply principles of self-government to India adds greatly to
the complication and difficulty of the matter, because when a legislative council, as
always possibly may happen, takes occasion to make a particular protest against
some legislation or some administrative act on the part of the Government of a
Dominion, It becomes . . . a far more serious matter than if a mere uninformed
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

439

grumble . . . is heard.
. . . On the other side, as regards the protection of those who are already
domiciled there, some, I may remind you, have been there for a very long time indeed.
There is at any rate one of the Dominions in which Orientals have been domiciled for
some 200 years.
. . . The difficulty, of course, does not arise, I know very well, from the views
or prejudices of Ministers themselves, but it cannot always be easy for them to
impress upon their subordinates, quite subordinate officials who are probably imbued
with a very strong anti-colour prejudice, the importance which we attach, and which
those who have to do with India and know India always attach—to what may seem
small matters of this kind. . . . however close the connection and however perfect the
understanding between the Mother Country and the self-governing Dominions, we are
not a united Empire unless that understanding spreads to some considerable extent
also to that vast part of the Empire of which, of course, India is the most prominent
division, but which also includes all the Crown Colonies which are inhabited by the
various Native races . . . . it is a distinct misfortune and a derogation from the unity of
the Empire if the Mother Country continually finds itself implicated in difficulties
between various parts of the Empire.
. . . I do not pretend, as I repeat once more, that the question is really a soluble
one in the full sense—I do not think it is—but I am quite certain that if the
Dominions will agree all thorough to show an accommodating and friendly spirit
towards India, . . . the best public opinion in India will recognize your efforts . . . .
India Opinion, 14-10-1911 & 21-10-1911
B

INDIA OFFICE MEMORANDUM FOR IMPERIAL CONFERENCE
INDIA OFFICE,
June, 1911
The general principles which His Majesty’s Government desired to maintain
in regard to the relations between His Majesty’s Indian subjects and the selfgoverning Dominions were thus stated by Mr. Chamberlain in the course of his
address to the Conference of Colonial Premiers in 1897:
“We quite sympathize with the determination of the white inhabitants of the
Colonies which are in comparatively close proximity to millions and hundreds of
millions of Asiatics that there shall not be an influx of people alien in civilization,
alien in religion, alien in customs, whose influx, moreover, would most seriously
interfere with the legitimate rights of the existing labour population. An
immigration of that kind must, I quite understand, in the interest of the Colonies, be
prevented at all hazards, and we shall not offer any opposition to the proposals
intended with that object, but we ask you also to bear in mind the traditions of the
Empire, which makes no distinction in favour of, or against, race and colour; and to

440

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

exclude, by reason of their colour, or by reason of their race, all Her Majesty’s Indian
subjects, or even all Asiatics, would be an act so offensive to those peoples that it
would be most painful, I am quite certain, to Her Majesty to have to sanction it.
Consider what has been brought to your notice during your visit to this country. The
United Kingdom owns as its brightest and greatest dependency, that enormous Empire
of India, with 300,000,000 of subjects, who are as loyal to the Crown as your are
yourselves, and among them there are hundreds and thousands of men who are every
whit as civilized as we are ourselves, who are, if that is anything, better born in the
sense that they have older traditions and older families, who are men of wealth, men
of cultivation, men of distinguished valour, men who have brought whole armies and
placed them at the service of the Queen, and have in times of great difficulty and
trouble, such, for instance, as on the occasion of the Indian Mutiny, saved the Empire
by their loyalty. I say you, who have seen all this, cannot be willing to put upon
those men a slight, which, I think, is absolutely unnecessary for your purpose, and
which would be calculated to provoke ill-feeling, discontent, irritation, and would be
most unpalatable to the feeling not only of Her Majesty the Queen but of all her
people.
What I venture to think you have to deal with is the character of the
immigration. It is not because a man is of different colour from ourselves that he is
necessarily an undesirable immigrant, but it is because he is dirty, or he is immoral,
or he is a pauper, or he has some other objection which can be defined in an Act of
Parliament, and by which the exclusion can be managed with regard to all those whom
you really desire to exclude. Well, gentlemen, this is matter, I am sure, for friendly
consultation between us. As I have said, the Colony of Natal has arrived at an
arrangement which is absolutely satisfactory to them, I believe, and remember they
have, if possible, an even greater interest than you, because they are closer to the
immigration which has already begun there on a very large scale, and they adopted
legislation which they believe will give them all that they want, and to which the
objection I have taken does not apply, which does not come in conflict with this
sentiment, I am sure, you share with us; and I hope, therefore, that during your visit it
may be possible for us to arrange a form of words which will avoid hurting the
feelings of any of Her Majesty’s subjects, while at the same time it would amply
protect the Australian Colonies against any invasion of the class to which they would
justly object.”
The position of India in the British Empire was again emphasized by
Mr. Asquith at the Colonial Conference of 1907, when he said: “We should never,
under any conceivable circumstances, accept here a preference granted to us only in
respect of goods carried in ships in which the whole of our fellow subjects in India
were not allowed to serve. We could not possible accede to that, and everybody here
would say we would rather have no preference limited by such condition as that.”

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

441

P ARTICULAR DIFFICULTIES
It is unnecessary to recapitulate the course of events since 1897, but the forms
in which Asiatic questions have arisen in the self-governing Colonies may be briefly
indicated.

NATAL
In Natal, which alone imported Indian labour, the resident Indian population
was increased by a large influx of collies who, at the end of their indentures, remained
in the Colony subject to special taxation, and by a small “free” immigration of
persons who were able to pass the education test imposed by the Immigration Act.
Difficulties arose about traders’ licences, municipal franchise, and the education of
Indian children, and these were accentuated by the passing in 1908 by the Natal
Parliament of two Bills which were reserved and have not come into operation, one to
bring to an end the issue of new trading licences to Asiatics,t he other to prohibit
after a certain time, the holding of trading licences by Asiatics. In 1909, however,
the Dealers’ Licenses Act of 1897 was so amended as to allow an appeal to the
Supreme Court on the renewal of existing licences, though not on their transfer or on
the issue of new licences.

TRANSVAAL
In the Transvaal, which most of the resident Indians had left during the
War, acute difficulties were caused by an influx of Indians after annexation and by
doubts as to the exact effect of some of the laws and regulations of the South African
Republic. Under the Peace Preservation Ordinance permits to Asiatics to enter the
Colony were granted only to persons who had resided before the War. This provision
was stereotyped by the Asiatic Law Amendment Act of 1907, passed immediately after
the grant of responsible government, and, although the Immigrants’ Restriction Act
of the same year was in form modelled on the Natal Act, the effect of the two Acts read
together was that no Asiatic, however well educated, could claim as a right to enter the
Colony unless he could prove that he was before the War a bona-fide resident. This
position, which had no parallel in any other part of the Empire, was, with great
reluctance, accepted by His Majesty’s Government. The stringent provisions for
proof of the identity of lawful residents, though declared by the Transvaal
Government to be necessitated by the trade in forged documents, gave rise to an acute
and bitter controversy, which was allayed only for a few months by an amending Act
of 1908. On the one hand the Indians deliberately adopted a policy of passive
resistance to the law; on the other hand some of the incidents of imprisonment and
deportation of Indians awoke in India itself a feeling of indignation the sincerity and
the importance of which were very imperfectly appreciated in South Africa.

442

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

C APE OF GOOD HOPE AND ORANGE F REE S TATE
In Cape Colony, which allowed the entry only of Indians who could pass an
education test, and in the Orange Free State, where an Asiatic question had never
arisen, nothing had recently happened which calls for notice, except for one or two
complaints that old residents who went back to India on a temporary permit were
refused readmission to Cape Colony on technical grounds, which caused hardship.

UNION OF S OUTH AFRICA
Under the Act of Union matters differentially affecting Asiatics were reserved
for the Union Government. The Union Government introduced an Immigration Bill in
the recent session of Parliament which aimed at a final settlement of the question. The
Bill was withdrawn at the end of the session, but it is understood that the subject will
again be taken up. Meanwhile, a provisional settlement has been arranged by the
Union Government which has led to the abandonment of the passive resistance
movement. The stoppage of indentured emigration from India to Natal has now
prevented the further recruitment of the uneducated classes of Indians within the
Union. Thus, in South Africa, the problem henceforth will practically be that of the
government of a resident Asiatic population, considerable in numbers only in Natal .
...

QUESTIONS OF POLICY
The foregoing summary shows that the question of Indian immigration affects
the several Dominions in different ways and in varying degrees. But the question may
be said to fall under three heads:
(1) The entry of new immigrants.
(2) The status and condition of Indians who have been allowed to enter.
(3) The employment of Indians on ships in colonial waters.

(1) ENTRY OF IMMIGRANTS
His Majesty’s Government fully accept the principle that each of the
Dominions must be allowed to decide for itself what elements it desires to accept in
its population. The extreme contention urged by some Indians, thought not by those
who speak with responsibility, that membership of the British Empire shall entitle
any British subject to resides where he chooses, is disposed of by acknowledged
political facts. At the same time it is of great importance to recognize that subjects of
the King, however different in physique, customs, and religion, from the European
races, are not aliens. It is not sufficiently realized that, for purely local reasons, the
Dominions have adopted a policy which puts Asiatic British subjects on the same
footing as alien Asiatics. In fact, for reasons noted above, the Dominion of Canada is
more rigorous towards British Indian than towards Japanese immigration. A second
important fact, generally overlooked, is that some parts of the British Empire have
adopted, towards Asiatic British subjects a policy of exclusion which foreign nations

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

443

have found unnecessary. It is of course the case that the tropical and sub-tropical
possessions of European Powers correspond in climate and conditions to the British
Crown colonies, and do not reproduce those local conditions which account for the
immigration policy of the Dominions. None the less, it is a striking fact that British
Indians are allowed by foreign countries privileges denied to them by the Dominions.
It is useless to attempt to veil the fact that the policy of building up new
nations of European blood within the empire the absolutely incompatible with the
idea that every British subject, whatever his race, shall have free right of ingress to
any part of the Empire. This being so, all that His Majesty’s Government is entitled
to ask is that the immigration policy of the Dominions shall be so framed and
expressed as to avoid wanton injury to the self-respect of non-European British
subjects. The policy of basing exclusion upon an educational, not a racial, criterion,
meets this requirement, although, in its application to individual cases, it admits of
being administered so as to exclude Indians on racial grounds. Other methods of
restricting immigration, without in statutory terms differentiating against a particular
race, find place in the Canadian law, which gives power (1) to exclude immigrants
deemed unsuited to local climate or requirements, or immigrants of any specified
class, occupation, or character; (2) to require immigrants to be in possession of a
certain minimum sum of money.
It will not be disputed that each of the Dominions is under the strongest moral
obligation to take no isolated action which would involve the Empire in war with a
foreign power. But it does not appear to have been thoroughly considered that each
Dominion owes responsibility to the rest of the Empire for ensuring that its domestic
policy shall not unnecessarily create embarrassment in the administration of India. It
is difficult for statesmen who have seen Indians represented only by manual labourers
and petty traders to realize the importance to the Empire as a whole of country with
some three hundred million inhabitants, possessing ancient civilizations of a very
high order, which has furnished and furnishes some of the finest military material in
the world to the Imperial forces, and which offers the fullest opportunities to
financial and commercial enterprise. It is difficult to convey to those who do not
know India the intense and natural resentment felt by veterans of the Indian Army,
who have seen active service and won medals under the British flag, and who have
been treated by their British officers with the consideration and courtesy to which
their character entitles them, when (as has actually happened) they find themselves
described as “coolies”, and treated with contemptuous severity in parts of the British
Empire. Matters like this are, of course, very largely beyond the power of any
Government to control, but popular misunderstandings are such a fruitful source of
mischief that it seems worth while to put on record the grave fact that a radically false
conception of the real position of India is undoubtedly rife in many parts of the
Empire . . . .
. . . The immigration difficulty, however, has on the whole been met by a
series of statues which succeed in preventing Asiatic influx without the use of
deferential or insulting language. It is accepted that the Dominion shall not admit as

444

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

permanent residents people whole mode of life is inconsistent with their own
political and social ideals.
But the admission of temporary visitors, to which this objection does not
apply, has not yet been satisfactorily settled. If the question were not grave, it would
be seen to be ludicrous that regulations framed with an eye to coolies should affect
ruling princes who are in subordinate alliance with His Majesty, and have placed their
troops at his disposal, members of the Privy Council of the Empire, or gentlemen
who have the honour to be His Majesty’s own Aides-de-Camp. It is of course true that
no person of such distinguished position would in fact be turned back if he visited one
of the Dominions. But these Indian gentlemen are known to entertain very strongly
the feeling that, while they can move freely in the best society of any European
capital, they could not set foot in some of the Dominions without undergoing
vexatious catechisms from petty officials. At the same time the highest posts in the
Imperial services in India are open to subjects of His Majesty from the Dominions.
The efforts of the British Government to create and foster a sense
of citizenship in India have, within the last few years, undoubtedly been
hampered by the feeling of soreness caused by the general attitude of the
Dominions toward the peoples of India. The loyalty of the great mass of
Indians to the Throne is a very conspicuous fact, and it is noteworthy that this
feeling is sincerely entertained by many Indian critics of the details of British
administration. The recent constitutional changes have given the people of the
country increased association with the Government, and have at the same time
afforded Indians grater opportunities of bringing to the direct notice of Government
their views on the wider question of the place of India in the Empire. The gravity of
the friction between Indians and the Dominions lies in this, that on the Colonial
question, and on that alone, are united the seditious agitators and the absolutely loyal
representatives of moderate Indian Opinion. The Government of India, while
appreciating the Colonial point of view, cannot, and do not, which to dissociate
themselves from general feeling of disappointment at the unwillingness of the
Dominions to recognize that Indians are entitled to consideration. Many highly
educated and well-bred Indians have natural and laudable desire to see other parts of the
Empire, but at present are deterred from visiting the Dominions. It is earnestly hoped
by His Majesty’s Government that the measures necessary to prevent such an influx
of the lower classes of Indians as would modify the population of the Dominions and
create grave internal difficulties will not be extended to visitors of good social rank,
merchants of sound commercial position who have interests outside India, or students
who have attained to University standing.

(2) THE S TATUS OF INDIANS R ESIDENT IN THE DOMINIONS
It is in South Africa alone that there is any large resident Indian population,
and it existence here is in the main due to the deliberate importation by Natal
(inaugurated under Crown Colony but continued under Responsible Government) of
contract Indian labour. In Canada and Australia Indian immigrants have been
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

445

comparatively few in number and have come on their own commercial business. But
in South Africa—apart from the entry of some representatives of those Indian traders
who have for centuries past done business on the east coast of tropical Africa—the
Indian element is, in origin due to the action of Government undertaken at the
instance and in the interests of a very important section of the European population
of Natal.
So far, then, as an Indian population exists, the Dominions can do much to
allay unrest in India by abstaining from any administrative policy which could be
represented as showing an intention to expel them, or to reduce them to a position of
degradation. In South Africa Indians compete chiefly with European traders—often
with a low class of Europeans of alien origin,—while in British Columbia they are in
competition with white workmen. It is thus inevitable that from time to time this
economic rivalry should lead to friction. But the treatment of Indian traders by
municipal authorities in Natal has at times been flagrantly unfair, and even now
security for permanence of trading rights is given, by means of Appeal to the
Supreme Court against licensing boards, only to individuals who already possess
trading licences. The transfer of existing, or the grant of new, licences, is entirely in
the hands of municipal authorities. Certain schemes of legislation in Natal, and of
administrative measures in the Transvaal, have caused much apprehension among
Indians, and it is to be hoped that, when the union has satisfied itself that safeguards
against unlimited Asiatic immigration have been provided, it will be possible to treat
resident Indians generously.
Any system of generous treatment may be held to involve:
(1) avoidance of any measures calculated to take away the means of
livelihood from respectable traders by vexatious regulations;
(2) restriction of sanitary measures to cover real sanitary needs, and
regulations adequate to prevent the use of such measures as an indirect
means of disturbing Indian residents;
(3) the grant of educational facilities, which, of course, need not lead to the
admission of Asiatic and European children into mixed primary
schools;
(4) a determination not to utilize immigration laws to banish lawful
residents by means of legal quibbles, or to break up domiciled families,
or to refuse temporary admission on visiting permit to relatives whose
presence is urgently required by resident Indians. (Such an incident as
the refusal of a permit to a son to attend to funeral of his father, which
is alleged to have occurred in British Columbia, would create very bitter
feeling amongst a people who attach supreme importance to funeral
rites.)
It is practically certain that there will never be any large Indian population in
Canada, Australia, or New Zealand, the Dominions in which the aboriginal
population is small, and in some cases decreasing, and which will, in the ordinary

446

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

course of events, be, for all practical purposes, purely European. But in South Africa
not only does the Native population so enormously outnumber the whites that
unskilled labour will probably always remain in Native hands, but a small Asiatic
element has existed for nearly two centuries. Cape Colony has found it possible to
govern without friction and to utilize the “Malays” imported by the Dutch East India
Company, who are Mahomedan in religion and distinctive in their social habits.
They have established a position as fishermen, drivers, and petty agriculturists. It
cannot be maintained that South Africa can accommodate only white and black, and
has no place for the brown races. For although in a comparatively recently colonized
area, such as the territories of the two former republics, this might be argued, Cape
Colony affords an example of a large element, consisting not only of the “Malays”,
but of the “Coloured people”, which is intermediate in civilization and habits
between the Native Africans and the Europeans. There is no intention to minimize the
difficulties caused by the presence of an intermediate element, whether of mixed blood
or purely Asiatic. But it is believed the equitable administration can prevent these
difficulties from becoming dangers.

(3) THE E MPLOYMENT

OF

INDIANS

IN

S HIPS

IN

C OLONIAL W ATERS

It is unnecessary to add to what is said on this point in the historical summary,
where the serious disabilities which the New Zealand Shipping Bill of 910 would
impose on Indian seamen are pointed out.
Indian Opinion, 9-9-1911, 16-9-1911, 23-9-1911 & 30-9-1911

APPENDIX IV
UNION MINISTERS’ MINUTES ON IMMIGRANTS’
RESTRICTION BILL (1912)
A1
In the course of conversation this morning General Smuts referred to the draft
Immigration Bill. I asked him what would be the position, under Clause 28, of one of
the limited number of educated Indians to be admitted into the Union under the
dictation test if he wished to enter the Free State. The Minister said there would be no
restriction upon his entry into the Free State or into any other Province, and the only
special disabilities to which he would be subjected would be the prohibition to acquire
fixed property, or to engage in commerce or farming in the Free State, as set forth in
Sub-clause 2 of Clause 28. According to what General Smuts said, there would be
nothing to prevent him from establishing himself as a doctor except the absence of
sufficient number of his compatriots to make professional practice lucrative. The rest
1
This is a report by the Private Secretary to the Governor-General based on a
discussion he had with Smuts. It was forwarded by Gladstone to the Colonial Office on
October 28, 1911.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

447

of Chapter 33 of the Orange Free State Law Book was not being repealed, but its
provisions, with the exception of Article 7 and 8, would be practically inoperative so
far as the Indians admitted under the dictation test were concerned, as their status and
rights were protected under the draft Bill. I asked the Minister whether he did not
anticipate strong protests from Mr. Gandhi and his followers in regard to the specific
retention of Articles 7 and 8. He said that Mr. Gandhi would raise no objection so
long as the right of entry into the Free State were secured, as it was under the draft
Bill. I did not anticipate such a sanguine reply, but I conclude from the confidence
with which General Smuts spoke that he has been in communication with Mr. Gandhi
and has satisfied himself on this point He appeared to be convinced that the Bill, so
far as it went, would be acceptable to the Indian community in this country. As
regards the attitude of the Orange Free State members, General Smuts recognized that
Sub-clause 2 of Clause 28 did not go so far as they would desire. Their wish would be
to prevent any Indian from entering their Province, and time would show whether
they would prove intractable. He hoped that they would be reasonable enough to
appreciate that it would be intolerable if they endeavoured to wreck the Bill because it
did not meet all their aspirations in every particular, and he considered that he had a
strong argument in his armoury in that there was no absolute bar upon the entry of
Indians into the Province under the present law, as the grant or refusal of permission
in each case was left to the exercise of ministerial discretion, and there was nothing
to prevent a Minister from admitting an unlimited number of Asiatics into the Free
State if he saw fit, subject always to the statutory bar in regard to their owning fixed
property, or their engaging in commerce or farming. He seemed to think that, if this
circumstance were brought home to them, their attitude might not improbably
undergo some modification. I may add that I have reason to believe that the draft of
Sub-clause 2 was specially submitted to General Hertzog, and that he did not take
exception to its terms.
2. I mentioned that I had failed to observe in the draft Bill any provision for
giving effect to the Minister’s undertaking in his correspondence with Mr. Gandhi
that provision should be made for the registration of passive resisters who, but for
their passive resistance, would previously have been entitled to registration. This
point, it will be remembered, was alluded to in Paragraph 15 of Lord Gladstone’s
despatch Confidential (2) of the 23rd October, General Smuts replied that it had been
found that no special legislation was required for the purpose of carrying out this
pledge, and that certificates of registration were now in fact being granted.
3. As regards the dictation test, General Smuts volunteered the statement that
he was considering the expediency of adopting the Australian model in its entirety
and of providing that the subject of the test should be restricted to European
languages. He thought there would be no difficulty in scheduling a list of European
languages, and he would be prepared to include Yiddish in the list as the
overwhelming majority of white immigrants at present were of the Jewish race.
4. He said that he was very hopeful of passing the Bill into law during the next
session, and would use every endeavour in that behalf, as it was of the greatest

448

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

importance that the immigration question should be regularized and settled. The
emphasis with which he spoke is the more satisfactory as a few months ago there
were indications suggesting the possibility of some slackening of interest in the
subject.
. . . 1 engage in productive industry. It will be noted that his observation on the
general question of white immigration differ considerably, both in tone and in
intention, from the public utterances of at least one of his colleagues.
6. As regards the Asiatic question in the Transvaal, he expressed himself as
gravely concerned by the interpretation placed by the Divisional Court upon Section
77 and 130 of the Gold Law, to which reference was made in Lord Gladstone’s
despatch No. 917 of the 23rd instant. He considered that the decision was bad in law
but he did not propose to interfere with it. Its effect he understood to be that wherever
a right to let Stands to Asiatics had existed in mining areas, outside of townships,
prior to the passing of the Act, that right could still be exercised. The result would be
that a large number of Asiatic stores would spring up all over the reef, that the white
trader would be crowded out, and that a considerable impetus would be given to the
illicit traffic in gold and liquor in which Asiatics were prone to indulge. He thought
that further legislation might be necessary, and a solution, to which he inclined, both
in regard to this particular difficulty and to the general question of Asiatic trading in
the Transvaal, might have to be found in the introduction of a licensing system
resembling that of Natal. It will be remembered that the contemplation of some such
expedient was indicated by Ministers in their Minute No. 1028 of the 2nd September,
which was transmitted to the Secretary of State with Lord Gladstone’s despatch No.
737 of the 4th idem. The scheme in General Smuts’ mind appears to be the
introduction of an universal system of licensing of all businesses in the Transvaal by
the local authorities, without any explicit discrimination against Asiatics, and
subject to the preservation of existing rights and to an appeal to some central
authority with a view to obviating the infliction of undue hardship. He has evidently
not yet come to a definite conclusion on the subject, and he appreciates that any such
proposals would encounter formidable opposition in several quarters. He said,
however, that he was strongly impressed with the necessity of taking some action to
check what he described as the alarming development of Asiatic trading in this
Province; and that, of course, would be the practical effect of the introduction of a
licensing system, however free from racial differentiation it might be in form. The
white trader, he asserted, could not exist side by side with Asiatic competition. He
quite recognized that the business methods of white trader did not entitle them to very
much sympathy, as they had taken as unreasonable advantage of their opportunities
and were inclined to charge excessive profits. But however that might be, he was not
prepared to face the alternative of the whole retail trade of the country falling into
Asiatic hands. As between the two evils of the undesirable business methods of white
traders on the one hand, and the unlimited extension of Asiatic trading on the other,
1

A page is missing here.

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

449

he could not hesitate to choose the former, unless he wished to stultify his ideal of
South Africa as a white man’s country. The tone of his remarks left no doubt in my
mind that he was giving the question serious attention, not merely as a subject for
theoretical consideration, but with a view to effective action, and it would, I fear, be
idle to hope that it will be allowed to remain to abeyance.
H. J. S TANLEY
Colonial Office Records: C.O. 551/14
B
November 28, 1911
1.
It is not considered necessary to provide by law for the validation of the
settlement of the Transvaal passive resistance controversy.
2.
Clauses 5(f). Domicile does not necessarily confer the right to reside:
e.g., by failure to comply with the Asiatic Registration Laws a domiciled person
would lose any right to reside.
3.
Clause 5(e) and (g). The point raised by the Secretary of State will be
borne in mind.
4.
Clause 5(h). It is not anticipated that the use of the term “white” will
cause any difficulty. The object of the clause as at present worded is to compel any
Government to go to Parliament whenever there is an intention to introduce Coloured
or Asiatic labour into the Union from other parts of the world.
5.
First Schedule. Although His Majesty’s assent was never given to
Transvaal Act No. 36 of 1908, it remains on the Statute-book, and legal questions
may afterwards arise which it may be advisable to obviate by formally removing it
from the list of laws passed by the Transvaal Parliament.
6.
Clause 7 and 28(2). Indians admitted into the Union under the
provisions of Section 4 (a) will require no further permission to enter the Orange Free
State; but if they do enter that Province they will naturally by subject to the
disabilities in respect of trading, farming and ownership of land which are imposed
by Chapter XXXIII of the Orange Free State Law Book.
Those clause although they do not represent a hard and fast agreement with the
Indian leaders are, it is believed, most likely to prove satisfactory to them, as they
are in accord with representations which have been made to the Government from
time to time by the Indian leaders.
7.
With regard to the question raised by the Secretary of State for India as to
the position of Natal Indians desirous of emigrating to the Cape and vice versa,
Ministers desire to state that the Provisions of Clause 7 are intended to prevent the
Natal Indian population from migrating to the other Provinces. The European
inhabitants in the Cape, Transvaal and Orange Free State would resent most strongly
the intrusion of Natal Indians and Ministers are not prepared to state that, under the
provisions of this Clause, even selected Natal Indians would be allowed to enter the
Cape in future.
Ministers desire to point out that the difficulties in connection with the Indian
population of South Africa require most careful handling on the part of the

450

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Government and if Cape members of Parliament were to gain the impression that
Natal Indians would be allowed into the Cape Province their opposition might
possibly prove fatal to the Bill.
LOUIS BOTHA
Colonial Office Records: C.O.551/14
C
secret
November 30, 1911
Immigration Bill. Reference my telegram of today’s date.
I saw J. C. Smuts after receiving Ministers’ reply to your questions. He
strongly deprecates raising question of validating registration certificates for passive
resisters. A separate bill would be necessary. The Government are issuing certificates
and their validity could only be challenged by themselves. By issue they will
themselves be stopped. It is their intention to safeguard position of passive resisters.
I think that it will be best not to press them on this points.
As regards answer 3 of Minister’s minute J. C. Smuts quite recognizes your
point. But he says that it is new and to make provision in bill [for?] fresh immigrants
would be dangerous. He prefers to deal with point in Parliament in the event of its
being raised and then to deal with it as best he can. Gandhi has not raised it.
As regards answer 4 he does not think Gandhi will make difficulty. He thinks
that paragraph can be considered from points of view other than differentiation.
Attempts now being made to organize entry of Natives from Liberia and he believes
elsewhere, and therefore he provides in such cases for necessity for legislation.
Whites must be exempted in view of white immigration scheme approved by
Government for land and other development here.
He cannot say that he has an agreed scheme with Gandhi. They are in
agreement generally but J. C. Smuts does not wish to incur risk of being charged with
breach of faith constructive or otherwise which unforeseen developments might
produce.
Owing to opposition in Orange Free State and the Cape, and from Jews, he is
doubtful whether he can get the Bill through, and he wishes to avoid its position
being prejudiced in advance.
GLADSTONE
Colonial Office Records: C.O. 551/44

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

451

D1
January 6, 1912
With reference to His Excellency the Governor-General’s Minutes Nos.
15/234 and 15/235 of the 18th ultimo on the subject of the draft Immigration Bill,
Ministers have the honour to state that they have given careful consideration to the
further points which have been raised by the Secretary of State for the Colonies and
the Secretary of State for India.
With regard to the recent settlement with the passive resisters, Ministers do
not anticipate that any difficulty will occur in connection with the validation of
certificates which have been issued to Indians in terms of that settlement. The Indian
leaders themselves do not ask for such legislation, and in Ministers’ opinion no
question is likely to arise with any future Government of the Union, as the certificates
in question are limited in number which will all have been issued in the space of a
short time, and it would be impracticable, even if it were legal and possible, for any
Government to recall or to refuse to recognize any such certificate which had been
officially issued.
Clause 5(g): Both under the law in South Africa and under the practice in the
past polygamous marriages have not been recognized, and Ministers are unable to
provide any facilities in the draft Bill which would have the effect of altering the
present position in South Africa.
Clauses 5(h): The Indian leaders, to whom the draft Bill has been shown, have
raised no objection to Clause 5(h) in its present form, but should it appear, during the
passage of the measure through Parliament, that opposition exists to the use of the
word “white”, Ministers will be prepared to consider the question of an amendment.
Clauses 6 and 7: Ministers desire to state that the interpretation placed on
these Clauses by the Secretary of State for the Colonies is the correct one.
Clauses 7 and 28(2): The leaders of the Indian community have raised no
objection to the reference to Chapter XXXIII, but have, on the contrary, intimated
that the Clause as drafted appears to afford a satisfactory solution of the difficulties
which have been experienced in this matter. Ministers desire, however, to add that the
question whether it will be possible to carry the Section as it is at present drafted
depends very largely on the attitude of the members of Parliament from the Orange
Free State, who are most strongly against any relaxation of the provisions of the
Chapter in question.
J. C. SMUTS
Colonial Office Records: C.O. 551/25
1

Gandhiji met Lane in Johannesburg on December 22, 1911, and was shown a
copy of the new immigration bill; vide “What to Expect from the Imperial
Government”, 23-12-1911. Gandhiji says in his letter to Lane of January 29, 1912,
that the bill, as published in the Government Gazette had undergone some changes
since he had seen it last.

452

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX V
EXTRACTS FROM IMMIGRANTS’ RESTRICTION BILL (1912)
AND ORANGE FREE STATE CONSTITUTION
To consolidate and amend the laws in force in the various Provinces of the Union
relating to Restriction upon Immigration thereto, to provide for the establishment of
a Union Immigration Department and regulate Immigration into the Union or any
Province thereof.
The Governor-General may appoint an immigration board at any such port of
entry as may seem to him expedient, and the duty of any such board shall be to advise
the Minister as to whether persons alleged to be prohibited immigrants should be
permitted to enter the Union, and as to matters incidental to their entrance.
(Section 3) (3).
The term “prohibited immigrant” includes:
(a)
any person who is unable to pass the dictation test, that is to say—when an
Immigration officer dictates to him not less than fifty words in the language selected
by such an officer, fails to write out those words in that language to the satisfaction
of that officer;
(c)
any person who, from information received from any Government (whether
British or Foreign) through official or diplomatic channels, is deemed by the
Minister to be an undesirable inhabitant of or visitor to the Union. (Section 4).
The exemption clause includes:
(e)
subject to the provisions of section seven, any person born in any part of
South Africa included in the Union;
(f)
subject to the provisions of section seven, any person who satisfies an
immigration officer that he still is both domiciled and entitled to reside in the Union
or any Province, and that during his absence from the Union he has not become such a
person as is described in paragraph (c), (d), (e), (f) or (g) of the last preceding section;
(g)
subject to the provisions of section seven, any person who is proved to the
satisfaction of an immigration officer to be the wife, or the child under the age of
sixteen years;
(i)
of any person who by passing the dictation test described in paragraph (a) of
the last preceding section has been permitted to enter the Union;
(ii)
of any person described in paragraph (f) of this section, provided that the wife
or the child (as the case may be) does not fall within the classes of person described in
paragraphs (c), (d), (e), (f) or (g) of the last preceding section. (Section 5).1
(1)
Every prohibited immigrant who, after the commencement of this Act, enters
or is found within the Union, shall be guilty of an offense and liable on conviction
1
Indian Opinion adds the following by way of comment: “Paragraphs (d), (e),
(f) and (g) refer to persons suffering from certain diseases or convicted of certain
crimes.”

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

453

(a)
to imprisonment with or without hard labour for a period not exceeding three
months without the option of a fine; and
(b)

to be removed at any time by the Minister’s warrant from the Union.

(2)
Pending the removal, the prohibited immigrant may be detained in such
custody as may be prescribed by regulation.
(3)
The prohibited immigrant may be discharged from the imprisonment or
custody aforesaid if security be given to the satisfaction of the Minister that the
prohibited immigrant will within one month leave the Union, and not return thereto.
(4)
Every such sentence of imprisonment shall terminate as soon as the
prohibited immigrant is removed from the Union. (Section 6).
Notwithstanding that a person is domiciled and entitled to reside in any
particular Province either at the commencement of this Act or thereafter, nothing in
this Act contained shall be construed as authorizing him to enter or reside in any
other Province wherein he has not become entitled to reside unless he is able to pass
the dictation test described in paragraph (a) of section four, and he may at any time be
required to pass that test. For the purposes of this Act every such person shall, unless
he has passed the said test, be a prohibited immigrant in respect of the said other
Province and the provisions of the last preceding section shall apply mutatis
mutandis to him. (Section 7).
(1)
No prohibited immigrant shall be entitled to obtain a licence to carry on any
trade or calling in the Union or (as the case may be) in any Province wherein his
residence is unlawful or to acquire therein any interest in land, whether leasehold or
freehold, or in any immovable property.
(2)
Any such licence (if obtained by a prohibited immigrant) or any contract, deed
or other document by which any such interest is acquired in contravention of this
section, shall, on conviction of the prohibited immigrant as such, be null and void.
(Section 8).
(1)
Every person who is suspected on reasonable grounds of being a prohibited
immigrant may be arrested without warrant by an immigration officer or police
officer, and shall be brought as soon as possible before a magistrate’s court to be
dealt with according to law. (Section 9).
An immigration officer may require any person entering the Union to make a
declaration in the form prescribed by regulation that he, or any person accompanying
him, is not a prohibited immigrant and to state in the declaration such further
particulars as may be prescribed by regulation, and may require him to fill in and
complete in every respect that form and to produce, in support of the declaration,
documentary or other evidence.
Every such declaration shall be exempt from any stamp duty ordinarily
imposed by law on affidavits or solemn or attested declarations, anything to the
contrary notwithstanding in any law in force in the Union relating to stamp duty.
Any person who fails on demand to comply with any provision of this section
or who declares upon the form anything as a fact, or produces or gives such evidence

454

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

as aforesaid which he knows to be false, shall be guilty of an offence. (Section 18).
Any person who
(a)
has been convicted, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, of
a contravention of any of the provisions enumerated in the second schedule thereto,
or of any amendment of those provisions;
(b)
having been removed at the expense, either whole or partial, of any
Government from the Union, or any part thereof now included in the Union, or being
the subject of an order issued under any law to leave the Union or any part thereof now
included in the Union, returns thereto without lawful authority or has failed to comply
with the terms of any such order;
(c)
having been refused by an immigration officer permission to enter the Union
or any Province, has entered the Union or that Province;
(d)
admits to an immigration officer in a written document that he is a prohibited
immigrant either in the Union or in any Province;
may, if not already under detention, be arrested without warrant and removed from the
Union or (as the case may be) from the Province, by the Minister’ warrant and,
pending removal, may be detained in such custody as may be prescribed by
regulation. (Section 21).
(1)
The burden of proving that a person has not entered or remained in the Union
or any Province in contravention of this Act or any regulation shall, in any
prosecution for or in respect of such a contravention, lie upon the accused person.
(Section 23).
(1)
Anything to the contrary notwithstanding in this Act contained, the Minister
may in his discretion issue a temporary permit to any prohibited immigrant to enter
and reside in the Union or any particular Province upon such conditions as to period
of residence or otherwise as the Minister may in the permit specify.
(2)
The Minister may also in his discretion issue a permit to any person who is
lawfully resident in the Union or any Province and who, desiring to proceed thereout
with the intention of returning thereto, for any reason apprehensive that he will be
unable to prove on his return that he is not a prohibited immigrant. The permit in this
sub-section mentioned shall expressly authorize the person named therein to return,
within a period specified in the permit, to the Union or the particular Province (as the
case may be), but before issuing the permit the Minister shall require such proof of
the said person’s identity add such means of identification to be furnished as may be
prescribed by regulation (Section 25).
(1)
Anything to the contrary notwithstanding in Act No. 36 of 1908 of the
Transvaal, a person who, by passing the dictation test described in paragraph (a) of
section four of this Act has been permitted to enter the Union shall not be deemed to
be subject to registration under the provisions of the said Act of the Transvaal.
(2)
Any person, being such a person as is described in Chapter 33 of the Orange
Free State Law Book, who, by passing the said dictation test, has been permitted to
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

455

enter the Union or, by passing the dictation test in accordance with section seven of
this Act, has been permitted to enter the Orange Free State from any other Province,
shall be subject in all respects to the Provisions of article seven and eight of the said
Chapter 33. (Section 28).
The Immigration Laws of all the Colonies are repealed; as also the Asiatic Law
Amendment Act of the Transvaal, No. 2 of 1907,—the whole, except so far as it is
applicable to the registration of minors lawfully resident in the Transvaal.

ORANGE FREE STATE LAWS
The following are Sections 7 and 8 of the Orange Free State Constitution,
Chapter XXXIII:
7.
No such Coloured person as is mentioned in the preceding articles (i.e., Arab,
Chinaman, Coolie, or other Asiatic Coloured person) nor the successor in title of any
such Coloured person shall, under any circumstances, have the right to have fixed
property registered in his name in this State.
8.
No such Coloured person as is mentioned in the preceding Articles shall, under
any circumstances, be permitted by the State President to settle in this State for the
purpose of carrying on a commercial business or farming, either directly or
indirectly, and each applicant, before obtaining permission to reside in this State,
shall make and sign a sworn declaration before the Landdrost to whom he makes the
application, in which he shall declare that he will neither directly nor indirectly carry
on a commercial business or do any farming in this State, and each such Coloured
person carrying on any other business or trade than the one for which he obtained
permission to settle in the country shall be liable to fine or punishment as provided
in the following Article. (1st offences, a fine not exceeding £25 sterling or in default
of payment imprisonment with or without hard labour for a period not exceeding three
months, and for subsequent offences the fine and punishment shall each time be
doubled).
Indian Opinion, 3-2-1912

APPENDIX VI
TELEGRAM FROM SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR TO GANDHIJI
January 31, 1912
FURTHER
TO
YOURS
YESTERDAY.
IN
REGARD
TO
SECTION
FIVE, NO LEGAL RIGHTS ARE DISTURBED BECAUSE, IN ANY CASE,
A DISCRETION WILL HAVE TO BE LEFT TO THE OFFICER. THAT
DISCRETION MAY BE REVISED BY THE BOARD AND, IN THE LAST
RESORT, BY THE MINISTER. UNDER SECTION 7, NO EXISTING RIGHTS
ARE DISTURBED, AS INTERPROVINCIAL IMMIGRATION
WOULD
STILL
BE A MATTER FOR ADMINISTRATIVE DISCRETION, BUT, OF COURSE,
IT
IS
WELL
UNDERSTOOD
THAT
AS
FAR
AS
POSSIBLE
SUCH
IMMIGRATION WILL BE KEPT WITHIN
NARROW
LIMITS,
AS YOU

456

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ARE AWARE THAT WAS THE POLICY CARRIED OUT UNDER EXISTING IMMIGRATION LAWS. IN REGARD TO THE DOMICILE CERTIFICATES IN NATAL, THEIR ISSUE WAS OPTIONAL, AND COMPLAINTS
HAVE
BEEN
REPEATEDLY
MADE
TO
MINISTER
THAT
THEY
HAVE BEEN ABUSED. IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO CONTINUE ISSUING DOMICILE
CERTIFICATES APART FROM SYSTEM OF REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION, AS THOSE
CERTIFICATES ARE
FREQUENTLY
PASSED ON
TO OTHERS WHO
ARE
NOT
ENTITLED
TO
THEM.
THE
SYSTEM
OF PERMITS IN FORCE AT THE CAPE IS NOT BEING ATTENDED
ALL OVER THE UNION, AND THE MINISTER IS SURE THAT WITH
A REASONABLE ADMINISTRATION IT OUGHT TO GIVE SATISFACTION
TO
INDIANS
WHO
WISH
FOR
LONGER
OR
SHORTER
PERIODS
TO VISIT THEIR OWN OR OTHER COUNTRIES. WITH REGARD TO
SECTION 28, THE SWORN DECLARATION IS NOT AN IMMIGRATION
PROVISION, AND IS ONLY INTENDED TO SAFEGUARD THE ABSTINENCE
OF
THE
PERSON
ENTERING
FREE
STATE
FROM
CARRYING
ON
FARMING OR TRADING. THAT BEING SO THE MINISTER DOES NOT
UNDERSTAND WHAT POSSIBLE OBJECTION THERE CAN BE TO
IT.
IF IT IS AGREED TO
BE REASONABLE
THAT
ASIATICS
SHOULD
NOT
TRADE
OR
FARM
IN
THAT
PROVINCE,
SURELY
IT
IS
QUITE REASONABLE TO REQUIRE THEM TO MAKE THE DECLARATION.

From a photostat of a typewritten copy: S.N. 5619

APPENDIX VII
TELEGRAM FROM SECRETARY FOR INTERIOR TO GANDHIJI
February 7, 1912
6/E.
REFERENCE
YOUR
TELEGRAM
1ST
FEBRUARY,
THERE
SEEMS TO BE SOME MISUNDERSTANDING IN YOUR MIND. NOWHERE IN
THE BILL ARE THE LAW COURTS EXCLUDED FROM JURISDICTION,
AND IT IS A MISTAKE TO THINK THAT
UNDER
CLAUSE FIVE
OR ANY OTHER CLAUSE AN APPEAL WOULD NOT IN LAST RESORT LIE
TO
A
LAW
COURT.
WITH
REGARD
TO
THE
DOMICILE
CERTIFICATE, IT
IS
QUITE
IMPOSSIBLE
TO
HAVE
SUCH
A
SYSTEM
INAUGURATED
ALL
OVER
THE
UNION.
EVEN
IN
NATAL THERE HAS BEEN A GROSS ABUSE OF THESE CERTIFICATES,
AND MORE THAN ONE THOUSAND HAVE ALREADY BEEN CONFISCATED IN THE HANDS OF PEOPLE WHO ARE NOT
ENTITLED
TO
THEM.
THE
QUESTION
WHICH
ARISES
UNDER
SECTION
8
OF
CHAPTER 33
WITH
REGARD
TO
A
DECLARATION
BY
AN
IMMIGRANT,
THE
O.F.S. RAISES SOME DIFFICULTIES
AND
THE
DEPARTMENT IS TAKING THE OPINION
OF THE
LAW
OFFICES ON
IT. IT SEEMS QUESTIONABLE WHETHER AS THE
CLAUSE STANDS

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

457

IN
THE
BILL
THE
DECLARATION
CAN
STILL
BE
REQUIRED..
IT IS HOPED THE PROVISIONS OF THE BILL THESE EXPLANATION
[sic]
WILL
PROVE
ACCEPTABLE,
AS
ANY
OTHER
ATTEMPTS
TO
PASS A GENERAL IMMIGRATION LAW WITHOUT DIFFERENTIAL PROVISIONS
WOULD
BE
VERY
UNLIKELY.
MINISTER
HAS
DONE
HIS
VERY BEST TO COME TO A FINAL
SETTLEMENT
ON
A
QUESTION
WHICH
HAS
DEEPLY
AGITATED
ALL
PARTS
OF
SOUTH
AFRICA, AND HOPES THAT HIS EFFORTS WILL BE SUPPORTED BY
THOSE IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED, AND VENTURES TO EXPRESS THE
HOPE THAT YOU WILL USE YOUR UNDOUBTED INFLUENCE WITH
YOUR
COMPATRIOTS
TO
THIS
END.
THE
BILL
CONTAINS
NO
DIFFERENTIAL PROVISIONS, AND SATISFIES THE POINTS OF HONOUR
AND
SELF-RESPECT ON
WHICH
YOU
HAVE
ALWAYS
LAID
THE
MOST STRESS.

From a photostat of a typewritten copy: S. N. 5619

APPENDIX VIII
LANE’S LETTER TO GANDHIJI
CAPE TOWN
May 14, 1912
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I am asked by the Minister to refer you to your letter of the 24th February in
which you refer to an opinion given you by your Counsel in regard to the proposed
Immigration Bill. General Smuts asks me to forward for your information a copy of
the new draft sub-section which he proposes to insert in place of sub section 2 of
section 28 of the draft Immigration Bill now before Parliament. You will remember
that it was not certain whether under the provisions of the clause as introduced, the
declaration required under section 8 of Chapter XXXIII of the Orange Free State Laws
would be required of educated Asiatic immigrants, and that before coming to a definite
decision the Department undertook to look into the point.
The matter has been considered and the amendment forwarded under cover of
this letter has been drawn up as an alternative to the clause as it stands in the Bill at
the present time, the legal advisers being of the opinion that if the provisions of the
declaration are included in the Bill the necessity of completing the declaration as set
out in schedule 2 of the Chapter is done away with.
With regard to the question of domicile which you raise, I am to say that the
Minister intends to insert a clause which, by removing all doubts in the matter, will
meet with your support.

458

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I shall be glad if you will let me have an expression of your views on the
amendment now before you at an early date as the Minister hopes to bring the Bill
forward very shortly in the Assembly.
Believe me,
Yours sincerely,
ERNEST F. C. L ANE
From a photostat of the typewritten original: S. N. 5650-1
APPENDIX IX

SMUTS’ SPEECH ON I. R. BILL (1912) IN UNION PARLIAMENT
CAPE TOWN ,
May 30, 1912
In the House of Assembly on the 30th ultimo, the Minister of the Interior
moved the second reading of the Immigrants’ Restriction Bill, and stated that the
Tuberculosis Commission had been instructed to report first on such questions as
might be of importance in regard to the Bill. The report, he thought, was a valuable
one, and parts of the recommendations would probably be adopted by the House
before the Bill became law. Although the Bill was not of the most urgent importance
from a purely South African point of view, yet it was important and urgent from the
wider point of view. The questions that received solution in the measure were of great
Imperial importance. The Bill intended to put in force and embody in legislation an
understanding come to as far back as 1910 with the British Government regarding
Asiatics and the immigration of Asiatics, especially Indians, to South Africa. The
Minister added that this was not merely a Bill dealing with white immigration to
South Africa, but dealt also with the somewhat different and more complicated subject
of Asiatic immigration to South Africa. The Asiatic population, and especially the
indian population, of South Africa had taken up an attitude, in which they were
supported by the India Office and the British Government, whereby they claimed, as
regarded the laws of South Africa, that there should be no differentiation between
them and the whites. They did not object to differential administrative action or
difference applied in practice to them; but they objected to and opposed most
strenuously any legislative stigma being put on them, so far as the statutes of this
country were concerned. In this attitude they were supported by the British
Government, and it was now, as members knew, after a great deal of trouble and
negotiation on the part of the present Government, that they had acceded to that
position, and they had recognized that in the legislation of the country there should
be no difference, but the difference would be confined to the administration of the
laws which they might pass. The difficulty in working the Immigration Law in this
country was considerable, because whilst, on one hand, they were most anxious to
foster the immigration of white people, they were equally anxious to keep Asiatics
out. (Hear!Hear!)They had therefore to pass a law applying in the same terms to all
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

459

sections, but aiming at bringing certain people in and keeping others out. It looked
almost like a Chinese puzzle. After a great deal of consideration, they had decided to
adopt the suggestion of the Colonial Office, supported by the Government of India,
to apply the Australian education test. This apparently was a very stiff test, but it
admitted of being applied with rigour in one case and laxity in another, so that whites
might be engaged to come to the country, whilst Asiatics would be kept out. That
Australian test, as adopted in the Bill, was the principal provision of the Bill and that
was also likely to give rise to the most discussion. It apparently placed enormous
powers in the hands of the Government, yet he was prepared to state, on the part of
the Government, that in the administration of this law there was not the slightest
intention of making it more difficult for white people to come into the country than it
was today. The intention was rather the other way. In the past there had been too great
a tendency under their existing legislation to lay stress on purely educational
qualifications. (Hear! Hear!) A man who wanted to come to this country, and was
physically fit and otherwise might be a good citizen, was asked to test his knowledge
in some European language. Some of these languages did not concern them in this
country in the least. A man who had a very high knowledge of Yiddish did not impress
him, and the same applied to Russian and many other languages. What they did want
in this country was a certain type of character and physical fitness, and they should
not look too much to immigrants’ literary attainments or educational qualifications
in languages of little use in this country. As for the rest, the Immigration Department
would be carried on the same as under existing laws. He was perfectly prepared to
state, as he now did, that no test would be applied to white people more difficult in
future than was applied in the past. So far as the Indian and Asiatic populations were
concerned, he was going to carry out the arrangement with the British Government,
and that was that they would permit a small number of educated and professional
Asiatics to enter South Africa yearly, but, of course, in limited numbers, but they
certainly would provide for others in such a manner that there would not be any influx
into this country of Asiatics.
I do not wish to say anything to influence this House. They have seen the Bill,
and they are most anxious it should be put on the Statute-book, although they have
raised one point in regard to domiciled people which is not in the Bill, but which I
want to bring forward as an amendment. The Government of India have also seen the
Bill, and agreed to it, and their desire is that it should appear on the Stature-book as
soon as possible. Proceeding, Mr. Smuts said the Bill contained the usual provisions
as to what were prohibited immigrants and what were not. In this regard he wished to
say that, in accordance with the report of the Tuberculosis Commission, they would
now have to add another paragraph to his section, by which it would be provided that
persons infected with tuberculosis might be permitted into this country under certain
conditions. Opinions differed as to whether they should allow people suffering from
tuberculosis into this country, but it would, however, be a considerable hardship to
close the door to these people without respect to the degree of tuberculosis from
which they were suffering, and the Commission had come to the conclusion that these

460

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

people might be allowed in under certain conditions, and provided they conformed to
certain regulations discussed in the Commission’s report. That part of their report he
would like to adopt (Hear! Hear!) They should fight the scourge [of] tuberculosis in
this country, for it was rapidly becoming one of the most dangerous diseases in the
country. They should make a commencement at their seaboards, so that they should
not be further infected with this disease. (Hear! Hear!) He agreed they should not
entirely close their doors, but he also thought that if the recommendations provided
for were accepted it would be possible to prevent any further infection from abroad.
Exceptions were also provided in the Bill—that was to say, certain classes of people
would be free to come into this country, and would not fall under the provisions of
this Bill at all. The provisions of the Bill of last year in this respect had been
somewhat extended, so that now all South Africans would be able to come in from
abroad with their wives and children. Some difference of opinion has arisen with the
Chamber of Mines in the Transvaal as to one of the paragraphs. Provision was made
in Clause 5 that the following persons would not be prohibited immigrants, namely,
any person who entered the Union in accordance with any law or convention with a
neighbouring Government. This provided for the exemption of all those Native
labourers from the East Coast of Africa. The convention referred to here was the
Mozambique Convention. The Chamber of Mines had raised several difficulties, and
had pointed out that Natives coming from Basutoland might technically under this
section be prohibited immigrants. Natives coming from Nyasaland, they pointed out,
might also be prohibited immigrants. He thought there was not much force in these
objections. With regard to Natives from Basutoland, the provisions of the recruiting
law of last year dealt with them. The Chamber also pointed to the case of the
Nyasaland Natives. Of course, Natives from Basutoland were not prohibited
immigrants, as Natives who came here in accordance with any other law were
exempted, but if there was any doubt he was prepared to meet the Chamber of Mines.
As regards the Nyasaland Natives, his information was to the effect that they were not
recruited in Nyasaland. They usually went into Portuguese territory from where they
were recruited by the agents of the Witwatersrand Native Labour Association, so that
they fell under the Mozam-bique Convention. He, therefore, thought no amendment
would be required in regard to these objections. Another important point under this
Bill was with regard to the movement of Asiatics in South Africa. It would in future be
possible to prevent wholesale immigration into the Union, but the difficult question
in regard to interprovincial movements still remained, and this was one of the points
which the British Govern-ment had impressed upon them. There was practically no
immigration of Asiatics allowed into the Transvaal or Free State, but under the laws of
the Cape and Natal Provinces it was possible for Indians and Asiatics to comply with
the Education test and enter these Provinces, not only from abroad, but from other
Provinces. The Natal Indian who wished to go to the Cape need only pass a low test
under the Cape law, and similarly the Transvaal or Cape Asiatic who wished to go to if
Natal could do so he passed a test under the Natal law. There was no law in the Cape or
Natal as regarded immigration of Asiatics, and therefore, hon. members would
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

461

understand the difficulty, as Asiatics could not at present go to the Transvaal or Free
State. Now the British Government had asked them in the application of this Bill not
to make the position of Asiatics worse than it was. Although they did restrict, under
the Bill, the interprovincial movements of Asiatics, they had asked so far as the Caps
and Natal were concerned not to go further in actual administration than the law
allowed to be done. As regards the position in the Transvaal, added the minister, “We
have a free hand, and we can debar their entrance from other parts of the Union to this
Province.” Whilst it was intended to enforce their law in the interior provinces, they
were prepared to make its administration not more drastic than hitherto under the
existing law. The question arose, what would be the actual position in a Province like
the Free State if this Bill became law? The position there would be that this limited
number of Asiatics who would be admitted annually into the Union under this Act, if
they were educated or professional people; and if, also, they were in limited numbers
as the Union Government might agree to let in.1 These people would be admitted into
the Union, and it would be free for them to settle if they desired in any Province of the
Union, even in the Free State, but the provisions of the existing law in the Free state
made impossible for them to exercise certain trades and professions or to hold
ground. All these prohibitions would remain in force, and the disabilities imposed
there would remain, even if they chose to go there. If Clause 28 did not appear quite
satisfactory, he was prepared to embody an amendment to make it still more explicit
that these people, although they could go anywhere in the Union, even in the Free
State, should be debarred from exercising any of those rights they were at present
debarred from by existing laws in the Free State. The net result in the Free State would
be that the position would be safer from the white point of view, because the present
Free State law was certainly of the most lax character. The present law of the Free
State provided that an Asiatic might come into the Free State, but within two months
of his arrival must apply for permission to remain there. If he got permission he
remained, but the door was opened. The Asiatic came first to the Free State, and after
two months got permission. That was a most unfortunate provision, for if people
were to be prevented from entering the Province it was best to prevent them at the
border. Once in the Province, it was very difficult to remove them. The result would be
that the position in the Free State would be safer. Continuing, the Minister said that a
deal of dissatisfaction arose from time to to time with regard to the administration of
the Immigration Department. Officers of the Department were able and painstaking,
but they were also human beings and no doubt sometimes did make mistakes, which
produced a certain amount of public commotion. Their decisions created some
criticism which he thought avoidable, and he proposed, therefore, to appoint
Advisory Boards at certain points. It was impossible to appoint a Board at every port
of entry into the Union by rail, as well as by sea, but he thought that at Cape Town

1
There appears to be some mistake in the reproduction of the foregoing point.
What Smuts seems to mean, however, is that only those Asiatics would be allowed
into the Free State that have passed the Union immigration test and no other.

462

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and Durban they should have Boards which could consider cases where the
Immigration Officer was about to prohibit a man from entering the country. These
Boards would be so constituted as to provide for fair and impartial consideration to
appeals. Some amendments would be necessary to the Bill, such as that a man
domiciled in South Africa should have leave to appeal to the law courts. He moved the
second reading of the Bill. (Cheers.)
Indian Opinion, 8-6-1912

APPENDIX X
LORD AMPTHILL ON PROVISIONAL SETTLEMENT
IN HOUSE OF LORDS
LONDON,
July 17, 1912
MY LORDS,
I am not going to take up your Lordships’ time with a speech, but I must say a
few words of explanation with regard to the Question which stands in my name. I am
obliged to put this Question because there was no opportunity in another place for
those interested in this supremely important question of the treatment of British
Indians in South Africa to elicit information from the Secretary of State. Your
Lordships will remember that the Secretary of State took the members of the House of
Commons for a tour round the Crown Colonies, which was so interesting and
protracted that there was not opportunity to go further. Those of us who have for
some years past been interested in this question are feeling very grave anxiety at the
present time. Our anxiety is due to two causes—in the first place, that the settlement
which was promised so long ago, promised so definitely and so hopefully by the late
Secretary of State for the Colonies, has again been postponed; and, in the second
place, that the management of the settlement is now in other hands. General Smuts,
who was Minister for the Interior, was personally pledged to carry out a settlement
which, as we believe, had been agreed upon as satisfactory, not only by the Indian
community in South Africa, but also by His Majesty’s Government and by the
Government of India. But now, unfortunately, the Bill has been postponed, and the
office of Minister of the Interior is in other hands—in the hands, I believe, of Mr.
Fisher, who unfortunately we know to be, I will only put it this way, less amicably
disposed towards the British Indian community than was General Smuts. We should
like to know most particularly whether the fact that there is a new Minister of the
Interior will make any difference as regard the settlement, and also, of course, why
exactly it has been found necessary to postpone this settlement.
Your Lordships will remember that more than a year ago we were assured most
confidently and hopefully by the noble Marquess, the Leader of the House, who was
then Secretary of State, that the settlement was close at hand, that he was really
confident it would be brought about. Perhaps I may remind your Lordships what that
settlement was. The essence of the settlement was the repeal of the Transvaal Act No.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

463

2 of 1907, which was so hurtful to the feelings of our Indian fellow citizens in South
Africa. That Act, which served no useful purpose and only acted as a humiliation and a
soreness to the Indians in South Africa, was to be repealed, while the rights of minors
were to be safe-guarded and the principle of the restriction of Asiatic immigration—to
which the Indians themselves assented and which they recognized as inevitable and
reasonable even—was to be that there should be no racial bar on the Statutes of the
Colony. That was the one thing they had been contending for—that Indians should
not be excluded on account of their colour. “If you must exclude us”, they said, “let it
be by administrative differentiation. Do it because it is a matter of economics
convenience, but do not do it on the ostensible ground that you think we belong to an
inferior race.” We had hoped that the settlement might have been brought about long
ago. It has been twice postponed. Therefore the first thing I want to know is what are
the exact causes of the postponement, and then I should like to know whether His
Majesty’s Government are satisfied that the Bill which has recently been before the
Union Parliament does actually fulfil those conditions of settlement to which I have
referred. I know that there are competent lawyers in South Africa who say that it does
not fulfil those simple and plain conditions, but that the racial bar is maintained in
another form. What is the opinion of His Majesty’s Government on that point? And
supposing they are not satisfied, what steps have they taken, are they taking, or are
they going to take to set that right?
Then it is also alleged—I speak subject to correction, but it is one of the
points on which I am asking the noble Lord for information—that this Bill does
deprive Indians in the Coast Provinces of rights which they have hitherto held
undisputed. Is that the case or not? His Majesty’s Government, in the Despatch of
October, 1910, I think it was, said that no settlement of the Transvaal Indian trouble
would be acceptable if it diminished the rights of Indians in other provinces. All
along it was the profession of the South African Government, long before the Union,
that they did not wish to diminish the rights of Indians who were already lawfully
resident in that country. Lord Selborne, when he was High Commissioner, made that
the keynote of his statements on the subject. He said he did not wish in any way to
treat Indians who were lawfully resident in the country one whit less well than they
had been treated before. The only things he stuck out for was that no more were to be
admitted, with the reasonable exception, which has been agreed to now by all parties,
that the few educated men who are required for the natural life of the community, as
ministers of religions, as doctors, and as lawyers, should be admitted. The number of
six per annum was given as a probably reasonable limit to the requirements of the
community. I hope it is not the case that, after competent examination, it has been
found that this new Bill does actually diminish the existing rights of Indians in the
country, because, if that were so, it would be a very grave and unpardonable breach of
faith. I trust, therefore, that we shall hear that His Majesty’s Government have
examined very carefully into that point and have been in friendly communications
with the Union Government about it.
But there is one more word which I must say in order to explain the object of

464

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

my question, and that is, that the spirit of this settlement, which we were told was so
near at hand, seems to have been violated during this period of delay. It was because
we were allowed to expect that there would be an immediate settlement that the Indian
community themselves agreed to drop their passive resistance movement. It was
because we were told that a settlement was at hand that friend of the Indian community
in this country stayed their hand and have since shown considerable reticence and
self-restraint. We have waited most patiently, we have not bothered the Government
with Questions and Motions in Parliament, we have treated them with very
considerable trust and confidence and have waited patiently for a long time before
asking them again what they were doing in regard to this question. I say that
advantage has been taken of this delay to violate the spirit of the settlement. The
spirit of the settlement was to treat Indians who were lawfully resident in the country
as well as possible. I must show what I mean by quoting some instances. In the first
place, the Transvaal Supreme Court have taken a very serious course in deciding
against the introduction of plural wives married according to the law of Islam, and
there has been a notorious case in which it has been decided that the second wife of
Mahomedan cannot be admitted into the Transvaal. It is going further than that. It
seems to me to be part of a very deliberate movement, for there is now an attempt to
secure a decision against the admission of Mahomedan wives at all into the country
on the ground that polygamous marriages are not recognized by the Transvaal law.
From there it would only be a step to declare that the offspring of these marriages are
illegitimate. I need not enlarge upon that point. I need only appeal to your Lordships’
imagination. Your Lordships have only to think for a moment what the consequences
would be in India, in Egypt, in every part of the Empire where there are thousands of
His Majesty’s loyal Mahomedan subjects, if an affront, and insult, of this kind were
levelled at the Mahomedan religion. Surely the whole spirit of rule under the British
flag wherever it was flown has been religious toleration. There seems to me
absolutely no ground for departure from that principle, and surely, whatever the risk
may be, it is the duty of His Majesty’s Government to uphold that principle wherever
there are British citizens under the British flag. That is a very serious matter. Apart
from everything else, a necessary question, if the movement is allowed to continue,
is the breaking up of homes, the wives not being allowed to come in or being turned
out of the country, the separation of families, the ruin of business, the expulsion of
men whose right to be in the country has never been questioned, and consequences
which I leave to the imagination of any one of your Lordship who will take the
trouble to give the matter a thought. I want to know what His Majesty’s Government
have done in regard to this decision of the Supreme Court of the Transvaal. Have they
pointed out how fatal would be the consequences of carrying this movement any
further? Have they protested? What has been the nature of their protest, and what
answer have they received?
There is another matter, and that is the growing tendency on the part of the
immigration officers to exercise arbitrary power. On one case I had occasion to
correspond with the Colonial Office, but I got vary little satisfaction. That case
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

465

showed this, that even of an Indian can prove his right to be in the country to the
satisfaction of the Supreme Court, it is within the power of the immigration officer to
keep him out. That was proved by the decision in that particular case. It is said—I
want to know whether it is the case or not—that the present Bill increases the
arbitrary powers of the immigration officers. General Smuts, in introducing the Bill,
did make some sort of apology for what he regarded as the occasional excesses on the
part of the immigration officers. On a par with this action of the immigration officers
is the exclusion of children of lawful residents in the country by the Portuguese
officials at Mozambique at the instance of the Immigration Department of the Union.
What has been the consequence of this? It is a very serious consequence, and I cannot
understand for the life of me why more notice has not been taken of it. The result is
that the Germans are imitating our example. In German East Africa they are proposing
anti-Indian legislation on the ground that we are pursuing the same course. What will
be our position as a nation before the people of India if we are obliged to confess that
we cannot protest against this exclusion by a foreign country because it is merely
what we are doing ourselves? There are other matters which are serious enough,
though they are smaller. For instance, the growing tendency to exercise the trade
licensing laws in Natal with the apparent object of making it impossible for Indians
to have a right to be in Natal, whose right has never been questioned, with the object
of compelling them to leave the the country. The same is being done, during this
period of delay of which I have spoken, with the Township Act in the Transvaal and
the Gold Law. The tendency of the regulations, which seem to be unlawful
regulations, under that Act is to force Indians into Locations. I should have thought
that His Majesty’s Government, of all people, would instantly object to and resent
any attempt to force Indians into Locations. That was the test of Chinese slavery. The
one test was that Chinese labourers were obliged to live in Locations. What, then is
the Government answer to and their justification of this deliberate tendency to force
Indians into Locations?
I could give scores of instances of the way in which advantage has been taken
of this Bill to oppress—there is no other word—the lawful Indian residents in the
Transvaal. What I want to know is whether His Majesty’s Government have been
taking note of these oppressive sets, whether they have done anything to protect His
Majesty’s subjects, our Indian fellow subject, who are in South Africa and have every
right to be there, whose right have never been questioned. I emphasize that because it
is not a case of immigrants who have forced their way in without permission. I do
hope the noble Lord who is going to answer me will not give that answer which I
have often heard before, and which I dare say the occupants of the Front Bench
opposite think good enough for me. It is not good enough for those on whose behalf
I speak. It is not good enough for anybody who regards this question from the point
of view of common sense and the interests of the Empire as apart from the ordinary
devices of political parties in Parliament. That answer is that you cannot interfere
with a self-governing Colony. That comes to be satisfying to many people, but it is a
rotten answer, a stupid answer. In the first place, there is no question of interference.

466

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Let me remind you of the Malecka case. If you can interfere with the Government of a
foreign country, over which you cannot possible exercise any compulsion, in order
to secure the reversal of the acts of a Court of Justice on behalf of one single person
who was only half British citizen if she was a British citizen at all, then surely you
have a right to do something, to say something, to make a bargain, to come to an
understanding, about thousands of persons who are wholly British citizens, and to
that understanding with people who are your own national kinsmen, who are under the
British flag, who are under the authority of our Sovereign, and with whom—and that
is the point—we have absolutely vital interests in common. If you cannot come to an
agreement with our kinsmen in our Dominions oversea about matters which concern
the whole welfare of the Empire, then I say that the Empire itself cannot have any
existence in fact.
I wish to Heaven that I had the power or the knowledge which would
enable me to create public opinion and propitiate those wizards of the Press who,
for good or for evil, influence our destinies in the same way as opinion was
created and the Press were propitiated in regard to the Malecka case. Ten
thousand times justification has there been during the last five years in the case of
our Indian fellow subjects in Transvaal; and if the pressure which. I refer to in
the Malecka case was potent to move the Government in this country to
action, to oblige then to interfere, with a foreign country over whom we have no
power of control, how much more, had I known the trick, would it have been possible
to move them into action in regard to our Indian fellow subjects in Transvaal? I hope I
have made it clear to the noble Lord what are the exact points on which I wish to have
an answer.
Indian Opinion 7-9-1912

APPENDIX XI
UNION MINISTERS’ MINUTES FOR IMPERIAL GOVERNMENT
REGARDING TOWNSHIPS AMENDMENT ACT (1908)
A
June 16, 1911
With reference to His Excellency the Governor-General’s minute, of the 12th
instant, No.15/139, transmitting a telegram from the Right Hon’ble the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, asking for Ministers’ observations on the petition of the
British Indian Association, copy of which was enclosed in His Excellency’s minute
of 8th May, and on the question raised by the South Africa British Indian Committee
in their letter of the 5th May, on the subject of the effect of Section 130 of the
Transvaal Gold law, Ministers desire to state that they do not think that is necessary
to review the situation which has arisen under Law No. 3 of 1885, and subsequent laws
dealing with the rights of Asiatics to own or otherwise hold property outside
Locations and Bazaars.
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

467

The grievance to which attention is particularly drawn in the enclosures to the
Governor-General’s minute refers to certain police action which has been taken at
Klerksdorp under Section 130 of the Precious and Base Metals Act of 1908. The
reference by the British Indian Association to the Townships Amendment Act, 1908,
is not understood by Ministers, as no provision such as is alleged to exist is
contained in that Act.
With regard to the Section of the Precious and Base Metals Act referred to,
Ministers wish to point out that that law deals primarily and almost entirely with
mineral and mining rights, from which Coloured people have always been excluded
under the provisions of the Mining Law of the Transvaal. No doubt the language of
Section 130 is wide enough to cover all rights conferred under the Act of 1908 as well
as under previous Gold Law; but there is no intention of interfering with the business
or rights of carrying on business which Indians have acquired and exercised previous
to the enactment of Act 35 of 1908. Ministers are informed that the Stands at
Klerksdorp in reference to which action has been taken were clandestinely acquired for
business purposes by Indians subsequent to the passive of the Act, and in
contravention of the Section referred to. They understand that action has been taken
at the instance of the local trading community, which is profoundly exercised over
the rapid ousting of white traders by the Indians. Ministers are, however, causing
further enquiries to be made in order to avoid as far as possible any harsh application
of the provisions of Section 130 of the law in question.
J. C. SMUTS
B
December 2, 1911
With reference to His Excellency the Governor-General’s Minute No.15/170,
of the 1st September, on the subject of the position of British Indians under the
Transvaal Townships Amendment Act of 1908 and the Transvaal Gold Law, Ministers
have the honour to state that the Courts by their recent judgment in the Tamblin case1
seem now to have finally interpreted the meaning and scope of Section 130 of Act
(Transvaal) No.35 of 1908, so for as it affects the right of occupation of Stands by
Coloured persons under lease from white holders on proclaimed areas outside
townships.
1

At Roodepoort, one Alfred Tamblin was charged under Section 130 of the
Gold Law of 1908 for subletting a mining Stand to two Asiatics, Ahmed Khan and
Abdulla Khan. His counsel argued that under the old Gold Law, an owner had the right
to sublet his Stand to Coloured persons and that under Section 77 of the present Gold
Law, Coloured persons were entitled to acquire rights to Stand, but the case was
remanded. Subsequently, a Krugersdorp magistrate found Tamblin guilty and
sentenced him. On appeal, the Transvaal Division of the Supreme Court Africa
acquitted Tamblin and ruled that the Asiatics in question were protected by Section 77
of the new Gold Law. Indian Opinion, 24-6-1911 & 2-9-1911.

468

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

With regard to the position of such persons in townships within mining areas
it is, an His Excellency will be aware, one of the conditions attaching to freehold
grants in Stand townships and private townships that the land shall not be occupied
by Coloured persons. Ministers, however, desire to repeat the assurance they have
already given that they do not propose to interfere with vested rights in such
townships which were acquired by individuals prior to the date of such grants; but it is
impossible for them to allow attempts in the direction of the acquisition of new
rights to be made without taking action. In this connection they desire to add that the
leaders of the Asiatic community appear to be making an organized attempt to invade
townships where Asiatics had no rights before, and public opinion amongst the
European community is, consequently, becoming greatly exercised; so much so that
Ministers will, in all probability, be compelled to take action under the Townships
Act to enforce the conditions contained in the title-deeds.
S. W. S AUER
Indian Opinion, 27-4-1912

APPENDIX XII
GOKHALE’S LETTER TO GANDHI
THANET HOUSE,
231-2, S TRAND,
LONDON, W. C.
July 27, 1912
DEAR MR. GANDHI,

I wired to you the day before yesterday to inform you definitely that I have
booked my passage by the Saxon, which sails from Southampton on 5th Oct[ober].
This means that I shall reach Cape Town on 22nd Oct[ober] and it will give me about
24 days in South Africa, and I must leave Durban for Bombay on 16th Nov[ember.]
Last Saturday I had a letter from Lord Crewe, offering me a seat in the proposed Royal
Commission on Public Services in India and I have accepted the offer. But the
Commission will not begin work till the beginning of January next. So that will not
now necessitate my starting for South Africa earlier than 5th Oct[ober]. Miss Polak
tells me that she has written to you by the letter going out today about the difficulty I
have had in the matter of my booking my passage. This morning, however, I had a
letter from Sir Owen Phillipps, Chairman of the Union Castle Company, telling me
that things would be put right and that everything would be done to make my
travelling comfortable If Sir Owen’s reply had been unsatisfactory, I had meant to
write to the papers and several editors—Mr. Spender of the Westminster Gazette, Mr.
Gardiner of the Daily News, Mr. Massingham of the Nation and a member on the staff
of The Times would have vigorously taken up the matter and Mr. Ramsay MacDonald
had intended asking questions in the House. Mr. Harcourt, too, whom I met at a lunch
the other day at the house of the Spenders, was very angry and had asked me to let him
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

469

know if Sir Owen’s reply failed to give me satisfaction. However, I don’t think
anything should now be done in this matter, though in a way I am sorry to drop it, as
the question of principle involved in it remains more or less unsolved.
Miss Polak also tells me that she has written to you to suggest that she should
pay a visit to South Africa this autumn so as to be able to deal here with first-hand
knowledge with our S. A. problems. I entirely agree with her, & I do hope most
earnestly that you will approve her proposal. I have been least that enormous
difficulties she has to contend against in this office, & the least that can be done to
help her in her work is to give her an opportunity to acquire a first-hand
knowledge of South Africa. From every point of view, her idea is the right one.
If the question of expense is likely to deter you from approving it, I undertake to raise
the hundred pounds which her visit will cost, on my return to India. Please therefore
approve her plan & authorize her by wire to engage her passage.
I leave for the continent on 5th Aug[ust]. Letters received here at the National
Liberal Club (Whitehall Place, S. W.) will be forwarded to me wherever I may be.
Yours sincerely,
G. K. GOKHALE
From a photostat of the handwritten original: S. N. 5672

APPENDIX XIII
POLAK’S LETTER TO INDIA GOVERNMENT ON GOLD LAW AND
TOWNSHIPS ACT (1908)
THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY,
SIMLA
April 19, 1912
[SIR, ]
In view of the recent publication of the White Paper [Cd. 6087], containing
“correspondence relating to the position of British Indians under the Gold Law and
Townships Amendment Act, 1908, of the Transvaal”, and especially of paragraph 2
of the Union Government’s Minute (Enclosure in No. 9), at page 17 thereof, I have
the honour, on behalf of the Indian community of the Province, to offer the following
observations.
2.
Law 3 of 1885, operating against the Native races of Asia, excludes Indians
and other Asiatics from the ownership of landed property, except in Bazaars or
Locations.
3.
The Transvaal Administration, however, have declined to grant them freehold
or long leasehold title of landed property in such Locations, but have permitted them
to acquire leases, of 21 years only, of the Stands into which these Locations are
divided, and, in Johannesburg, a monthly tenancy is alone allowed.

470

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

4.
In spite, however, of the legal prohibition against the ownership, by an
Indian, of landed property, the custom grew up of the creation of virtual trust,
whereby European friends of Indian traders took nominal transfer of certain
properties, which, however, were bought and paid for by the Indian, and virtually
owned by them, These properties were acquired, not for speculative purposes, but for
the furtherance of legitimate business interest, and the virtual Indian owners, as a
rule, built substantial and modern structures thereon, costing many thousands of
pounds in the aggregate, as residences for themselves and as business premises.
5.
Of the fact that these transactions were not secret means of defeating the law,
there is sample evidence.
6.
Before Law 3 of 1885 came into force, Messrs Mahomed Ismail, Indian traders
of Klerksdorp, bought at public section certain Stands in the Township, upon the
condition of the payment of monthly licences thereon, and the Stands were registered
in their name. It became customary amongst the Klerksdorp Stand-holders to pay the
Stand licences half-yearly, and Messrs Mahomed Ismail made payment in this way.
After some time, an anti-Indian agitation arose, the Republican Government
intervened, and summarily confiscated the Stands without compensation to the Indian
owners, who strongly protested against this unwarranted act of spoliation. After
lengthy negotiations, the Government notified the Indian traders that they would be
permitted to resume the ownership of the Stands, upon condition that these were
registered in the land registered in the name of some European. The condition was
accepted, and the land was so transferred, at the suggestion of the authorities
themselves.
7.
The late Mr. Aboobaker Amod, the pioneer Indian trader in South Africa,
bought in 1885, a certain Stand, in Church Street, Pretoria, before the law was
enforced, but transfer was not granted before that date. The Indian owner died, and
transfer was refused direct to the heirs, but granted to certain European nominees on
their behalf. The injustices of the situation was realized by the new Transvaal
Government, in 1907, who, in Act 2 of that year, endeavoured to provide for transfer
to the heirs. The property had meanwhile been registered in my name. On an
application to the Supreme Court, however, it was held that the provision of Act 2
had been so worded as to preclude transfer to the hiers, and, in framing Act 36 of
1908, provision was made, in terms, for the transfer to them of the Stand registered in
my name, the entire transaction being recorded in a clause of a Transvaal Act of
Parliament.
8.
In the year 1905, in the appeal case of Syed Ismail and Another v. Jacobs, N.
O., such virtual trusts were distinctly recognized by the Court. Some months
afterwards, when the legality of such transfers was questioned by the Deeds Office, and
legal opinion was sought by the Department, it was held that the Supreme Court’s
decision in this case put the legality of such transactions beyond dispute, and a
number of similar ones took place subsequently to that time.
9.
In the debate in the House of Lords, on the 19th February last, on Lord
Ampthill’s questions dealing with the operation of the Townships Amendment Acts
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

471

of 1908 and 1909, Lord Selborne, late High Commissioner for South Africa and
Governor of the Transvaal, put the matter of the openness with which those
transactions were carried out beyond all doubt. In the Official Report, he is recorded to
have said: “A British Indian subject might not own the freehold of land and he might
not engage directly in a mining enterprise. I say here, my Lord, what I
have said before to a Transvaal audience. I do not think these two restrictions
are justifiable. I think they are not only not justifiable, but they are very
foolish, because they are perfectly inoperative. A British Indian is forbidden to hold
land in freehold, but he holds it absolutely securely through the medium of a white
man with whom he makes arrangement.”
10.
Whilst, then, it is plain that the law denied Indians the right of ownership of
fixed property, it is equally evident that, apart from certain extra incidental expenses,
the wealthier members of the Transvaal Indian community suffered little actual
hardship from the denial, by season of the growth of a custom of indirect ownership,
recognized both by the Courts and by the Government of the Colony.
11.
If the Imperial Government and the Transvaal Indians pressed for the repeal of
the prohibition clause of Law 3 of 1885, it was not only for the protection of the less
well-endowed members of the community, but for the removal of a racial disability,
imposed neither upon the aboriginal Natives nor upon any other Coloured British
subjects in the Transvaal.
12.
It should be realized that, whilst individual Indians have availed themselves of
the right of indirect ownership of landed property, the right was held prospectively
by every single member of the community.
13.
In the year 1908, the Townships Amendment Act (No. 34 of 1908, Transvaal)
was passed, amending the Townships Act of 1907, and dealing specifically with
Stands in a township. This measure, and a subsequent amending Act of 1909, were
framed in general terms, i.e., they contained no racial differentiation, and made
provision for the conversion, in certain circumstances and on certain conditions, of
leasehold titles into freehold titles.
14.
Whilst, however, in ordinary circumstances, no leaseholder is obliged to make
application for the grant of freehold, in certain circumstances, such an application is
rendered compulsory.
15.
These Acts provided for the publication of regulations (see Appendix1 to
White Paper [Cd. 6087]), setting forth the conditions upon which the freehold grants
are to be made.
16.
These conditions were published under Government Notice (Transvaal)
NO.640 of 1909, and sub-clause (d)reads as follows: “It (the land granted by the deed
of grant)or any portion of it shall not be transferred, leased, or, in any other manner,
assigned or disposed of to any Coloured person;and no Coloured person, other than
the domestic servants of the registered owner or his tenant shall be permitted to reside
1

472

Not reproduced here
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

thereon or in any other manner occupy the same. Any branch of the foregoing
condition shall entitle the Government of the Transvaal to cancel this grant and
resume possession of the land hereby granted, without payment of any compensation
in respect of buildings or structures erected on or improvement effected to the said
land.”
17.
It should be observed that, though the parent law is couched in
nondifferential terms, the conditions of the Crown Grant, which from an integral
part thereof, impose a serious racial disability, in that they deprive the Indian
community of the indirect right, hitherto possessed by them, of holding fixed
property, Moreover, in the circumstances alluded to in paragraph, 14 hereof, Indians
at present owning landed property indirectly may be at a future date, deprived of their
property lawfully acquired without compensation.
18.
The Indian community hold that these conditions are ultra vires of the law, or,
in the alternative, that the law itself is ultra vires, and, therefore, unconstitutional.
They hold that the tenor of the Townships Amendment Acts of 1908 and 1909 is such
as to preclude the framing of differential regulations. On the other hand, the Transvaal
Constitution of 1906 provides that differential legislation must be reserved for the
expression of Royal wishes thereon. The Acts of 1908 and 1909, being in general
terms, were not reserved, but were assented to immediately by the Governor. The
differential regulations framed thereunder were never brought before the cognizance of
Parliament, nor were they submitted to the scrutiny of His Majesty’s Secretary of
State. It is held that the requirements of the Constitution have not been complied
with, and that the regulations are of no force or effect.
19.
Partly in order to extend his business and partly to test the validity of the
regulations, Mr. Ahmed Moosa Bhyat, in the latter part of last year, in the exercise of
the right of indirect ownership of landed property hitherto recognized by the Courts
and Government of the Province, purchased the freedhold of certain Stands in the
Township of Boksburg, which were registered in the name of Mr. Lewis Walter Ritch,
Barrister-at-Law, lately the Secretary of the South Africa British Indian Committee, in
England, and presently practising as an Attorney of the Supreme Court of the Union
of South Africa, in johannesburg.
20.
Previously to that date, the white inhabitants of the township had combined to
refuse to sell indirectly to Indians any Stands therein, with the object of maintaining
Boksburg as a white preserve, confining the Indian residents to the Location. Mr.
Bhyat, having been able to find a seller, purchased the aforementioned property,
erected, at great expense, suitable premises, and opened a general dealer’s business
therein, having previously obtained from the Government a licence thereto.
21.
The trade jealousy of Mr. Bhyat’s European commercial rivals has, however,
been aroused, he has been the victim of an organized boycott, and the white residents
have induced the Union Government to institute proceedings against Messrs Ritch
and Bhyat for the cancellation of the title-deeds, a declaration of forfeiture of the
property, ejectment, and damages. In order to defend their position, they are both
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

473

faced with costly litigation, whilst Mr. Bhyat stands to lose his property and his
business, without compensation therefor. It should be added that his stock has been
supplied to him by European wholesale firms of Johannesburg, to whom he has been
known, as a trader of high integrity, for many years.
22.
In bringing these facts to the notice of Government, I am desirous of
emphasizing the growing tendency in the Union to legislate by means of regulations
of which both the Union parliament and the Imperial Government are wholly
ignorant. I wish also to make it clear that the Indian community are claiming no new
right or privilege, but merely the retention of one that existed up to the date of the
enforcement of the aforementioned Acts, whilst, nevertheless, not withdrawing the
demand for the repeal of the differential provisions of Law 3 of 1885, whose injustice
has been the subject of many remonstrances by the Imperial authorities, both before
and since the War.
23.
I venture, accordingly, to request Government to use their utmost efforts to
prevent the imposition of further disabilities upon an already overburdened
community, and to secure the preservation to them of a right, actual and potential,
always hitherto recognized and justified.
[Yours, etc.]
H. S. L. P OLAK
Indian Opinion, 6-7-1912

APPENDIX XIV
GLADSTONE’S MINUTE ON MEETING WITH GOKHALE
GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
PRETORIA,
November 19, 1912
CONFIDENTIAL
SIR,

Mr. Gokhale came to luncheon with me yesterday, and subsequently we
discussed the British Indian question.
2.
I ascertained from the Prime Minister that some of his Ministers and
many persons in the Orange Free State had taken umbrage at what they considered a
minatory passage in one of Mr. Gokhale’s speeches. But I am satisfied that Mr.
Gokhale has no intention of making a threat. He wished to present to his audience the
position in India, and the danger which might result from a continued stated of
friction in South Africa. The danger is all the greater because of inevitable
exaggerations, and the efforts of revolutionaries to use the grievances of British
Indians in South Africa against the British in India. In one of his speeches at Durban,
he made his intention clear. He stated that he is sincerely anxious for the passage of
the Immigration Bill, though he is disturbed at Mr. Fischer’s apparent wish to

474

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

substitute a Canadian test for the Australian. Ministers however say that Mr.
Fischer’s idea is his own and not theirs. Mr. Gokhale appeared to attach much more
importance to the licensing question and the £3 tax.
3.
As regards the £3 tax, the Prime Minister told me that he
thought it would be possible to meet Mr. Gokhale’s view, though there might be
strong opposition in Natal. From what Mr. Gokhale said I gathered that the Prime
Minister had given him a satisfactory assurance.
4.
The licensing question is likely to cause trouble, but for the present I
think it is best to concentrate effort on the passage of the Immigration Bill. I am
convinced that the Prime Minister and General Smuts ate sincerely anxious to put it
through, and probably the irritation caused by Mr. Gokhale’s somewhat indiscreet
language on the position in India will die down.
5.
Mr. Gokhale has seen most of the influential members of the Unionist
party, including Mr. Alexander, who was the protagonist against the Bill. From all of
them he says he has received satisfactory promises of support when the Bill is before
Parliament. He had arranged to see Sir Thomas Smart before sailing form Lourenco
Marques on Monday.
6.
Last session the Second Reading of the Bill was taken dangerously late.
Its fate was sealed by the silence of the Opposition leaders, and the determined
opposition of some of the rank and file.
7.
I can hardly believe that the Unionist party will again fail next session
to support General Botha and his colleagues in their endeavour, in the highest
interests of the Empire, to remove grievances in South Africa which are productive of
grave mischief and danger in India. If the Opposition leaders do their duty to the
Empire next session, and if Minister fulfil their promise to bring in the Bill at an
early date, there seems to be no reason to anticipate another regrettable failure.
8.
Mr. Gokhale expressed his gratitude for the courtesy and consideration
of the Union Government and all the officials concerned in their arrangements
throughout his stay in South Africa for his comfort and convenience.
9.
He will present a report to Lord Hardinge as soon as possible after
landing in India, which in due course will doubtless be transmitted to you.
I have, etc.
GLADSTONE
GOVERNOR-GENERAL
Colonial Office Records: C.O. 551/30

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

475

APPENDIX XV
GOKHALES SPEECH AT BOMBAY 1
December 14, 1912
The Hon. Mr. Gokhale, who was received most enthusiastically, then said:
“Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, I cannot tell you how glad I am to be back
again in India and my joy is further intensified by the kind and cordial greetings
which this great gathering has extended to me and the generous terms in which, you,
Sir, have spoken of my work in South Africa. Your warm welcome joined to the
undoubted satisfaction with which our countrymen in South Africa have regarded the
visit, is to me ample reward for such strain as the work imposed on me while it lasted.
You probably know, what I have publicity stated more once, that my visit was
undertaken in response to an earnest invitation repeatedly presses on me by our great
countryman there, Mr. Gandhi. When I first made up my mind, however to pay the
visit, my idea was to go about the country as quietly as possible to visit all important
Indian centres, to collect such facts as I could concerning the treatment to which our
countrymen were subjected there [and] on my return to lay those facts before the
Government and the people of this country in the hope of stimulating thereby greater
exertion on this side in support of the Indian cause in South Africa . . . When,
however, I reached Cape Town and actually saw how anxious the Union Government
was to treat me with every consideration and how arrangements had already been made
for my meeting not only my own countrymen at all important centres, but also
members of the European community at these centres, the only thing left to me was to
enter whole-heartedly into the spirit of the arrangements and utilize to the full the
opportunities placed within my reach. To have done anything else in these
circumstances would have been to betray the cause which I had gone there to serve and
to show myself unworthy of the confidence which my countrymen there had chosen to
repose in me.”
HOW THE TIME WAS SPENT
Mr. Gokhale then described how his four weeks in South Africa
were spent in visiting important Indian centres, meeting not only thousands
of Indian residents in that country, but also a large number of Europeans,
many of them men of note, addressing meetings somethings sometimes
composed exclusively of Indians, sometimes of Europeans, but more often
mixed gathering of both Europeans and Indians discussing the several phases of the
question in interviews and at conferences with leading men of all shades of opinion
and representing various interests. He was already fairly familier with the Indian side
1
Gokhale arrived in Bombay from South Afica on December 13,
1912, and this speech was delivered on December 14 at a public meeting convened
in the Town Hall by the Sheriff and attended by both Indians and Europeans.

476

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of the question and it did not take him long after his arrival at Cape Town to acquire a
firm grasp of the facts of the case so far as the Indians were concerned. And the access
that he was enabled to have to the European community gave him exceptional
opportunities to acquaint himself with the feelings and opinions of different sections
of the European community. After examining the whole question from every point of
view, Mr. Gokhale met the Ministers—General Botha, General Smuts and Mr.
Fischer—on 14th November at Pretoria in a long interview lasting for two hours,
when they went over the whole ground point by point and there was a full and frank
interchange of views, the Ministers promising a careful consideration of the case
submitted to them and they on their side explaining what they considered to be the
special difficulties of the position. On the following day Mr. Gokhale had an
opportunity of laying the whole matter before the Governor-General, H. E. Lord
Gladstone, and then he left South Africa, feeling satisfied in his own mind that he had
done all that he was capable of and bringing away with him the liveliest recollections
of the wealth of affection lavished on him by his countrymen there, of the extreme
kindness with which the European community had treated him and of the great
consideration and courtesy shown to him by the Union Government.

A P OSITION OF DIFFICULTY
Proceeding, Mr. Gokhale said: “Before I attempt to give you an idea of the
state of things as I found it there . . . I should like to make one or two observations of
a somewhat personal character. The first is about the extreme difficulty of my
position in South Africa. Never before in my life, I assure you, had I to walk on such
difficult and delicate ground, nor did I ever feel so oppressed with a sense of
responsibility as during my four weeks in South Africa . . .
“My second observation will be about my dear and illustrious friend, Mr.
Gandhi. From the moment I landed at Cape Town to the moment I left South Africa and
even afterwards during nearly the whole of my visit to East Africa, Mr. Gandhi was
with me and we were together nearly every moment of our walking hours. He had
taken upon himself the duties of my private secretary, but he was in reality my guide,
philosopher and friend. I do not wish to speak on this occasion of the devoted love
with which he surrounded me but I feel it to be my duty to pay a brief, though
altogether inadequate, tribute to the great work he has done for India in South Africa.

HERO

AND

MARTYR

“Ladies and gentlemen, only those who have come in personal contact with
Mr. Gandhi as he is now, can realize the wonderful personality of the man. He is
without doubt made of the stuff of which heroes and martyrs are made. Nay, more. He
has in himthe marvellous spiritual power to turn ordinary men around him into heroes
and martyrs. During the recent passive resistance struggle in the Transvaal—would
you believe it?—twenty-seven hundred sentences of imprisonment were borne by our
countrymen there under Mr. Gandhi’s guidance to uphold the honour of their country.
Some of the men among them were very substantial persons, some were small traders,
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

477

but the bulk of them were poor and humble individuals, hawkers, working men, and so
forth, men without education, men not accustomed in their life to think or talk of
their country. And yet these men braved the horrors of gaol- life in the Transvaal and
some of them braved them again and again rather than submit to degrading legislation
directed against their country. Many homes were broken in the course of that
struggle, many families disperses, some men at one time wealthy, lost their all and
became paupers, women and children endured untold hardships. But they were touched
by Mr. Gandhi’s spirit and that had wrought the transformation, thus illustrating the
great power which the spirit of man can exercise over human minds and even over
physical surroundings. In all my life I have known only tow men who have affected
me spiritually in the manner that Mr. Gandhi does—our great patriarch, Mr. Dadabhai
Naoroji and my late master, Mr. Ranade—men before whom not only are we ashamed
of doing anything unworthy, but in whose presence our very minds are afraid of
thinking anything that is unworthy. The Indian cause in South Africa has really been
built up by Mr. Gandhi. Without self and without stain, he has fought his great fight
for this country during a period now of twenty years and India owes an immense debt
of gratitude to him. He has sacrificed himself utterly in the service of the cause. He
had a splendid practice at the bar, making as much as five to six thousand pounds a
year, which is considered to be a very good income for a lawyer in South Africa. But
he has given all that up and he lives now on £3 a month like the poorest man in the
street. One most striking fact about him is that though he has waged this great
struggle so ceaselessly, his mind is absolutely free from all bitterness against
Europeans. And in my tour nothing warmed my heart more than to see the universal
esteem in which the European community in South Africa holds Mr. Gandhi. At every
gathering, leading Europeans, when they came to know that Mr. Gandhi was there,
would immediately gather round him anxious to shake hands with him, making it
quite clear that though they fought him hard and tried to crush him in the course of the
struggle, they honoured him as a man. To may mind Mr. Gandhi’s leadership of the
Indian cause in South Africa is the greatest asset of that cause and it was an
inestimable privilege to me that he was with me throughout my tour to pilot me
safely through my difficulties.”

THE P OSITION ANALYSED
Proceeding to describe the position of the Indians in South Africa, Mr.
Gokhale said that the Union of South Africa consisted of four provinces—Cape
Colony, Natal, Transvaal, and Orangia and in the whole Union there was a total
Indian population of about a hundred and fifty thousand persons. Of that, roughly
speaking, about a hundred and twenty thousand were in Natal, about twenty thousand
were in the Cape and about ten thousand were in the Transvaal. In Orangia there were
hardly any Indian, the total number not exceeding a hundred, as some years ago, the
Boer Government of that time forcibly expelled from the Republic all Indian except
such as were domestic servants. Four fifths of the entire Indian population in South
Africa represented indentured labourers, ex-indenturted and their descendants. The

478

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

remainder were free persons who had gone there at their own expense in the wake of
the indentured labourers. One peculiarity of the position which the meeting had to
realize was that there was no educated class among the Indians in South Africa similar
to the educated class of this country—the men who followed, what were called, learned
or liberal professions being so few as to be counted on one’s fingers. The bulk of the
people were either tradesmen or working men and a few were domestic servants. The
traders were most of them petty traders, though some were fairly substantial.
Speaking roughly, there were about two thousand traders and five to six thousand
hawkers in each one of the three provinces mentioned. Of the working men a large
proportion were still serving their indenture, while the rest were ex-indentured
labourers or their descendants. In the Cape Indian could acquire both the municipal
and the political franchise. In the Natal they had the municipal franchise but not the
political and in the two Dutch provinces they were rigorously excluded from both the
municipal and the political franchise. The present immigration law was different for
the different provinces. In cape Colony and Natal Indians could enter only by passing
a test in a European Language and the average number of such immigrants for the last
few years was between 40 and 50 for the two provinces together—a surprisingly
small number. In the Transvaal and Orangia new Indians were at present prohibited
altogether from entering. The traders’ and hawkwers’ licences in Cape Colony and
Natal had to be renewed every year and the grant of new licences lay in the discretion
of local authorities manned almost entirely by the European trade rivals of Indian
traders. In the Transvaal, on the other hand, licences had to be granted as a matter of
course for the mere tender of a licence fee. But there were two laws in force there,
known as the Gold Law and the Townships Act, the combined effect of which was to
make those licences practically worthless. Wherever an area was declared to be a gold
area under those laws, Indians could only reside and trade in special Locations situated
as a rule at some distance from the towns. In Cape Colony and Natal, Indians
could own land or acquire other immovable property, which they could not do
in the Transvaal and Orangia. In addition to these there were several minor
disabilities, including many galling social ones of greater or less severity
in the different provinces. Finally there was hardly any provision for the education of
Indian children. A few primary schools were to be found here and there mostly
maintained by missionary bodies or by the community itself. Throughout South
Africa there was no provision of any kind for the secondary, higher or technical
education of Indian children.

A HEART-RENDING S ITUATION
When the speaker arrived in South Africa and took a broad survey of the Indian
position as he found it, he confessed his heart for a time sank within him. The
position in many ways was truly pitiable and heart-rending. It was well known that
the lot of their countrymen in the Transvaal, hard as it was in the days of the Boer
Republic, had grown far harder since it became a British Province. But it was not so
well known that in Natal and even in the Cape the situation had been steadily getting
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

479

worse since the Union, the harsh anti-Indian Transvaal spirit gradually infecting the
whole Union. Mr. Gokhale found on his arrival that almost every section of the
Indian community throughout South Africa was filled with a serious dread about its
future, a feeling of insecurity, harassment and oppression prevailing generally such
as was bound to demoralize any community. A large proportion of European
population was evidently determined to a make things so intolerable for the Indians
there that they should of their own accord get out of the country. Not only were some
of the laws under which they lived harsh and unjust, but even the administration of
other laws, which in themselves were neither harsh nor unjust, was so oppressive as
to drive the community well nigh to despair. Thus the Immigration Law in regard to
old Indian settlers in the Cape and Natal was being so worked as to fill everyone with
the fear that if he left the country temporarily on a visit to India or elsewhere, he
might have difficulty in getting back. About the same time that Mr. Gokhale arrived
at Cape Town, a case occurred there illustrating what he was saying. At present an
Indian settler in that province wishing to be temporarily absent from the country had
to take out a permit with him specifying the period within which he should return.
And an Indian trader who had thus left with a year’s permit on a visit to India, leaving
his business in charge of his wife and children, returned one day late, owing to his
steamer having been held up four days on the way by a storm. If the steamer had
run according to schedule time, he would have arrived at Cape Town three days
before the expiry of his permit. And yet on the technical ground that he had
not returned within the specified time, he was turned back, his business ruined and
his wife and children put under the necessity of leaving the country. Similarly in
Natal old settlers were provided with domicile certificates which were supposed
to give them the right of going out of the country and coming back whenever
they liked, the only provision being that Immigration Officer should satisfy
himself about the genuineness of the certificates. In exercise of that power even
holders of certificated 15 or 16 years old were being cross-examined, on their
return to Natal after a temporary absence, as to minute details of where they lived,
what they did when they first arrived and so forth. And the smallest discrepancy
between the answers unwarily given by the men and the actual recorded facts was
deemed sufficient to justify the rejection of the certificates, compelling the holders to
return to Indian absolutely ruined men. Now the speaker would put it to his European
friends on the platform how many of them, if they were suddenly asked all sorts of
questions as to when they first came into this country, where they lived, what they did
and so on, would be able to answer such questions without making any mistake.
Again, the question of trading an hawking licences was agitating the Indian mind
gravely throughout Cape Colony and Natal. Both provinces had now clearly entered
on a policy of granting no new licences to Indians as far as possible and of steadily
extinguishing all existing licences as opportunities offered themselves. As those
licences were renewable every year, a feeling of the utmost uncertainty as to what
would happen to his licence when the time for a renewal came filled the mind of every
Indian trader. Businessmen in Bombay would have no difficulty in understanding how

480

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ruinous must be the consequences of such a state of things and how much constant
anxiety about the future must paralyse and finally destroy all business enterprise
among the persons affected. In the Transvaal the steady extension of the gold area
condemning Indian traders to trade and reside only in Locations was in itself a
frightful hardship.

R ELENTLESS O PPRESSION
But some local authorities were carrying the policy of relentless oppression
still further by breaking up old Location if Indians were found to be doing business
successfully in them and ordering them to remove to fresh Locations even more
disadvantageously situated. The speaker had personally visited several Locations and
he could only say that the whole policy involved in them deserved to be denounced in
the strongest terms. They would thus see how gravely disturbed and anxious the mind
of the Indian trading community in South Africa was. The labouring population in
addition to many disabilities laboured under a special grievance of their own which
caused them untold suffering, i.e., the £3 Licence Tax. The speaker had no hesitation
in saying that a more cruel impost it was impossible to conceive. Under it all exindentured Indians in Natal who completed their indentures after 1901 and their
descendants were liable to pay annually £3 each, all males above the age of 16 and
females above the age of 13 being so liable. And for non-payment they were sent to
gaol with hard labour. That under any law a girl of 13 should have to pay £3 a year to
the State and should be liable to be sent to gaol with hard labour for non-payment,
was a thing too horrible to contemplate. If they took an ordinary family of a father,
a mother and two daughters of 13 and 15 with one or two younger children,
they would find that the family had to pay £12 a year for the mere permission to
live in the colony of Natal-and that after the man and the woman had
contributed five years’ labour to the prosperity of Colony under a system of
indenture. Now the average monthly wage of the man might be taken at about 25
shillings and the woman with her two daughters looking after the household might
earn about 16 shillings a month among them—a total income of about £2 a month.
Out of that sum £1 or full one-half had to be given as that miserable Licence
Tax. After that there was rent to pay and the cost of food and clothing and all ordinary
taxes common to the general community. Need anybody wonder that a prominent
member of the Natal Legislature declared openly two years ago that the impost broke
up families, drove men into paths of crime and women into lives of shame? One of the
most harrowing sights at which Mr. Gokhale had to be present was a meeting in
Durban of those who were liable to pay the £3 Tax. About 5, 000 persons were
present. As man after man and woman after woman came forward and narrated his or
her suffering due to the Tax, it was impossible not to feel overwhelmed by feelings of
indignation, pity and sorrow. One old woman of 65 was there who had been to gaol
six times for inability to pay the tax and Mr. Gokhale could not recall the case even
after that interval without emotion. As things stood, unless a fairly satisfactory
settlement was soon arrived at it would not take many years for the Indian community
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

481

of South Africa to be practically harassed out of the country after undergoing great
suffering and losses.

P OSITION OF E UROPEAN C OMMUNITY
That was the position of the Indian community as he found it. He wanted next
to describe to them briefly the position of the European community. It was necessary
to understand that position clearly, to understand their interests, their difficulties,
their view and their sentiments and even their prejudices. They were a handful of
people—only about a million and a quarter in all—in the midst of a vast indigenous
population at a totally different grade of civilization. And the contact between the
two races had already created grave problems—social, political, economic and
moral—which were already filling the European mind in that subcontinent with
uneasiness, misgiving and even dread. And they found in the midst of their difficult
and complicated situation a third element introduced belonging to another
civilization and representing other modes of life and thought. It was true that the
present number of Indians in South Africa was only a lakh and a half against 12_
lakhs of Europeans. But the Europeans felt that there were 300 millions of people in
India and if Indians continued to come freely into South Africa, there was nothing to
prevent several millions from going there and swamping the European community
and practically making the country another India. The fear was based on an absolute
misapprehension, but it was there, deep and strong and general, and no useful purpose
would be served by shutting one’s eyes to it. In addition to this, there was first the
tremendous colour prejudice which existed in that land—a prejudice felt even more by
the Dutch than by the English—and secondly the dread of Indian competition on the
part of small European traders, who felt that they could not hold their own against
their Indian rivals in a fair field, owing to the Indians’ less expensive scale of living.
The combined result of all these causes was the present harsh and oppressive policy
towards Indians—a policy plainly directed to making the lot of the Indians in that
country so hard as practically to compel them to leave the country, or if remain they
must, to remain there as a servile, degraded and depressed community.

A GRAVE S ITUATION
Such was the position—grave, anxious and extremely difficult. What was to be
the way out of it? So long as the European mind in South Africa was dominated by the
fear of serious influx of Indians swamping the Europeans, so long there was no
chance of securing—leave alone absolute equality—even reasonably just and humane
treatment for our countrymen such as would enable them to live in peace and security
and steadily advance to the position of a worthy element in a self-governing
community. Even the best friends of Indians among the Europeans in South Africa—
and there was a small section that could be thus described—were convinced that unless
the fear of being swamped was removed form the European mind, they were powerless
to urge with any effect the plea of more just and more humane treatment for the Indian
community. Another section, a much larger section, that had the sense of fairness to

482

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

feel heartily ashamed of the present policy pursued towards the Indians, would also
then, but not till then, sympathize with the struggle of the Indians against their
present treatment. The Indian community of South Africa itself also clearly felt the
necessity of removing that fear, groundless more or less though it was, in view of the
fact that the average number of free immigrants during the last few years had been
only between 40 and 50—a number, however, which the ordinary European there did
not accept and could not be pursuaded to accept as correct. For some time past,
therefore, the policy of our countrymen in South Africa under the leadership of Mr.
Gandhi was, while insisting on maintaining intact their theoretical rights as equal
subjects of the Empire in the legislation of the country, to strive for such
modification in practice of the present policy of injustice and oppression as would
enable the community to live and proper in peace and security and steadily advance in
status and importance in that land. And even the briefest visit that one could pay to
South Africa would satisfy one that that was the only wise, sound, practical, and
statesmanlike course for the Indians to adopt in existing circumstances. It was in
accordance with that course that in the compromise which was arrived at between Mr.
Gandhi and General Smuts last year, under which the passive resistance movement
was suspended, the Union Government agreed not to make any legislative
differentiation against Indians in the proposed new immigration law. Mr. Gandhi on
his side agreed that in practice the discretion vested in the exicutive administering the
law might be exercised by the administration as it thought reasonable, subject to a
minimum number of Indians being admitted every year to supply the higher needs of
the community and replace its wear and tear in certain direction. That minimum was
six Indians for the Transvaal where under the existing law no Indian whatever was
admitted. For the whole Union a minimum now asked was forty, which was the
present number of free immigrants annually on an average of seven years. The
essence of the compromise was that by removing legislative inequality the
theoretical rights of the Indians as subjects of the Empire should be maintained, while
by agreeing to limitation of new immigrants to the present average number, the fear
of an indiscriminate influx which haunted the European mind should be removed.
Once that was done, the Indians there could struggle far more effectively than at
present for a juster, more equal and more humane treatment in other respects. Mr.
Gokhale’s own work in South Africa had been done on those line. He did not ask for
an inch either more of less than what the Indian community there had been asking.
His one advantage was that he was enabled to have access to the European community
as no other Indian had it before him and he was thus enabled to address his appeal for
justice and humanity to the very heart and conscience of the European community,
speaking to it members face to face.

THE OPEN-DOOR P OLICY
On his return to India the previous day Mr. Gokhale said he was astonished to
learn that the view was expressed in some quarters that the line taken by him in South
Africa was wrong, that he should have stood out there for the open door in practice
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

483

and nothing less and that the surrender of India’s rights in the matter already made by
Mr. Gandhi had been confirmed by him. All he would say in regard to that criticism
was that those who passed it did not show any real grasp of the problem in South
Africa. The supreme question of the Indian community there was not to urge a policy
of the open door for more Indians to come there, but to secure such an amelioration of
the conditions under which they live that their lot might become more bearable and
they might have opportunities of growing into an important part of a self-governing
community. And the only chance of their securing that was if they approached the
whole question in a practical spirit. Mr. Gokhale could easily have stood out for the
open door in practice in South Africa. He could have made brave speeches on that
subject and could have returned to his country feeling that he had made brave
speeches. But the cause of the Indian community in South Africa could not been been
served that way. The European community would have been made, if anything, more
implacable in their determination to get rid of the Indians at all costs and the eventual
expulsion of Indians from that subcontinent would only have been hastened by such a
course. As regards the charge brought against Mr. Gandhi, it amounted to an utter
travesty of the actual facts. After all, their right to equal treatment in the Empire today
were largely theoretical. But even to maintain them theoretically intact Mr. Gandhi
had been four times to gaol and had inspired hundreds of his countrymen to do the
same. Those theoretical rights would no doubt steadily grow more and more into
rights enjoyed actually in practice, but that was a matter of slow growth and it
depended in a large measure upon the improvement of their position in India itself.

P RESENT OUTLOOK
Concluding, Mr. Gokhale said: “Ladies and gentlemen, before I sit down you
may well ask me what is now the outlook in South Africa. Well, the catalogue of our
grievances there is so long that as General Botha said to me, in the course of our
interview, even the strongest Ministry that could be conceived in South Africa today
could not be strong enough to remedy those grievances all at once and if it attempted
any such thing it would straightway be hurled from power. The situation is such that
though we must keep up the struggle ceaselessly, we must not expect anything else
than a slow, though steady, amelioration of our lot. But I think in certain matters
relief will be forthcoming almost immediately. In the first place, I fully expect that
the provisional settlement, arrived at between Mr. Gandhi and General Smuts as
regards the passive resistance movement which the Government found itself
powerless to carry through Parliament last session, will be successfully carried
through this year. The actual working of the Immigration law also will, I expect,
soon become milder and more considerate. Then that outrageous impost, the threepound license tax, will, I fully expect, go in the course of this year. In fact, I may
mention that Ministers have authorized me to say that they will do thier best to
remove the grievance as early as possible. In the matter of education also, the
position will materially improve and the actual administration of laws such as the
Gold Law and Townships Act will tend to become less and less burdensome. In one

484

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

respect, however, I fear the position will not soon change for the better, and it is
even possible that it may even grow worse before it become better. And that is in
regard to trading licences. Here, however, our community is fighting for bare justice.
And it has behind it in the matter the sympathy not only of the Government of India
and of the Imperial Government but also of the better mind of the European
community in South Africa. And in the struggle, if only we in this country do our duty
properly, our countrymen there will win. And this brings me to my concluding
observations. Ladies and gentlemen, I strongly feel—many friends of our cause in
England and South Africa also feel—that so far India has nor done her duty by her
children across the seas, struggling to uphold her honour amidst unparalleled
difficulties. One man amongst us, it is true has set a great and glorious example—my
friend Mr. Ratan Tata—whose name I assure you is held in the deepest affection and
gratitude by the Indian community in South Africa. A committee in Madras has also
done some work and the committee here has collected some funds, but all these taken
together amount to but little, considering the issues involved. Ihope, however, that
whatever may have been our remissness in the past, we shall do better in this respect
in the future. I hope we shall all take in the future more interest in what will go on in
South Africa, follow the developments more carefully and enable our countrymen
there to feel that we stood solid and united behind them. I hope too that we shall
collect and send much larger funds in aid of the cause there than we have hitherto
done. Remember, the community there is already exhausted financially and otherwise
by its long struggle. Remember also, that it requires assistance not only in waging
this most unequal struggle, but for providing educational and other facilities for the
moral and material well-being of its children. Remember finally that it is no merely
the interests of the Indian community in South Africa alone that are involved in the
struggle, but our whole future as a nation in this Empire is involved in it. In
proportion therefore as we do our duty in this matter, shall we have advanced more and
more towards a position in this Empire more worthy of the self-respect of civilized
being. In proportion as we do this duty, shall we have deserved well of our country, of
our children and our children’s children.
Indian Opinion, 25-1-1913 & 1-2-1913

APPENDIX XVI
GOKHALE’S ANSWER TO SILBURN AND F. C. HOLLANDER
A
Speaking at Durban on November 11, 1912 at a banquet in Gokhale’s honour,
Silburn had said among other things, “He had followed Mr. Gokhale’s tour through
the country, and had noticed that few word of warning had been given him as to what
the position really is. Many thought the British and the Boers were hostile to his
countrymen, but that was not the case. He, as a politician did consider that there were
grievances under which the Indians were suffering, and that they should be remedied as
VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

485

speedily as possible and personally he should give his assistance in removing the £3
tax. But it had to be remembered that a very difficult native racial problem confronted
us, and that the introduction of a third element tended to make it more complex rather
than to ease it. Furthermore, the people on the spot here were the people to deal with
it, and he asked Mr. Gokhale to go back to India, and to let the Government of India
and the Government of England know that this problem was to be dealt with in South
Africa, and that no interference either by Great Britain or by India would be tolerated
by the British people of this country.” To this, Gokhale, in his speech had rejoined,
“He knew enough of English history and the traditions of the English race to realize
that if anything were to be got from Englishmen it would not be got in these ways,
but by appealing to their sense of fair play of justice. . . . He would be the very last
person, then, to do anything to diminish the right of self-governing dominion. But
the position was peculiar. The Indian Government could not approach, the South
African Government directly; they could only approach them through the Imperial
Government, and the Imperial Government was therefore their sole protection in
these matters....he asked Major Silburn what he would do if he were in India and in his
shoes. He thought that he would do what any Britisher would do, namely, represent
his cause to the Imperial Government . . .”
B
Gokhale, in his speech at Maritzburg on November 7, 1912, had said, “On the
one side was a small European community in a vast country scattered among a
vast number of Natives . . . the two races were on different grades of civilization,
and their contact had already produced difficulties. . . . The European community
naturally wished to safeguard its own civilization. . . . Then the Indian factor had
been introduced. Their numbers at present were small, but there was a fear in the
mind of many Europeans that unless drastic measures were taken their numbers
would grow, and they would possibly one day swamp the European community.
He had come to think that a large part of the conditions of which the Indians,
perhaps rightly, complained, was due to that fear. Then came trade jealousies,
the Europeans fearing that, with his simpler standard of living, the Indian
would undersell him. That was a question, however, which had two sides.
The complaint came from the small trader, who was inconvenienced, not from the
community as a whole which, if it was interested in anything, was interested in
buying as cheaply as possible.” (Indian Opinion, 16-11-1912). On November 8,
Hollander1 , in his speech of welcome at the Duration Town Hall selectively recalled
only two observations from the above speech and quoted them, saying, “He ventured
to refer specially to two utterances in Maritzburg. Mr. Gokhale was reported to have
said that he realized that where there were tow grades of civilization growing up
alongside each other, contact with each other must necessarily bring about serious
difficulties . . . He welcomed these two utterances, because they proved at once that
1

486

F. C. Hollander, mayor of Durban
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

their distinguished visitor was prepared to approach his task in no narrow-mined
spirit, that he was prepared to realize . . . there would perhaps be more than one point
of view. He was certain in his own mind, also, that Mr. Gokhale had realized since he
had been in South Africa that there was another and even more outstanding question,
and one which perhaps overshadowed every other question in the country: it was what
we called the Native question, and all the questions affecting race and colour were so
intermingled the one with the other anyone who attempted to approach the solution
of one of them must find himself confronted with the greatest difficulty, because of
the presence of the other.”
From Hon. Mr. Gokhale’s Visit to South Africa, 1912

VOL. 12: 15 JULY, 1911 - 8 MARCH, 1913

487

