1. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
Y. M.,

August 23, 1930
MY DEAR ANAND,

I have your delightful letter. You do not tell me how you fared
physically. I have already written to you. I am glad Vidya is with you
and has seen a little of the Ashram life. Tell me how you are in mind
and body.
Love.
BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand
T. Hingorani

2. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 23, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

I have your letter. After Shanta and Kalavati have tried the
medicine given by the doctor, write to me and tell me what effect it
has. If the latter has taken a pledge to join the struggle, I think she
cannot leave. But you have already written to Father. You should both
do as your hearts bid you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5249

3. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

August 23, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. If any questions arise with regard to the vow
of not indulging the palate, ask me. 1 You have not mentioned
anything about your health in your letter this time. I therefore assume
1

For Gandhiji’s observations on the control of the palate, vide “Letter to
Narandas Gandhi”, 12-8-1930.
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

1

that you are well. Do you go for a walk every day? Physical exercise
is necessary.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Blessings to Brother. When you write to Mother and Father, say
that I often think of them.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

4. LETTER TO VIDYA HINGORANI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 23, 1930
CHI. VIDYA,

I have your letter. Look upon the Ashram as your home. Try to
improve your Hindi handwriting still further.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

5. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 24, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I have your love letter written during your journey to Madras. I
am hoping that this strain will not prove too much for you. Your
descriptions are all valuable. Yes, I had a strenuous time during the
Nehrus’ visit. It was with difficulty that I was able to spin 375 rounds
without doing which I should feel most unhappy. The box wheel is
working very well and undoubtedly causes less strain. It gives more
satisfactory work now that I have put on it the thin mal you sent me.
The thick mal was causing trouble. The carding-bow is working to
perfection. It imposes no strain on me. Kakasaheb rolls the slivers. He
has yet to learn carding which he proposes to begin shortly. The
translation of the bhajans continues as before regularly but slowly
2

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and I see no immediate chance of greater output. I am keeping well.
The weight fluctuates. Last week I regained one pound out of two or
three I seemed to have lost. There has been no loss of energy. The
water here is hard and therefore constipation requires a little handling.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
You will be glad to know that the tant has not once broken.
From the original: C.W. 5409. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9643

6. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 24, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I didn’t see any letter from you in the mail this week. You must
have received my letters to Jayaprakash and to you. My weight, which
was going down, has again increased by one pound. What is your
daily programme of work these days? Vallabhbhai told me that
Jayaprakash was not in good health. How is that?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3367

7. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 24, 1930
CHI. SUSHILA (MANILAL),

You seem to have dried up? Is it out of compassion for me or
through laziness? If you had compassion for me, you would write to
me. How is Sita? Why does she fall ill so often? I hope you are not
being miserly about fruit. What is the condition of your ears? How do
you keep generally? How is Tara? How is Nanabhai’s health? Think
about other similar questions yourself. I hope you, always find
Manilal with a smile on his face and joking. Does he read anything in
jail?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4770

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

3

8. LETTER TO RASIK DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 24, 1930
CHI. RASIK (DESAI),

Did you uphold my honour? Did you keep the vows which you
had taken? Give me all the details. How did you spend the time? Were
you lazy? Were you talkative? Did you keep good health? Reply to
these and many other similar questions. What friends did you make?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6617

9. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 24, 1930
CHI. MRIDU,

I have preserved your last letter. I did not reply to it. But after
reading about your heroism I cannot help writing. Deal patiently with
the situation. I would advise you not to do anything on an impulse.
Does it need mentioning that pure sacrifice calls for careful thought, a
sense of discrimination, restraint and patience? Since Khurshedbehn
was with you, I felt reassured and satisfied.
Blessings from both of us.
MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11109. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

10. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 24/26, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

This time I got the letters earlier than usual, that is, on
Wednesday instead of on Thursday. Among the letters is one for Satis
Babu. He is Krishnadas’s guru, Satis Mukherjee. His address is
Harra Road, Calcutta. I have forgotten the number of the flat. You will
find it somewhere in my papers. Surendra is likely to know it. Or
you will get it in the Ashram office itself. How is Devdas’s health?
Tell him that I often think of him. Has Ramdas’s health recovered? I
have before now asked for the names of those who have been
released. It would be better if against each name the quantity of
carding and spinning done by the person is also mentioned. If, when
you do not get a cloth-lined envelope, the ordinary envelope is tightly
secured by a string, like a packet sent as book post, there will be no
risk afterwards. Keshu seems to have lost health again.Take immediate
and effective measures to help him to recover. Giriraj’s illness has
lasted quite long. His blood must be impure. I have not received the
guide to Singer’s. If you find it difficult to secure a copy, give up the
attempt. I understand what you write about Hasmukhrai. Give him the
letters if and when you think you may. Read the letter to Zaulinger
before giving it to her. Hence I don’t write about her in this letter.
You must have sent an acknowledgment to Dhangopal. How is
Jamnadas? Do the authorities let you visit him occasionally?
Tuesday morning, August 26, 1930
Non-possession is allied to non-stealing. A thing not originally
stolen must nevertheless be classified as stolen property if we possess it
without needing it. Possession implies provision for the future. A
seeker after truth, a follower of the law of love, cannot hold anything
against tomorrow. God never stores for the morrow; He never creates
more than what is strictly needed for the moment. If, therefore, we
repose faith in His providence, we should be assured that He will give
us every day our daily bread, meaning everything we require. Saints
and men of faith have always found justification for it from their
experience. Our ignorance or negligence of the Divine Law, which
gives to man from day to day his daily bread and no more, has given
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

5

rise to inequalities with all the miseries attendant upon them. The rich
have a superfluous store of things which they do not need, and which
are therefore neglected and wasted; while millions starve to death for
want of sustenance. If each retained possession only of what he
needed, no one would be in want and all would live in contentment.
As it is, the rich are discontented no less than the poor. The poor man
would fain become a millionaire, and the millionaire a
multi-millionaire. The poor are not content if they get their daily
needs. They have a right, however, to get enough for their daily
needs and it is the duty of society to help them to satisfy them.
The rich should take the initiative in dispossession with a view to
universal diffusion of the spirit of contentment. If only they keep
their own property within moderate limits, the starving will be easily
fed and will learn the lesson of contentment along with the rich.
Perfect fulfilment of the ideal of non-possession requires that man
should, like the birds, have no roof over his head, no clothing and no
stock of food for the morrow. He will indeed need his daily bread, but
it will be God’s business, and not his, to provide it. Only very very
few, if any at all, can reach this ideal. We ordinary seekers may not
be repelled by the seeming impossibility. But we must keep the
ideal constantly before us, and in the light thereof critically examine
our possessions and try to reduce them. Civilization, in the real
sense of the term, consists not in the multiplication, but in the
deliberate and voluntary reduction of wants. This alone promotes
real happiness and contentment and increases the capacity for service.
Judging by this criterion, we find that in the Ashram we possess many
things the necessity for which cannot be proved, and we thus tempt
our neighbours to steal. If people try, they can reduce their wants and,
as the latter diminish, they become happier, more peaceful and
healthier. From the standpoint of pure truth, the body, too, is a
possession. It has been truly said that desire for enjoyment creates
bodies for the soul and sustains them. When this desire vanishes, there
remains no further need for the body and man is free from the vicious
cycle of births and deaths. The soul is omnipresent; why should she
care to be confined within the cage-like body, or do evil and even kill
for the sake of that cage? We thus arrive at the ideal of total
renunciation and learn the use of the body for the purposes of service
so long as it exists, so much so that service, and not bread, becomes
for us the staff of life. We eat and drink, sleep and wake, for service

6

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

alone. Such an attitude of mind brings us real happiness and the
beatific vision in the fulness of time. Let us all examine ourselves
from this standpoint.
We should remember that non-possession is a principle
applicable to thoughts as well as to things. A man who fills his brain
with useless knowledge violates that inestimable principle. Thoughts
which turn us away from God or do not turn us towards Him are
unnecessary possessions and constitute impediments in our way. In
this connection we may consider the definition of knowledge
contained in Chapter XIII of the Gita. We are there told that humility,
amanitvam, etc., constitute knowledge and that all the rest is
ignorance. If this is true—and there is no doubt that it is true—much
that we hug today as knowledge is ignorance pure and simple, and
therefore only does us harm instead of conferring any benefit. It
makes the mind wander and even reduces it to a vacuity, and
discontent flourishes in endless ramifications of evil. Needless to say,
this is not a plea for inertia. Every moment of our life should be filled
with mental or physical activity, but that activity should be sattvik,
tending towards truth. One who has consecrated his-life to service
cannot be idle for a single moment. But we have to learn to
distinguish between good activity and evil activity. This discernment
goes naturally with a single-minded devotion to service.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Kakasaheb’s weight has again increased by one pound, and his
cheerfulness has also increased. I have regained one pound from what
I had lost. For the past three days, I have been taking boiled
vegetables in addition to curds. You will see that today’s letters are put
into one of the envelopes received from you, fresh slips of paper
being pasted on it. You can use the envelope again.
BAPU

[PPS.]
There are 53 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

7

11. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 29, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I got your letter. No one should be amused at my writing on
slips of paper or be angry with me for that reason. That is the proper
thing for me to do. Though I write on such slips, I try to make each
letter as interesting as I can in the time I get.
Why are you alarmed by the suspicion that you have got some
disease in your body? What would it matter even if you had a disease
and that too a grave one? “The body may live or perish, what should
endure is one’s devotion to God.’’1 We have learnt at least this in the
Ashram, if nothing more. If you fast for a few days, the body will be
cleansed. You require Kuhne baths, hip-baths and particularly friction
sitz-baths. If you do not know about them, ask Kanta or Radha. I
think they know. You may also read about them in Kuhne’s book.
Whenever women suffer from any disease, it becomes necessary to
know the facts about their monthly periods. Are they normal with
you? Are they regular in appearance and duration? Are they painful?
If necessary, consult a doctor.
I have not read Arvind Babu’s book. I alone know how limited
is my reading. My main interest is in reading the book of nature. I
shall never finish reading it.
You should have enough sleep. You should observe the rule of
sleeping from 9 to 4.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10232; also C.W. 6680. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

1

8

From the Marathi saint Namdev
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

12. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI MADHAVJI THAKKAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 29, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

Was there any letter to which I did not reply? I do think every
day about you and all other sisters. I would have been happy, too, if
you had spent a few months with me. However, both of you have so
trained yourselves, though you lived away from me, that I don’t know
what more you would have gained if you had stayed with me. It is
good that the children still live on fruit, etc., and that you have started
on it again. Why has not Dahibehn written to me? My blessings to all
sisters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6797

13. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 29, 1930
CHI. MANU (TRIVEDI),

Gangabehn writes and tells me that you have become impatient
to go out [for work]. This was before you got my letter. I hope that
my letter has overcome your restlessness. Can a soldier ever ask why?
He goes on doing, silently and cheerfully, the work assigned to him.
Let Kakasaheb’s condition be fulfilled. It is not long now before he
will be released. If you are still not satisfied let me know.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7761

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

9

14. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 29, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have your letter. If Kamalabehn willingly lets you go and there
is an opportunity for work in Bihar, it is your first duty to take it up. I
hope Jayaprakash is keeping good health. Take care of your health. I
got Mrityunjay’s letter.
I am more or less all right. I have at present substituted fresh
vegetables for raisins and dates in my diet. I shall watch the effect of
the change. Don’t worry about me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3368

15. LETTER TO MAITRI GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 29, 1930
CHI. MAITRI,

You should write regularly to me. I feel happy to hear from
Gangabehn that she is satisfied with you. I hope you keep good
health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6218

10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

16. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 29, 1930
CHI. MANGALA,

I have your letter. Your handwriting is tolerable but there is
much scope for improvement. You should see Radhabehn’s1
handwriting. In seeking to tie up Narandasbhai, you girls are
yourselves properly tied up. While I bathe I shall have to test you in
Ch. XVIII 2 . Is you pronunciation correct? You must write out that
chapter from memory a couple of times in neat handwriting.
Why did you fall ill?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11088. Courtesy: Pushpa Naik

17. LETTER TO RANI VIDYAVATI
Y. M.,

August 29, 1930
CHI. VIDYAVATI,

Narandas has given me news of you. I hope you are well in
body and mind. What is Laxmi Devi doing? Both of you should write
to me. It is good that jang Bahadurji has gone to jail. My blessings to
him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Rani Vidyavati papers. Courtesy: Gandhi National
Museum and Library

1
2

Radhabehn Gandhi
Of the Bhagavad Gita

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

11

18. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 29, 1930
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I have your letter. Both of us feel that you should take with you
both Dhiru and Rambhau 1 if they are willing to go. In each other’s
company, they will stay there longer and you will have less to worry
about. With either Dhiru or Rambhau alone, you will have to go out of
way to give him company. At present, I would not like you to be in
that predicament.
I had forgotten about Damodardas and therefore wrote nothing
about him. I would not have seen any harm if he had come, and you
had accompanied him. But I like the present arrangement more.
I understand what you say about the spinning-wheel. My
argument was altogether different. I appreciate that it does not bother
you. May your faith be rewarded. You have mentioned the right
shlokas. If you have the self-confidence demanded by the shloka, if
you are hard-working and if your idealism is based on reality, you
will certainly find the rest of the means and will also acquire the
required knowledge. So, I have no objection at all if you intend to
persist in your efforts. The only condition is that you are not to do it
at the cost of your health. If your health had reached beyond
recovery stage, I would not have allowed you to go to the hills. This
time you are going with the blessings of Kashi and Chhaganlal. No
doubt blessings from both of us are always with you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original S.N. 32962

1

12

Rambhau Khare, son of Narayan Moreshwar Khare
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

19. LETTER TO GULAM RASOOL QURESHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 30, 1930
CHI. QURESHI,

I was happy to read your letter. You did a good thing in
studying the Koran. Get hold of The Mystics of Islam and read it. You
may write to me anything you wish to. Regular inclusion of curds in
your diet will probably benefit you. Take moderate and regular
exercise. When you visit Imam Saheb next time, tell him that both of
us think of him with great love, and his name frequently comes up in
our conversation. Ask Amina to write to me. Blessings from us both to
both of you.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6651

20. LETTER TO SHARDA C . SHAH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 31, 1930
CHI. SHARDA,

Your letters come quite regularly. If one’s mind indulges in
thoughts of pleasure, one might as well get it done with the body. But
when the mind itself does not want it, it would indeed be better if one
works away at something with concentration. In matters like these,
children cannot be forced to do anything. If you are feeling too lazy
for udyoga 1 the feeling can by persistent effort be got out of the
system. You must realize the necessity of work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9888. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala.

1

Industry; here the Ashram activities like spinning, etc.

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

13

21. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

August 31, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I got your letter. It would be well to try out Premabehn’s diet. I
think it is necessary to resume regular sitz-baths. It can easily be done
in my bathroom. It also has sunlight filtering through the thatched
roof. You should have your periods regularly. If you do not you must
immediately take remedial measures. When the date is due it would
help if you took a steam-bath once or twice. I think Radhabehn knows
how it is done. They follow your suggestions in making the bread
here. They say there is still some defect. I have conveyed to them the
improvement suggested by Gangabehn.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Are there any letters from Krishna?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

22. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

August 31, 1930
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

Your letter. Do go to Almora if there is an opportunity. How is
your mental state? Convey my blessings to Krishnan Nair.
Continue writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2384

14

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

23. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[About August 31, 1930] 1
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter though written in a shaky train was wonderfully
legible. If you had not drawn my attention, I should not have noticed
any difference at all.
I think I have got my control over the travelling wheel and I
hope to gain greater speed than now. As it is I am saving about an
hour and there is much less fatigue. But your labour has not gone in
vain. Kakasaheb was using the Gandiv. But it did not give him
satisfaction. And he was not able always even to do one unit, i.e., 160
rounds. On your wheel he has no difficulty in making one unit in two
hours which is the least he has vowed to give to the charkha.
You did the right thing in transferring to the 2nd class. There
can be no harm and certainly no shame in going 2nd class, when the
3rd is clearly impossible or next to it.
I am glad you had a quiet 36 hours with Miss Petersen. Is not
your sister somewhere in Madras?
Send my love to Andrews, Reginald and those others who may
be thinking of me.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5407. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9641

24. LETTER TO AMRITLAL THAKKAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 1, 1930
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,

Why should you think that because you have done no work for
me you cannot write to me? Really speaking, is there any work which
is mine? All of us should do God’s work to the best of our ability and
1

From the reference to the travelling wheel it appears this was written some
time after August 18; vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 18-8-1930 In another letter to her of
October 5, Gandhiji says he did not miss a week in writing to her. Since no letter
dated between August 24 and September 7 is available, it is likely this was written on
or about August 31, 1930.
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

15

according to our lights. And you are doing that every moment of
your life. Kaka and I often talk about you. If there is anything about
which you think you should write to me, please do so. I don’t ask
you, and I do not wish, that you should write to me merely for the
sake of writing. I know that you keep, and would be ready to give, an
account of every minute of your time.
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Kanya Ashram Rajat Jayanti Smritigranth, p. 16

25. LETTER TO MOTIBEHN
Silence Day [September 1, 1930] 1
CHI. MOTIBEHN,

Ba told me that you feel depressed. Why should you? One who
reads the Gita and reflects over its teaching should never feel
depressed. How can that man or woman who daily meditates on God
and believes that He always dwells in our hearts ever feel depressed?
Try and get rid of your depression.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3736

26. LETTER TO GANGABEHN JHAVERI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 1, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (JHAVERI),

I have an impression that Nanibehn and you owe me a reply to
one letter of mine. There is nothing particular to write about this time,
and I write this letter only to tell you that I think about all of you
every day. I know that you devote all your time to work. That is the
right thing to do and is sure to give proper results in course of time.
Devotion to duty is the fabled wish-fulfilling tree.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3101
1

The original letter has a remark, in a different hand, “about 1-9-30”. Monday
fell on September l.

16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

27. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
September [1, 1930] 1
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

You are too greedy. However long my letter, you will think it
too short. I send between 50 and 60 letters to the Ashram every week,
and I must write them during whatever time I can spare from
spinning. Hence, and also because I don’t have much to write about
from here every time, I write short letters in which, however, I say all
that I wish to say. If I had to write only one or two letters, I could fill
them with long description of conditions here. The letter meant for
the whole Ashram is always long. Since Mirabehn cannot read
Gujarati, I write a long letter to her. All other letters are short and to
the point. Look; I have filled half this letter explaining why I write
short letters. Kakasaheb and I were weighed on Friday; my weight
came to 104 and Kakasaheb’s to 114. This is a fairly good increase.
We pray regularlyevery day. The Gita is also read daily. Recently I
have given up raisins and dates and, instead, eat boiled vegetables.
Generally I eat sweet potatoes and uncooked tomatoes every day or
some other vegetable like cabbage. This diet has done me no harm.
The weight has increased and constipation has been relieved. You
must have read the reports about the negotiations with the
Government. There was no truth in them at all. Let me know your
future programme, and also Jayaprakash’s. Has your mother-in-law
recovered now? I am sure you will nurse her with the utmost love.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3370

1

The source has only September, as the original seems to have been damaged
here. However Bapuna Patro-10: Shri Prabhavatibehnne, pp. 33-4, gives this date.
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

17

28. LETTER TO DURGA GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 1, 1930
CHI. DURGA,

Are you cross with me? You don’t even write to me and yet will
be cross. What sort of justice is this? Is this the way of the Ashram or
that of the hills? Or are you simply shirking letter-writing by
pretending to be cross? How much do you spin daily? What other
work do you have? Do you regularly get up in the morning? How
many chapters have you memorized?1
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalata, p. 31

29. LETTER TO V. G. DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 2, 1930
BHAISHRI VALJI,

I got your letter. If it is only your gums which bleed, you
should gargle with salt water three or four times a day and in the
morning massage them with a finger using pure, finely-powdered salt,
taking care not to spit out the saliva meanwhile. You may use coconut
oil instead of salt. You should also gargle with some potassium
permanganate solution. If the bleeding does not stop with this, you
should consult a dentist. Sometimes such bleeding is brought about
even by indigestion. You should eat daily a little quantity of
uncooked green vegetables.
Were you forced to eat rotlas of bajra and jowar or did you eat
them to keep company with the other prisoners? I have seen you
refusing to take advantage of the shade even when sitting under a
green tree. I should like to get, if available, an account of the carding
and spinning done by everyone.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7406. Courtesy: V. G. Desai
1

18

The original was written in Gujarati.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

30. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[September 2, 1930] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got the Ashram packet on Thursday. If you get the discourses
printed, send one or two copies here. It would help if I had with me a
copy of the previous discourse. Send me also the set of Ashram rules.
If Surendra, Madhavji and Madhavlal have still not written to me, ask
them to write. Others, too, should write. Kusum’s hand must be all
right. Has Mrs. Zaulinger calmed down a little? Try to win her over.
I remember to have written to someone and given permission
for a translation of the Autobiography in Swedish. Accept the sum of
£11 and credit it in whichever account you think proper.
You utilized the occasion of Rakshabandhan very well. Take
care of Lilavati. If she gets fainting fits, she should come over to the
Ashram and rest. If you come to know Devdas’s weight, mention it in
your letter. In that place he should improve. You can get a garland
made from yarn spun by Jamnalalji. The spinning-wheel gives me no
difficulty now. The speed has not increased much, but it is good
enough. This is a portable spinning-wheel and it required a thin mal.
If anyone knows a simple method of making a mal, he should write to
me. Abbas had explained it to me, but I have forgotten it. One packet
of cotton has been exhausted. Together with what I can make from
the second one, I shall have enough slivers to last a month. But
someone is bound to visit Kakasaheb. Send one packet with him.
Vallabhbhai, too, has a visitor once a week or fortnight. You may send
the packet with one of the persons. If neither course is possible, send
some cotton by post as you did previously. There is no hurry at all.
Along with it, send some pieces of leather for repairing the heels of
my sandals. If no such pieces are available and if you can find my
pair of sandals, send that. There was an extra pair during the march.
Kanti will probably know about it. There was one in the Ashram too.
Kusum may know about it, or the person to whom she has handed
over charge of these things.
1

As in the printed source.

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

19

FEARLESSNESS. As every reader of the Gita knows fearlessness
heads the list of the divine attributes enumerated in Chapter XVI.
Whether this is merely due to the exigencies of metre or whether the
pride of place has been deliberately yielded to fearlessness, is more
than I can say. In my opinion, however, fearlessness richly deserves
the first rank assigned to it. For it is indispensable for the growth of
the other noble qualities. How can one seek Truth or cherish love
without fearlessness? As Pritam says: “The path of Hari is the path of
the brave, not of cowards.” Hari here means Truth. And the brave are
those armed with fearlessness, not with the sword, the rifle and the like.
These are taken up only by those who are possessed by fear.
Fearlessness connotes freedom from all external fear, fear of
disease, bodily injury and death, of dispossession, of losing one’s
nearest and dearest, of losing reputation or giving offence, and so on.
One who overcomes the fear of death does not surmount all other
fears, as is commonly but erroneously supposed. Some of us do
notfear death, but flee from the minor ills of life. Some are ready to
die themselves, but cannot bear their loved ones being taken away
from them. Some misers will put up with all this, will part even with
theirlives, but not their property; others will do any number of black
deeds in order to uphold their supposed prestige. Some will swerve
from the straight and narrow path which lies clear before them, simply
because they are afraid of incurring the world’s odium. The seeker
after Truth must conquer all these fears. He should be ready to
sacrifice his all in the quest of Truth, even as Harishchandra did. The
story of Harishchandra may be only a parable; but every seeker will
bear witness to its truth from his personal experience and, therefore,
that story is as precious as any historical fact.
Perfect fearlessness is almost impossible to cultivate. It can be
attained only by him who has realized the Supreme, as it implies
freedom from delusion. One can always progress towards this goal by
determined and constant endeavour and by cultivating self-confidence
As I have stated at the very outset, we must give up all external
fears. But the internal foes we must always fear. We are rightly afraid
of animal passion, anger and the like. External fears cease of their
own accord when once we have conquered these traitors within the
camp. All such fears revolve round the body as the centre, and will
therefore disappear as soon as we get rid of attachment for the body.
We thus find that all external fear is the baseless fabric of our own
20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

vision. Fear has no place in our hearts when we have shaken off
attachment for wealth, for family and for the body. “Enjoy the things
of the earth by renouncing them’’ 1 is the sovereign precept. Wealth,
family and the body will be there just the same; we have only to
change our attitude towards them. All these are not ours, but God’s.
Nothing whatever in this world is ours. Even we ourselves are His.
Why then should we entertain any fear? The Upanishad, therefore,
directs us to give up attachment for things while we enjoy them. That
is to say, we must be interested in them not as proprietors but only as
trustees. He on whose behalf we hold them will give us the strength
and the weapons requisite for defending them against all usurpers.
When we thus cease to be masters and reduce ourselves to the rank of
servants, humbler than the very dust under our feet, all fears will roll
away like mists; we shall attain ineffable peace and see Satyanarayana,
the God of Truth, face to face.
Kakasaheb had not so far taken a categorical vow of spinning;
he has done so now. The vow is that he will spin for not less than two
hours and not less than 160 yards daily. He has also started carding.
He spends most of his time in physical activities. He maintains good
strength. For the last four days or so I have given up raisins and dates
and eat instead boiled vegetables, raw tomatoes, etc. If this122
dietdoes not meet my needs, I shall add fruit. I have made the change
in order to overcome constipation. If the change proves economical,
so much the better. I will not be obstinate about any item.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There are 58 letters.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8123. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi; also
Bapuna Patro-9: Shri Narandas Gandhine, Pt. I, pp. 112-5

1

Ishopanishad, v. 1

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

21

31. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 3, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I got both your letters together. Which other women are with
you at Sarbhon? Only God is completely free from the pride of the
ego. Everyone among us, however, should strive daily to get rid of
such pride.
“The brave never run away from a battle; fight against lust and
anger, pride and greed.” Only yesterday I was trying to translate this
bhajan. 1 I then felt its beauty more powerfully than I had done
before. For us that is the only real battle. If we fight on, we are bound
to win in the end.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 531. Courtesy: Vasumati Pandit; also
S.N. 9286

32. FRAGMENT OF A LETTER
September 3, 1930
We may claim our experiment to have succeeded only if the
Ashram women can swim across even in a storm. We need not worry if
we stumble. Whenever we try to climb, there is always a risk of falling.
We must take that risk. We may not knowingly take such a risk, but we
should not turn back if circumstances force us to take it. We should
learn to adopt towards women the same liberal attitude that we do
towards men. Will not Lord Krishna protect our honour? We sing a
bhajan which says that He will. Let us show that faith in our actions.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6798

1

For Gandhiji’s translation of this bhajan by Kabir, vide “Ashram
Bhajanavali”, 15-12-1930 under the date 5-9-1930.

22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

33. STATEMENT TO T. B. SAPRU AND
M. R. JAYAKAR 1
September 5, 1930
DEAR FRIENDS,

We have very carefully gone through the letter, written to you
by H. E. the Viceroy, dated 28-8-1930. You have kindly
supplemented it with a record of your conversations with the Viceroy
on points not covered by the letter. We have equally carefully gone
through the Note signed by Pandit Motilal Nehru, Dr. Syed Mahmud
and Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, and sent by them through you. This
note embodies their considered opinion on the said letter and the
conversation.
We gave two anxious nights to these papers and we had the
benefit of a full and free discussion with you on all the points arising
out of these papers. And as we have told you, we have all arrived at the
definite conclusion that we see no meeting ground between the
Government and the Indian National Congress so far as we can speak
for the latter, being out of touch with the outside world. We
unreservedly associate ourselves with the opinion contained in the
Note sent by the distinguished prisoners in the Naini Central Prison,
but these friends expect us to give in our own words our view of the
position finally reached in the negotiations for peace, which you, with
patriotic motives, have carried on during the past two months at
considerable sacrifice of your own time and no less inconvenience to
yourselves. We shall therefore allude as briefly as possible to the
fundamental difficulties that have stood in the way of peace being
achieved.
1

After meeting Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and M. R. Jayakar the Viceroy addressed
a letter to Sapru on August 28, vide Appendix Viceroy’s letter to Sir T.B. Sapru”,
28-8-1930. Sapru and Jayakar then met Motilal Nehru, Jawaharlal Nehru and Dr. Syed
Mahmud at Naini Jail on August 30 and 31 and showed them the Viceroy’s letter as
also notes of conversation with him, vide Appendix “Notes of Conversations with
Viceroy’s”, 5-9-1930. The Nehrus then gave them their final note addressed to
Gandhiji, vide Appendix “Note From Nehrus”, 31-8-1930.. With these documents
Sapru and Jayakar saw Gandhiji and other leaders at Yeravda Jail on September 3, 4
and 5. A draft of this Statement available in Gandhiji’s hand in S.N. 1927 bears some
changes and additions in a handwriting other than Gandhiji’s.
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

23

The Viceroy’s letter, dated July 16, 1930, is, we have taken,
intended to satisfy, so far as may be, the terms of the interview Pandit
Motilal Nehru gave to Mr. George Slocombe on June 20th, and the
statement submitted by Mr. Slocombe to him on June 25, and
approved by him. We are unable to read in the Viceroy’s language in
his letter of July 16 anything like satisfaction of the terms of the
interview or the said statement. Here are the relevant parts of the
interview and the statement.
In the interview it was stated: “If the terms of the Round Table Conference
are to be left open and we are expected to go to London to argue the case for
Dominion Status, I should decline. If it was made clear, however, that the
Conference would meet to frame a constitution for a Free India subject to such
adjustments of our mutual relations as are required by the special needs and
conditions of India and our past association, I for one would be disposed to
recommend to the Congress to accept the invitation to participate in the
Conference. We must be masters in our household, but we are ready to agree to
reasonable terms for the period of transfer of power from a British
administration in India to a responsible Indian Government. The Conference
must be to meet British people to discuss these terms as nation to nation and
on an equal footing.’’1

The statement contained the following:
“The Government would give private assurance that they would support
the demand for full responsible Government for India subject to such mutual
adjustments and terms of transfer as are required by the special needs and
conditions of India and by her long association with Great Britain and as may
be decided by the Round Table Conference.”2

Here is the relevant part of the Viceroy’s letter:
It remains my earnest desire, as it is that of my Government—and I have
no doubt also that of His Majesty’s Government—to do everything we can in
our respective spheres to assist the people of India to obtain as large a degree
of management of their own affairs as can be shown to be consistent with
making provision for those matters in regard to which they are not at present
in a position to assume responsibility. What those matters may be,
and what provisions may best be made for them, will engage
the attention of the Conference, but I have never believed that, with

1
2

24

The draft did not have this paragraph.
The draft did not have these paragraphs.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

mutual confidence, on both sides, it should be impossible to reach an
agreement.1

We feel that there is a vast difference between the two positions.
Where Pandit Motilalji visualizes a Free India enjoying a status
different in kind from the present as a result of the deliberations of
the proposed Round Table Conference, the Viceroy’s letter merely 2
commits him and his Government and the British Cabinet to an
earnest desire3 to assist the people of 4 India to obtain5 as large a
degree of the management of their6 own affairs as can be shown7 to be
consistent with making provision for those matters in regard to which
they are not at present in a position to assume responsibility. In other
words, the prospect held out by the Viceroy’s letter is one of getting,
at the most, something more along the lines of reforms commencing
with those known to us as the Lansdowne Reforms.
As we had the fear that our interpretation was correct in our
letter of 15-8-1930 signed also by Pandit Motilal Nehru, Dr. Syed
Mahmud and Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, we put our position negatively
and said what would not in our opinion satisfy the Congress. The
letter you have now brought from H.E. the Viceroy reiterates the
original position taken up by him in his first letter, and, we are grieved
to say, contemptuously dismisses our letter as unworthy of consideration and regards discussion on the basis of the proposals contained in
the letter as impossible.
You have thrown further light on the question by telling us that
“if Mr. Gandhi definitely faced the Government of India with such a
question”, i.e., the right of secession from the Empire at India’s will,
the Viceroy would say, that “they were not prepared to treat it as an
open question”. We, on the other hand regard the question as the
central point in any constitution that India is to secure and one which
ought not to need any argument. If India is now to attain full
1
2
3
4

The draft did not have these paragraphs.
This word is added in the draft.
The draft has “a desire”.
The words “the people of ”, not found in The Hindu version, were added in the

draft.
5

The draft has “get”.
The draft has “her”.
7
The words following this do not appear in the draft. Gandhiji simply wrote
“take” indicating that the remaining part of the sentence, quoted from the Viceroy’s
letter, was to be copied here.
6

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

25

Responsible Government or full Self-Government or whatever other
term it is to be known by, it can be only on an absolutely voluntary
basis, leaving each party to sever the partnership or association at will.
If India is to remain no longer a part of the Empire but is to become
an equal and free partner in the Commonwealth, she must feel the
want and warmth of that association and never otherwise. You will
please observe this position is clearly brought out in the interview
already alluded to by us. So long, therefore, as the British Government
or the British people regard this position as impossible or untenable,
the Congress must, in our opinion, continue the fight for freedom.
The attitude taken up by the Viceroy over the very mild
proposal made by us regarding the salt tax affords a further painful
insight into the Government’s mentality. It is as plain as daylight to us
that, from the dizzy heights of Simla, the rulers of India are unable to
understand or appreciate the difficulties of the starving millions living
in the plains whose incessant toil makes 1 Government from such a
giddy height at all possible.
If the blood of innocent people spilt during the past five months
to sustain the monopoly of a gift of nature 2 next in importance to
poor people only to air and water has not brought home to the
Government the conviction of its utter immorality, no Conference of
Indian leaders as suggested by the Viceroy can possibly do so. The
suggestion that those who ask for the repeal of the monopoly should
show a source of equivalent revenue adds insult to injury. This attitude
is an indication that if Government can help it the existing crushingly
- expensive system shall continue to the end of time. We venture
further to point out that not only does the Government here, but
Governments all the world over, openly condone breaches of
measures which have become unpopular but which for technical or
other reasons cannot straightway be repealed.
We need not now deal with many other important matters in
which too there is no adequate3 advance from the Viceroy to the
popular position set forth by us. We hope we have brought out
sufficient weighty matters in which there appears at present to be an
unbridgeable gulf between the British Government and the Congress.
1

The draft here reads: “starving millions living in the plains of India who

2

The draft has “substance” which was changed to “gift of nature”.
Added in the draft

make”.
3

26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

There need, however, be no disappointment for the apparent
failure of the peace negotiations. The Congress is engaged in a grim
struggle for freedom. The nation has resorted to a weapon which the
rulers being unused to it will take time to understand and appreciate.
We are not surprised that a few months’ suffering has not converted
them1 .
The Congress desires to harm no 2 single legitimate interest by
whomsoever acquired. It has no quarrel with Englishmen as such, but
it resents and will resent with all the moral strength at its command the
intolerable British domination. Non-violence being assured to the end,
we are certain of the early fulfilment of the national aspiration. This
we say in spite of the bitter and often insulting language used by the
powers-that-be in regard to Civil Disobedience.
Lastly, we once more thank you for the great pains you have
taken to bring about peace, but we suggest that the time has not arrived when any further peace negotiations should be carried on with
those in charge of the Congress organization. As prisoners, we labour
under an obvious 3 handicap. Our opinion is based, as it must be, on
second-hand evidence and runs the risk of being faulty. 4 It would be
naturally open to those in charge of the Congress organization to see
any of us.5 In that case, and when the Government itself is equally desirous for peace, they should have no difficulty in having access to us.
M. K. GANDHI
S AROJINI NAIDU
VALLABHBHAI P ATEL
JAIRAMDAS DOULATRAM

The Hindu, 5-9-l930

1

The draft has “Government”.
The Hindu version here has “the”, evidently a misprint.
3
The draft has “a tremendous”.
4
The draft here reads: “is more likely to be faulty.”
5
The draft here reads: “It is another matter if those in charge of the Congress
organization desire to see any of us.”
2

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

27

34. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI PANDYA
September 5, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I have your painful letter. . . . behn1 appears to be a most sinful
woman. We shall however now win her over by kindness, if we can.
Your dharma is clear. At least for the present you should leave her
company altogether. You should neither serve her nor accept service
from her. I have written a letter to her which Narandas will read to her.
You should read it. A man or a woman susceptible to mutual passion
has no right to accept help from or offer it to each other. You have
ceased to be man and wife, but even when the relationship exists the
husband who is susceptible to carnal desire can never render pure
service to his wife. Know this to have been proved by experience.
Therefore, forget, at any rate for some time, that a person named . . .
behn lives in the Ashram. That alone will do you good. If . . . behn
finds this an impossible situation she will go. And if she goes indeed,
let her leave with pleasure. Ask me if you have not understood all this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 323. Courtesy: Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

35. LETTER TO PUNJABHAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 5, 1930
CHI. PUNJABHAI,

I got your letter. We should certainly feel ashamed if we fall ill.
But very often illness comes to us without our knowing how it comes.
Knowing this, we should be tranquil and humble and have greater
faith in God. This is a good way of utilizing an illness. What remedies
are you trying? Who is your physician?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4015

1

28

The name has been omitted.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

36. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 5, 1930
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

Narandas tells me in his letter that I have not written to you. But
I do remember that I wrote to you. Do you remember any letter of
yours to which I did not reply? Send me a report of the activities on
that side. How is Kasumba? Why did Yukti come away? If she can
write, she should write to me. How is your health?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III

37. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 6, 1930
CHI. SHARDA (BABU),

I do receive all your letters. It is true that I do not write to you
every week. I realize that what I have been writing about non-stealing
and the other vows is rather complicated and it does not interest you.
It is not the language that is difficult, but the ideas are difficult to
grasp and they are stated tersely. That is the way of explaining a lot in
a few words. Now, if you understood those things from Chimanlal or
Premabehn and read them again, you would get interested. You can
definitely understand it if you have the desire. I hope you are not
having the asthma trouble now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9889. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

29

38. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 6, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I hope you have stopped worrying about your health. Why did
Jamnadas1 refuse to see visitors? If you have more news, let me know.
Has anyone ascertained how many volumes in each language
the library contains? How much time do you have to give to it? What
about the harassment by thieves? I suppose the rains have stopped
now. The rainfall here has been very little. It is raining hard today. It
was badly needed.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10233; also C.W. 6681. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

39. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 6, 1930
CHI. LILAVATI (ASAR),

I got your letter. Narandas tells me in his letter that your
fainting fits have become more frequent. In such a case you require
rest. Spend a few days in the Ashram or at any other place where you
think you will feel happy. But you can do this only with
Khurshedbehn’s permission. You should write pure truth in your
diary. Don’t mind who reads it. It is to our good to appear to the
world exactly as we are. There is in this no humiliation at all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9564

1

30

Jamnadas Gandhi, then in Rajkot jail
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

40. LETTER TO BECHARDAS DOSHI
September 6, 1930
BHAI BECHARDAS,

I have your letter. Really speaking Kakasaheb should reply to it.
But just now I reply as he can write only a limited number of letters.
Take it that the view expressed here is that of us both. I will say
nothing about the method of giving the etymology 1 . If Kakasaheb
wishes, he will write about it later. After discussing the matter with him,
I understand that your main work is to translate the Agamas2 . Shri
Punjabhai has given the money for that work, and it is our duty,
therefore, to carry out the object of the grant as quickly as possible.
You should not mind it if in devoting your time to that work you have
to postpone or delay work on etymology; or you may get it done
through somebody else if that can be conveniently arranged. The idea
in placing Bhakti Prasad at your disposal was not that he might do
original work on his own, but that he might work under you and help
you, and might, if he was persevering, acquire proficiency in the work.
As for your eyes I think you should lay down a limit. You
should be satisfied with whatever help is available in Gujarat. Dr.
Haribhai is a specialist in eye diseases. If he cannot help you, you
should assume that nobody else will be able to and rest content. There
should be a self-imposed limit like this for anyone who has decided to
live a simple life. Do the countless poor have the benefit of help even
from a Dr. Haribhai? This of course is my personal view. I can say
that Kakasaheb now agrees with this view. But this is a delicate matter.
Everyone should lay down the limit for himself according to his own
lights and his own wish. The limits accepted by one person cannot, in
such a matter, apply to all.
BAPU

[PS.]
My reason for using “now” and saying that “Kakasaheb now
agrees” is that, as he tells me, he himself had formerly advised you to
consult one or two other doctors. He now thinks that my view is right.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1340
1
2

In the Gujarati dictionary under preparation then in the Gujarat Vidyapith
Jain scriptures.

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

31

41. LETTER TO KAMALNAYAN BAJAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 6, 1930
CHI. KAMALNAYAN,

I have your letter. It is well written. If you have enough work
there I do not see any need of your going to Ajmer. But someone
must go if the need in Ajmer is urgent. It is difficult to give a decisive
opinion from here. What has Mother to say? Only the leader of the
batch can take a policy decision. Ask Surendraji who is there these
days.
As yet it is well-nigh impossible for me to write letters in
Marathi. I get very little time even to read. Tell Janakibehn to write to
us.
Blessings from Kakasaheb.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, pp. 276-7

42. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 7, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter from Tirupur. You now know all about our peace
talks. I have regained the weight I had lost here. I weighed 104 lb. last
Friday. I have dropped the dried fruit also. The sour limes remain. I
take vegetables in the place of dried fruit. Sweet potatoes and raw
tomatoes are standing vegetables. The former are roasted. A green
vegetable is boiled—generally it is cabbage or marrow or the like.
This change accounts for the restoration of the weight andconstipation
no longer worries me. If the change proves successful in the long run,
the cost is considerably reduced. Let us see. I have made no hard and
fast rule about the avoidance of fruit. But just now it is no deprivation
whatsoever and possibly a gain in health.
32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

My mastery over the wheel is increasing. The fatigue is no
longer felt. I see that if you concentrate on the puni end whilst the
thread is drawing, then on the point of the spindle when the thread is
being shifted to the cone and then on the cone when it is brought
there, you avoid breakage if the puni is sound. I hope shortly to
increase the speed appreciably. It is better even now. But there is
much room for improvement. Anyway, just now it is the wheel that
absorbs my attention to the exclusion of other studies. Kaka is still at
your wheel. He is getting on slowly. The carding-bow is quite all
right. I have no difficulty in adjusting it. Ever since it has been with
me the gut broke only once and that too after Kaka too began to work
on it. He is absolutely new to it but is an extremely careful worker.
Then too I deliberately cut it where I saw it had worn out. Kaka had
devised a new catch for holding the spindle whilst unwinding. It is
fixed to the box. The spindle is mounted on it and the thread is held
between the left hand fingers. The result is that it winds tightly on the
winder. There is saving in time too. On your wheel of course the
spindle remains on the holders whilst the unwinding is done. The
catch was wanted for the box.
I hope you have had some rest somewhere. Do not rush.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5410. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9644

43. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 7, 1930
CHI. MANI (PATEL),

I have your letter. Once again Father and Jairamdas were with
me for a couple of days. Your letter to me was received at the same
time and was read by Father. He also gave me your letter to him to
read.
Your sketch of Mother is moving. Such indeed were most
mothers of old; hence I found nothing unusual in your description.
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

33

Maternal affection however is so luminous that, although mixed with
infatuation, it is ever fresh. Do not break the rule about writing to me.
It would be different if you were in prison.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 73-4

44. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 7, 1930
CHI. SUSHILA,

I have a letter from you after a long time. But you blame me,
like a thief turning round on the policeman. You must have got my
previous letter. Sita’s illness has lasted too long. Are you not able to
discover the cause? As I have not seen her myself, I do not have the
courage to say anything in the matter. But I make this suggestion. It
would be advisable to keep her chiefly on milk, curds and fruit instead
of giving her a variety of things to eat. If she is given toast, it should
be of brown bread. I see no need to give her porridge. If you wish,
you may give her cod-liver oil. I myself would never think of giving it
to anyone. But you should attach no importance to this view. How is
your ear? Write to me every week. And write in ink.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4771

45. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 7, 1930
CHI. MANU (TRIVEDI),

Have you calmed down? If you are still not satisfied, you should
continue to struggle against me. I don’t wish to force you to be
virtuous. No one in the world has ever been made so through force. In
34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

any case, your desire is good in itself and I don’t want to force you to
remain against your wish.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7762

46. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 7, 1930
CHI. RAIHANA,

I got your letter. Because my letters are short, don’t make yours
also short. You know why mine are short. Into which language is
Father translating the Sirat? During my first imprisonment, I had read
that book and Asva-e-Sahaba and found them extremely interesting.
But now my Urdu has become rusty, and in any case this time
spinning leaves me no time to read.
We have no choice but to trust in God to restore your health.
“What God, World Teacher and Master, has willed for the day, it is
futile to grieve over”. Bhrrr to Father and Vandemataram to Mother.
To your sisters, Khuda Hafiz.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9620

47. LETTER TO TARAMATI MATHURADAS
TRIKUMJI
September 7, 1930
I hope Mathuradas’s imprisonment has not upset you. Where do
you live at present? How is your health and Dilip’s? What does
Mathuradas say in his letters? Does he feel any hardship? How do you
spend your time? Do you take any part in public activities? Do you
get any visitors? Do you visit any friends?
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 102

1

This is in Urdu.

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

35

48. LETTER TO SARALADEVI SARABHAI
September 7, 1930
SARALABEHN,

May God grant you increasing strength.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11134. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

49. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

September 7, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I have you letter.
You can write to me as long letters as you please. If Father visits
you there, you may tell him: ‘I am here with your consent. You have
entrusted me to Bapuji. It is therefore my duty to do as he says. Please
do not insist on taking me away. Dasharatha was prompted by his
ignorant love to suggest to Rama that he ignore his pledge. But Rama
refused to do so and saved Dashratha’s honour and upheld the
sanctity of dharma. Let me do the same, and bless me that I may
remain firm in observing the vow taken by you and me.’
You may show this letter to Father. It is good that you are
learning English. Improve Your health. For controlling your mind, try
giving up the extra salt in your food. Pleasure of the palate also is a
mental habit. You do have strength of will. I am writing a separate
letter to Brother.
Are you able to understand this letter?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a Photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

36

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

50. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 7, 1930
CHI. SUMANGAL,

I have necessarily to think of you every day, because I have with
me your translations of the Hindi Bhajans of the Bhajanavali;
Kakasaheb had asked for them. I am translating them into English
with his help.1 We both find your translation inaccurate at places. It is
certainly hasty. Still, as a whole it can be considered satisfactory. We
are both well. Write to me in detail about the work going on there.
Kakasaheb sends his blessings.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original:
Memorial Museum and Library

Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy: Nehru

51. LETTER TO KALAVATI TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 7, 1930
CHI. KALAVATI,

Your letter reached me belatedly. Go if you must to serve your
mother-in-law. Most probably this letter will reach you there. Observe
the rules well. Be very strict regarding your diet also.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5250

1
The work of translation was begun on May 6, 1930 and the last hymn was
translated on December 15. For Gandhiji’s version of the Ashram Bhajanavali, vide
“Ashram Bhajanvali”, 15-12-1930.

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

37

52. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 8, 1930
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

Have not yet got the pamphlet sent by you. There is a thrill that
is sattvik and one that is rajasik. What category would your writings
fall in? We expect to hear more about the American lady. I hope the
Ashram life will not prove too trying for her. Our joint
congratulations to Mrs. Appasamy on her introduction of the wheel
and the takli in her school.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10090

53. LETTER TO P. G. MATHEW
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 8, 1930
MY DEAR MATHEW,

Human speech is inadequate to express the reality. The soul is
unborn and indestructible. The personality perishes, must perish.
Individuality is and is not even as each drop in the ocean is an
individual and is not. It is not because apart from the ocean it has no
existence. It is because the ocean has no existence, if the drop has not,
i.e., has no individuality. They are beautifully interdependent. And if
this is true of the physical, how much more so of the spiritual world !
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1554

38

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

54. LETTER TO MOTIBEHN CHOKSI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 8, 1930
CHI. MOTI,

I am happy that you have gone to the Ashram. I hope you will
live in peace now. If you don’t receive any money even from Broach,
how do you meet your expenses? Did Najuklal save anything?
Ask Lakshmi to write to me. Where is Jivandas, and what does he
do at present? Where is Jethalal? Is there any news about Mani? What
does she do in Bombay? Does Gokibehn take any part in public
service? What is your daily programme of work? Vallabhbhai told me
that Lakshmidas had fever. Is that true? They have now removed
Vallabhbhai from me. He was brought here only for two or three
days. That is what a prison is.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12147

55. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR MORARJEE
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 8, 1930
CHI. SHANTIKUMAR,

Your regards have been conveyed to me. You are in my
thoughts every day. As usual, I have the watch before me as a constant
reminder. You can write to me. Are you out of the wood? My regards
to Grandmother. May God give you peace of mind.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4719. Courtesy: Shantikumar Morarjee

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

39

56. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 8, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

One should not think too much about one’s mental condition.
We should keep ourselves absorbed in our appointed work and be
cheerful. When impure thoughts trouble the mind, we should drive
them out with good thoughts and remain peaceful. If we remain firm
in our decisions, we automatically acquire self-confidence.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5251

57. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 8, 1930
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter, but see none from Motibehn.
In regard to degrees, after discussing the matter Kakasaheb and
I have both come to the conclusion that there should not be more than
three stages and that for each stage the name of the diploma or the
degree should be the same for all subjects, whether craft or industry or
art or letters or philosophy. At present there are three diplomas or
degrees, Vineet, Visharad and Pundit, in the Vidyapith. Vineet
(Matriculation, Entrance) is one who has acquired general knowledge
in a subject. Visharad (Graduate) is one who has acquired proficiency
in his subject to the extent of being able to teach it to others also. And
Pundit is one who can do research in the subject and write
dissertations and articles concerning it. Having regard to this, we
should for the present, award the degree of Pundit to no one, we may
award the diploma of Dhanur-Vineet or of Dhanur-Visharad. If you
award the degrees or diplomas, see that you do not make them cheap.
Appoint examiners and give the degree or the diploma only to those
who pass according to a prescribed standard.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3744

40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

58. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 5/9, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I again got the packet of letters on Wednesday. Read the letters
to Manibehn and Bhagwanji. Read out yourself to Manibehn the letter
meant for her. If you read both the letters, everything will be clear to
you. I need not, therefore, give you any other instructions. I had not
thought that you would have to attend to such duties too, but I should
have known. It is God’s kindness that you are capable of attending to
them. The problem of Keshu seems to be difficult. Be careful and
carry on as well as you may. What made him break with Navin? The
two used to get on very well with each other. You may send me letters
received from abroad, if there are any which you think should be sent
to me. If a letter is very important, make a copy and send me the letter
or the copy. If Dudabhai is eager to have Lakshmi with him and if the
latter wishes to go, do not stop her. She is sufficiently obstinate, but
watch if you have a different experience of her now.
September 8, 1930
There is barely sufficient cotton for carding to last me up to the
20th. If you have not sent any so far, send some immediately. It will
be all right if you send 4 Ib. Since slivers have to be made for both of
us, a good deal of cotton is consumed. Kakasaheb has started only
recently. He is likely to spin more as time passes. I have already
written to you about the sandals.
Read about our weight and the changes in my diet, etc., in the
letter to Mirabehn.
Tuesday morning, September 9, 1930
REMOVAL OF UNTOUCHABILITY
This, too, is a new observance, like control of the palate, and
may even appear a little strange. But it is of vital importance.
Untouchability means pollution by the touch of certain persons by
reason of their birth in a particular caste or family. In the words of
Akha, it is an excrescence. In the guise of religion, it is always in the
way and corrupts religion. None can be born untouchable as all are
sparks of one and the same Fire. It is wrong to treat certain human
beings as untouchables from birth. It is also wrong to entertain false
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

41

scruples about touching a dead body, which should be an object of
compassion and respect. It is only out of considerations of health that
we bathe after touching a dead body or after an application of oil, or
after a shave. A man who does not bathe in such cases may be looked
upon as dirty, but surely not as a sinner. A mother may be
“untouchable” so long as she has not bathed or washed her hands
and feet after cleaning up her child’s dirt, but if a child happened to
touch her, it would not be polluted by the touch. But Bhangis, Dheds,
Chamars and the like are contemptuously looked down upon as
untouchables from birth. They may bathe for years with any amount
of soap, dress well and wear the marks of Vaishnavas, read the Gita
every day and follow a learned profession, and yet they remainuntouchables! This is rank irreligion fit only to be destroyed. By treating
removal of untouchability as an Ashram observance, we assert our
belief that untouchability is not only not a part and parcel of
Hinduism, but that it is a plague, which it is the bounden duty of every
Hindu to combat. Every Hindu, therefore, who considers it a sin
should atone for it by fraternizing with untouchables, associating with
them in a spirit of love and service, deeming himself purified by such
acts, redressing their grievances, helping them patiently to overcome
ignorance and other evils due to the slavery of ages, and inspiring
other Hindus to do likewise. When one visualizes the removal of
untouchability from this spiritual standpoint, its material and political
results sink into insignificance and we befriend the so-called
untouchables regardless of such results. Seekers after Truth will never
waste a thought on the material consequences of their quest, which is
not a matter of policy with them, but something interwoven with the
very texture of their lives. Similar is the case of those who have vowed
to remove untouchability. When we have realized the supreme
importance of this observance, we shall discover that the evil it seeks to
combat is not restricted in its operation to the suppressed classes. Evil,
no bigger than a mustard seed in the first instance, soon assumes
gigantic proportions and in the long run destroys that upon which it
settles. Thus this evil has now assailed all departments of life. We
practise untouchability against followers of other religions than our
own, against those who belong to other sects than our own within the
Hindu fold and even against members of our own sect, so much so
that, ever busy observing untouchability, we .become a burden on the
earth. We have hardly enough time even to look after ourselves,.
thanks to the never-ending ablutions and exclusive preparation of
food necessitated by false notions of untouchability. While pretending
to pray to God, we offer worship not to God but to ourselves. This
observance, therefore, is not fulfilled merely by our making friends
42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with untouchables but by loving all life as our own selves. Removal of
untouchability means love for and service of the whole world and thus
merges into ahimsa. Removal of untouchability spells the breaking
down of barriers between man and man, and between the various
orders of beings. We find such barriers erected everywhere in the
world; but here we have been mainly concerned with the
untouchability which has received religious sanction in India and
reduced lakhs and crores of human beings to a state bordering on
slavery.
Blessings from

BAPU

PS.
One Kantu Gajiwala is a resident of Surat and lives in Khapatia
Chakla. I think he gave me Rs. 5 during the march. I had given
instructions to make a khadi-bound diary from the handmade paper
which we have and send it to him. Because of my arrest, the matter
could not be pursued further. Now get a small diary, of a hundred or
more pages, bound by anyone who knows the art and send it to
Gajiwala. And write to me when you do so. In any case drop a
postcard to him immediately.
BAPU

[PS.]
There are 53 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

59. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI MADHAVJI THAKKAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 10, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

I got your letter. As your work increases, your handwriting
improves. You should improve it still further. You should not try to
give a flourish to the characters. For instance, the sign for the sound
“u” should be written thus— é and not thus— ~. If you form the
habit of writing each letter of the alphabet as it is printed, your
handwriting will appear very beautiful. I wish to see you and all other
women perfect in every respect. I do not exaggerate when I say that 1
have put all my hopes in you women. I strongly feel that the ultimate
victory of non-violence depends wholly on women.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6799

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

43

60. LETTER TO MOTIBEHN
[About September 10, 1930] 1
CHI. MOTIBEHN,

I hope you have overcome your grief now. The Gita is the
medicine for your grief. Read the Gujarati translation every day and
read it over and over again. Get Shantu examined by Dr. Haribhai and
take the necessary measures about his teeth. Read a little every day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3738

61. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 11, 1930
CHI. RAMA (JOSHI),

I have your fine letter. I see that Mahalakshmi copies you.
There is no difference even in the handwriting of you two. This is
good. But, then, does not this increase your responsibility? You
should, therefore, go on rising higher in all respects. God has given
you the strength to do so. He has now provided even the
circumstances in which you can rise as high as you wish to. “ G o
forward”— that is my prayer and my blessing. I had seen even in
Wardha those virtues in Mahalakshmi which you describe.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5324

1

44

The source bears this date though not in Gandhiji’s hand.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

62. LETTER TO ROHINI KANAIYALAL DESAI
September 11, 1930
CHI. ROHINI,

I have your letter. I was very glad to read in Hamidabehn’s
letter about the courage which you displayed. It is but natural that
Kanjibhai’s daughter should be so brave. On reading about your
courage, I was reminded of a parable in one of the Upanishads. It
compares our senses to horses. The human soul is described as the
charioteer and that which can control these horses, the senses, is
described as a conqueror. That [soul] which lets itself be carried away
by the horses is said to be defeated by them. As you could stop that
horse by the power of your courage, so you and other young women
there ought to ride the senses and control them. If you succeed in
doing so we shall live in Ramarajya, no matter what the outward
circumstances are. Show this to Hamidabehn and explain the idea to
her. May God grant you still greater strength and courage. Teach
Gujarati to Hamidabehn.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2652

63. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
September 11, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I have your letter. You must have recovered completely by now.
You must observe the rule for the night. Reduce your work during
day time, or keep aside your reading, etc., for the time being. If you
have as much sleep as you need, you will feel fresher and be able to
do the same amount of work in less time. Irrespective of whether this
happens, you should let your mind rest between 9 and 4 and lie down
to sleep. Start doing this immediately. I should be happy if you
wouldn’t argue about this. You may argue as much as you like about
matters in which there is room for argument, but not on this matter.
Have you cultivated friendship with Kamalabehn Lundy?
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

45

Tell Dhurandhar that Prof. Limaye has translated Anasaktiyoga
and that the translation will be soon published.
‘Bheek’ in Marathi is ‘beek’ in Gujarati.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10234; also C.W. 6682. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

64. LETTER TO NIRMALA DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 11, 1930
CHI. NIRMALA (AUNT),

Your imprisonment is real and ours not so. But it is in your
power to get out of your prison, and it is not in our power to get out
of ours. You need not get frightened by the bone growth. You should
take sun-bath only in the early morning at the time of sunrise. At least
that part of the body where there is bone growth should be exposed to
the sun’s rays. You will benefit more if you expose the whole body. If
you eat simple food, you will certainly be able to digest it. Apart from
this, do whatever else Haribhai advises.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9456

65. LETTER TO BALBHADRA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 11, 1930
CHI. BALBHADRA (OR BUDDHICHAKRA),

Narandas is full of praise for you. You have done quite a good
deal of carding. How nice it would be if you thus worked regularly!
Why don’t you write to me?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9210

1

46

‘Bheek’ (Marathi) means alms; ‘beek’ (Gujarati) means fear.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

66. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 11, 1930
CHI. LILAVATI (ASAR),

I got your letter. Take some rest now before you resume work.
See that your handwriting does not become worse. Compare yours
with Radhabehn’s. With a little effort, you will be able to improve it.
Once it has improved, it will not become worse again even if you write
fast.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9565

67. LETTER TO NARAYAN MORESHWAR KHARE
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 11, 1930
CHL. PANDITJI,

‘Chi.’ does not seem to go well with ‘Panditji’. I use this form
very freely these days. Sometimes I even tremble when using it. One
should be fit to claim to be anybody’s father. I frequently examine
myself to see if I feel the love and sympathy which a father should
feel and am as vigilant as a father should be, and sometimes I tremble
as I do so. I can only state truthfully that I sincerely strive to cultivate
these, and console myself with that thought. I certainly know that
whenever I address anyone as ‘Chi.’, my responsibility increases to
that extent. I hope God will make me worthy of that responsibility.
The early morning processions can produce much strength. I
am sure that you can make a big contribution in organizing them
properly. Please do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 212. Courtesy: Lakshmibai Khare

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

47

68. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 11, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),

How is it that there has been no letter from you? You must write
every week. Do you write to, and keep yourself in touch with, all the
women who are engaged in picketing work outside the Ashram? If
you are not doing so, start writing to them. Remember that you are in
the position of a mother to many of them. You have no dearth of sons
and daughters. We know that all those daughters are doing work
which involves danger to their persons. It is but our duty to undertake
such work. We may not seek it, but when it comes to us unsought, we
should welcome it and pray for God’s help to succeed in it. Those
women alone who, though outside the Ashram, observe the vows will
be said to have succeeded in the struggle.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro–6: G. S. Gangabehnne, p. 41; also C.W. 8757. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

69. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 11, 1930
CHI. MANU (TRIVEDI),

I got your letter. Both of us were relieved. We should be happy,
rather than feel sorry, that others of our age do better work than we.
“What God, World Teacher and Master, has willed for the day, it is
futile to grieve over.” We can work only as much as the body which
has been given us permits us to do. He who shirks work and does less
than what he is capable of has cause to feel ashamed. A person like
you has no such cause at all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7763

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

70. LETTER TO BENARSILAL BAZAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 11, 1930
CHI. BENARSI,

I have your letter. You were arrested and released too ! I am
confident that in all that you do you will be calm, truthful and
non-violent. I have, therefore, no worry.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 9304. Courtesy: Benarsilal Bazaj

71. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 12, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I have your letter. Give me details about the work being done at
Sarbhon. Where are you staying? Are there any men or is everything
managed by women? To which place does the old lady belong? How
old is she? What work does she do?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9287

72. LETTER TO RUKMINI BAZAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 12, 1930
CHI. RUKMINI,

I have your letter. I was in fact waiting for a letter from you.
How is your health now? Didn’t Vijapur agree with you? I hope you
do not worry at all about Benarsi. He is a careful man. And ultimately
it is only God who protects us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9052

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

49

73. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 12, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (DESAI),

I got your letter. I was waiting for one in the hope that it might
give me news about Pyarelal. I knew that Pyarelal was here only when
I accidentally saw your wire with the jailor. Afterwards, I got a letter
from Chhaganlal [Joshi] giving me news about his bad health. Here
they tell me that he is all right. I shall know the truth now from your
next letter.
Do not neglect your work. Have faith. Faith is required when
reason fails you. Isn’t that so? Have no hesitation in telling me about
anything you fail to do through lethargy or any other cause. Even
your writing to me will protect you, for the very thought that you will
have to tell me will prompt you to be regular.
What can I do about Ba from here? You yourself should
complain to Mithubehn. She certainly cannot act independently. She
has gone there to work under the leadership of Mithubehn and ought
to submit to it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1803

74. LETTER TO MADHAVDAS
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 12, 1930
CHI. MADHAVDAS,

I read in the letter from the Ashram that you went and visited
Ramdas and others. I was glad. How are you? How is Krishna? Has
she recovered her health now? Can you two do any work in the
present movement? Where do you live?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXII

50

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

75. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

September 12, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I got you letter. I will of course write to you regularly. It will be
another matter if I have to stop writing letters altogether. You too may
go on writing as you please. By all means eat boiled vegetables instead
of raw. When the vegetable for the day is radish, gourd, pumpkin,
tomato, etc., make a habit of eating a little of it raw. If you cannot
digest it, you may discontinue it.
Make only such changes as suit your body. When you get time,
improve your arithmetic. Is there no letter from Krishna at all?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

76. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PARIKH
September 13, 1930
CHI. MANIBEHN (PARIKH),

Please write to me and tell me if you know now the cause of
Narahari’s bone growth. I trust you keep good health. How are the
children? Do they study and learn anything? How do you spend the
day? Write to me giving all details. Our being able to write to each
other is quite an uncertain matter. Nobody knows when we may have
to stop. There are no such signs just now, but after all a prison is a
prison. A prisoner has no personal rights.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Mohan’s getting jaundice means some error in regard to his
food.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5960

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

51

77. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 13, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have your letter. I have not missed a single post. But it may be
that letters are not dispatched from here in time. I hope Jayaprakash
has recovered now. How is it you don’t get any newspapers there?
They get a good many in the Ashram, and can send you some.
Mother-in-law must have recovered by now.
I have already informed you about my weight. Both of us are
keeping fine? Can you go out for a daily walk there? Do the people
also pray daily? How do you spend the day? What is the approximate
population of the place? What are Jayaprakash’s plans now? Will he
be able to earn anything? Does he worry about anything? Even if you
write directly to me, most probably I shall get your letters. At present,
at any rate, I get such letters. I myself cannot write many letters direct.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3369

78. LETTER TO RANI VIDYAVATI
Y. M.,

September 13, 1930
CHI. VIDYAVATI,

I shall not use the formal ‘aap’ in addressing you. But can love
be expressed through words? Love is related to the heart and can be
recognized through the heart. When words come from the heart, they
do have some meaning. Tara’s 1 is a sad story. If Tara is firm, if she
has humility, courage and tolerance, she can leave the house of her inlaws and live with you in the Ashram. You alone can know if you can
give her refuge. Through humility, Tara will be able to win over her
1

52

Addressee’s daughter
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

relatives in the end. That is the certain result of satyagraha. For this
result, there should be sincere love even for the oppressor. Just as fire
is always extinguished by water, anger is also calmed down by love.
How is your health? How is Laxmi Devi? We should have known
about her. How is Jang Bahadur?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have just seen Laxmi Devi’s handwriting. My blessings to her.
R ANI VIDYA DEVI
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM
HARDOI
From the Hindi original: Rani Vidyavati papers. Courtesy: Gandhi National
Museum and Library

79. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 14, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

Your Coimbatore letter before me. It is remarkable how well
you have kept on the whole in the midst of the tremendous rush. It is
a sign of mental calm I expect.
Keshu did offer to send me a bamboo charkha. I would not let
him. The fault was mine in that I did not master the detailed working
of it when there was ample opportunity for so doing. I am now doing
penance by mastering it by making mistakes. I see that the mal and its
proper adjustment have much to do both with speed and efficient
working. I am getting on. I am by no means despondent. The
extraordinary fatigue is gone. There need be no anxiety therefore
about the wheel. Kaka is at your wheel. He can’t yet get more than 80
rounds per hour.
I am sorry about Mrs. Asher’s miscarriage. The chief thing they
should do is to impose restraint upon their carnal desires for at least
three years if they expect a full-grown healthy baby and Mrs. Asher is
to become a strong and healthy mother. To this end they should live
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

53

separately if need be. Of course this restraint is in addition to simple
diet, open-air life and plenty of gentle exercise. It would do her a
world of good if she would take Kuhne baths both hip and sitz I am
sure that if she follows the course for three years and has patience she
will be a new woman. You may pass this on to Mrs. Asher if you like.
My walks must still be confined. But I am keeping quite well.
The wheel and thinking about it make the time fly. And at the end of
the day I get good sleep which to me means more than food. I have
finished translating the 65th bhajan. But there is yet a long distance to
cover. I rarely get time to do more than one and I have not yet failed
to do one per day. Though therefore the progress is steady, it is
undoubtedly slow.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5411. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9645

80. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
Y. M.,

September 14, 1930
MY DEAR ANAND,

I am glad you are feeling well in both body and mind. The
greater your moral progress the greater will be Father’s reconciliation
and happiness. The only way to serve elders and for that matter
anybody else is to do the right thing without ostentation and never to
feel irritated. I know this is more easily said than done. But it has got
to be done.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
I am quite well.
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

54

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

81. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 14, 1930
CHI. MANI (PATEL),

I write this as you wanted me to write. But goodness knows if it
will reach its destination. They allowed me to send your letter to me
for Father to read. Write if you get the necessary permission. Make
full use of the enforced rest you have got.1 That too I consider a part
of our service. Take good care of your health. Draw up a
regularprogramme of work. Let me know what food you get.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 74

82. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
[September 14,] 2 1930
I smell mental violence even from here. People have not much
appreciated non-violence as a religious principle, but even the fact that
they have adopted it as a policy is evidence of a great change. From
this they will one day appreciate it as a religious principle. If we could
make ourselves living embodiments of non-violence, we would, when
the atmosphere was unfavourable to it, be twice as vigilant and do
twice as much tapashcharya as when the atmosphere might be
favourable.
We don’t pay much attention to the danger concerning
women which you mention, since we always condone men’s misdeeds.
It is good indeed that women have come out. About those who come
out successful from the test, we will say that they have really observed
the Ashram vows and have understood the meaning of dharma. If any
woman falls despite her striving, she will strive again and rise. If a
woman had been secretly nursing gross desires and, having an
opportunity now, gratifies them, we should know that she did not
1
2

The addressee was put in the Arthur Road Prison, Bombay.
Vide the following item. The year has been supplied by the addressee.

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

55

really observe the vows and that her hypocrisy has been exposed. We
should welcome that too.
Have no fear, therefore, and don’t worry on their account. Let
each of us take care of himself or herself. It is for God to look after
all. If even a few of us remain pure, they will save those who stray
from the path. Personally I am confident that a good many of us will
remain pure. I don’t like the present state of affairs in which the two
classes have become a mixed crowd. But it is inevitable.
So long as I can write with self-respect, my effort through letters
will continue. I strive through prayers too; no one can prevent me
from doing that.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 204-5

83. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 14/16, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. I follow your hint concerning the women.
Read my letter to Chhaganlal Joshi. You or Gangabehn should keep
in correspondence with the women who have settled down for work in
different places outside the Ashram. If it seems necessary and if she
can find time, Gangabehn should even pay visits to some of those
places. Lapses will occur in some of them, but we need not be afraid
about them. We should remain, and see that others, too, remain,
sufficiently vigilant and leave the result to God. What indeed is our
tapashcharya in comparison to the degree of self-control we expect
from and wish to see in others? Whatever that is, we wish to follow no
other path. We wish to uphold the fullest freedom for women. It does
not matter if we miss the path on our way, if we stumble, are pricked
by thorns or fall down. I gave the letter on Tuesday as usual, but it
must have been posted late by the office here either deliberately or
through negligence. I have not complained. You should, of course,
write to me whenever you do not get the letters in time. It is good that
Punjabhai has returned. Have you appointed anyone from the Ashram
56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to look after him? I am writing to Manibhai 1 about the money for
honouring the memory of the poet2 which is lying with Revashankerbhai.
Tell Mrs. Zaulinger that I am awaiting her reply. She may write
to me anything she wishes to without any hesitation. You have acted
rightly in regard to Kamalabehn Lundy. For the present it is best that
she should say or write nothing. There is plenty of silent service she
can do. Balbhadra has done fine work indeed in carding. This shows
that, if we refuse to regard a person as too dull-minded for a particular
thing and go on encouraging him, the result is bound to be good.
I am getting on all right just now. As usual I take milk and
curds. Instead of raisins and dates, I eat daily seven or eight tomatoes,
four or five big-sized, baked sweet potatoes and about six spoons of
cabbage or any other vegetable that is available. This helps me in
passing stools. I drink at 7.30 in the morning the juice of one lemon
with hot water and salt. In the afternoon, I take the juice of one lemon
with soda bicarb. If this regimen suits me, it will solve the problem of
constipation and effect considerable economy. I get the vegetables
from what grows in the garden here. If we count the expenditure, I
don’t. think it exceeds two annas daily, whereas raisins and dates
probably cost every day not less than six annas. Those who suffer
from constipation may try this diet. I cannot say that it will benefit all.
About myself, too, I cannot yet say that the good effect will last. If this
experiment is followed, any other food should be avoided. The baked
sweet potatoes should be eaten by themselves and chewed well. They
should not be dipped in milk or curds. Probably it will do no harm if
one eats the skin. I do eat some. Because of my delicate stomach I am
afraid to eat all. Anybody else who has a similar stomach and who
tries this experiment should also avoid the skin. I would be really
happy if you could find my sandals. Kusum is bound to know about
them. She may have entrusted them to Premabehn. If you have not
yet sent the cotton send it even by post in the last resort. Both the
belts, one of six strings and the other of eight strings, were found to be
too thin. They come off the pulley and go on revolving without
1
2

Manibhai Revashanker Zaveri
Rajchandra

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

57

moving the latter. Do not send me new ones in their place. Some are
ready with me and I will somehow manage to make others. I asked
you to let me know a simpler method because such a method would
save my time.
September 15, 1930
My silence ended a little while ago and Kakasaheb read out to
me Ramdas’s letter to him. Ramdas says in it that he wrote a letter to
me which I have not received. I was very happy that Ramdas gave in
the letter to Kakasaheb detailed information about his health and
studies. When he is released from jail, we shall be able to write to each
other. I shall then get any letter written by him if I can keep up this
correspondence. I send you the letters in cloth-lined envelopes now. I
have with me only the envelopes received from you. I retain their size
when returning them, so that you may be able to use them again.
Otherwise I could have made them smaller and used them.
Tuesday morning, September 16, 1930
I read in papers about Ba having been harassed in Surat by the
police. Is there any truth in the report?
The law, that to live man must work, first came home to me
upon reading Tolstoy’s writings on bread labour. But even before that
I had begun to pay homage to it after reading Ruskin’s Unto This
Last. The phrase ‘jatmahenat’ is a translation of the English
expression ‘bread labour’. Literally it means labour for roti. The
divine law that man must earn his bread by labouring with his own
hands was first stressed, not by Tolstoy but by an obscure Russian
writer named T. M. Bondoref. Tolstoy took it from him and gave it
wider publicity when he accepted it. In my view, the same principle
has been set forth in Chapter III of the Gita where we are told that he
who eats without offering sacrifice eats stolen food. Sacrifice here can
only mean bread labour. Be that as it may, that verse is the origin of
our observance.
Reason, too, leads us to an identical conclusion. How can a man
who does not do body labour have the right to eat? “In the sweat of
thy brow shalt thou eat thy bread,” says the Bible. A millionaire
cannot carry on for long, and will soon get tired of his life, if he rolls
in his bed all day long and is even helped to his food. He, therefore,
induces hunger by exercise and helps himself to the food he eats. If
everyone, whether rich or poor, has thus to take exercise in some
58

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

shape or form, why should it not assume the form of productive
labour, i.e., bread labour? No one asks the cultivator to inhale fresh
air, or to use his muscles. And more than nine-tenths of humanity
lives by tilling the soil. How much happier, healthier and more
peaceful would the world become if the remaining tenth followed the
example of the overwhelming majority at least to the extent of
labouring enough for their food. And many hardships connected with
agriculture would be easily redressed if such people took a hand in it.
Again, invidious distinctions of rank would be abolished if everyone
without exception acknowledged the obligation of bread labour. At
present these distinctions have invaded even the varna system in which
there was not a trace of it originally. There is a world-wide conflict
between capital and labour, and the poor envy the rich. If all worked
for their bread, distinctions of rank would be obliterated; the rich
would still be there, but they would deem themselves only trustees of
their property and would use it mainly in the public interest. Bread
labour is a veritable blessing to one who would observe non-violence,
worship Truth and make the observance of brahmacharya a natural
act. This labour can truly be related to agriculture alone. But at
present at any rate everybody is not in a position to take to it. A
person can, therefore, spin or weave, or take up carpentry or smithery,
instead of tilling the soil, always regarding agriculture, however, to be
the ideal. Everyone must be his own scavenger. Evacuation is as
necessary as eating; and the best thing would be for everyone to
dispose of his own waste. If this is impossible, each family should see
to its own scavenging. I have felt for years that there must be
something radically wrong where scavenging has been made the
concern of a separate class in society. We have no historical record of
the man who first assigned the lowest status to this essential sanitary
service. Whoever he was, he did us no good. We should, from our very
childhood, have the idea impressed upon our minds that we are all
scavengers, and the easiest way of doing so is for everyone who has
realized this to commence bread labour as a scavenger. Scavenging,
thus intelligently taken up, will help one to understand religion in a
different and truer light. If children, the old and those disabled by
illness do not do bread labour, that should not be regarded as
violation of the law of bread labour.
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

59

The child is, as it were, included in the mother. If nature’s laws
were not violated, the old would not be disabled and there would be
no disease.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Tell Khurshedbehn that, if she requires money, she should have
no hesitation in obtaining it from the Ashram. If she got it from any
other source, it would pain me.
There are 55 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

84. LETTER TO PATRICK QUINN
September 18, 1930
DEAR MR. QUINN,

We both waited for you last evening in accordance with your
message.
(1) Please send yesterday’s Chronicle.
(2) Could you not arrange to have it sent at the regular hour
daily?
(3) Please send also the Ashram post. It was due yesterday.
(4) I expect a parcel from the Ashram containing sandals and
cotton.
(5) Any other parcels of books and magazines. I have of [sic]
a pamphlet called Caesar or Christ and there should be Hindu of
Madras.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Pt. III, p. 287

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

85. LETTER TO GULAM RASOOL QURESHI
September 18, 1930
CHI. QURESHI,

I got your letter. You did well in paying a visit to Bombay.
Sultana would never come near me when I was there. No wonder she
remembers me now. Whenever she saw me, she would run away. Since
Manilal is there with Imam Saheb to look after him, I am perfectly
easy in my mind about him. Amina’s courage is boundless. Though I
don’t mind her having given her name as a volunteer, how will she be
able to keep the children in jail with her if she is imprisoned? It would
be all right if she did whatever she could remaining at home. It is
enough that she is ready to go to jail if it becomes necessary.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6652

86. LETTER TO KAMALA NEVATIA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 18, 1930
CHI. KAMALA (RAMESH WARDAS),

I got a letter from you at last. So you understood the suggestion
in my letter that you should write to me. Don’t be lazy in future. How
is your health? Write to me from time to time. If you do so, even that
will help you to shake off your laziness. Did you meet Kikibehn1 ,
Gangabehn2 and others in Karachi?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3042

1
2

J. B. Kripalani’s sister
A. T. Gidwani’s wife

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

61

87. LETTER TO RALIATBEHN VRINDAVANDAS
September 18, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

Mani tells me in her letter that you sometimes think about me. It
is but natural that you should. On my part, I think about you quite
often. I see your face in my mind and remember Narottamdas, for
your face resembles his. May God give you and Mother peace of
mind.
Jai Shrikrishna from

MOHANDAS
S MT. G OKIBEHN
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9810

88. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
Y. M.,

September 18, 1930
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

If I were free you would be the first visitor I would be seeing in
the morning tomorrow 1 . It has been many days since I last saw your
handwriting. Do keep writing to me. Is your health all right? Tell
Nirmalabehn that I have not forgotten her. Her innocent face often
swims in my ken. What is Indu doing?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G. N. 11553

1

62

Gandhiji’s birthday according to the Vikram calendar fell on September 19.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

89. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
September 18, 1930
BHAI RAMESHWARDAS (DHULIA),

Your letter. As you have survived the snake-bite, God will
certainly exact more service from you. What treatment did you have?
Was the snake poisonous? God will give you peace. Be certain that
Ramanama is the kalpadruma1 for us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 175

90. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
September 20, 1930
CHI. SHARDA (BABU),

You seem to have grown really wise. From now on, so long as I
receive your letters, you will receive my letters too. So, you have now
become a store-keeperess 2 . You must become very strong in body.
Punjabhai is older than I am but he considers me his elder. Even if a
nephew is older than his uncle, it is the custom, is it not, that only the
uncle can bless the nephew. Do you understand me now?
If Anandi is missing me, all of you must keep her in good
cheer.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9890. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

1
2

A mythical tree which grants all wishes
Gandhiji uses an arbitrary feminine form in Gujarati.

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

63

91. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
September 20, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I got your long letter.
Since your health is good, I need make no suggestion.
Do you cultivate contacts with those two European ladies? If
you have not been doing so, do so now.
At present it seems that God has given over your whole life to
me. This will remain true till the end.1
To which part of the country does Sushila belong who sends me
her good wishes in English? The name is Gujarati or Marathi. It is
certainly not Tamil. If she is a Tamil, she may be excused. If not, she
should send her good wishes in her mother tongue.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10235; also C.W. 6683. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

92. LETTER TO LAKSHMIBEHN KHARE
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 20, 1930
CHI. LAKSHMIBEHN (KHARE),

Your joining the picketing will prove a shield for the other
women. As these are all novel experiences some are likely to get hurt.
Still we should not retrace our steps. You have inexhaustible strength.
Put it to good use and bring credit to yourself as well as to the
Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati: C.W. 276. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn Khare

1

On the occasion of Gandhiji’s birthday the addressee had offered to dedicate
her life to him.

64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

93. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

September 21, 1930
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,

I must now unburden myself of my second difficulty. I do not
doubt a word of what you have told me about the charges of alleged
ill-treatment in this prison. Yet I cannot dispel from my mind all the
reports that have appeared in the Press. The writers could not have
deliberately lied about everything. I am sure that some of the
statements are gross exaggerations. I hope that most are, and I should
like to believe that all are false. But my mind is disturbed. There may
be things you do not know; there must be things which you look at
from one angle and the prisoners concerned from another.
My duty in the circumstances seems to be plain. I must ask to be
allowed to see them occasionally, if I may not be permitted to live with
them. I have told you I desire no privileges. What comforts are
allowed to me may be taken away from me. If I am isolated for the
sake of the comforts, they mean little to me, whereas isolation means
everything to me. I desire no comforts that may not be allowed to the
other prisoners suffering from the same physical disabilities as I. I do
not believe in classification which, in my opinion, is degrading. If I
permit myself comforts which the other prisoners like me do not
enjoy, I do so because of my physical needs 1 . But I would fain
sacrifice health if it has to be purchased by the sacrifice of the
privilege of serving my companions, many of whom I know and none
of whom I consider to be in any way inferior to me.
I was able to bear the separation so long as I was under the
impression that all was well. But the knowledge that young Ratilal is
no more, that Pyarelal who is like a son to me has been suffering, that
the elderly Narsinhabhai was near death’s door and the persistent
complaints in the Press have awakened me to a sense of my duty, viz.,
that I should strive to the utmost of my ability to establish touch with
them.

1

From the draft available in S.N. 19980. In the source the word is obli-terated.

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

65

I know that it is not in your or the I. G. P.’s power to grant me
the permission requested. I would therefore ask you please to place
this letter before the Government and secure an early reply. I am
aware as prisoner I have no rights and no choice as to the disposal of
my body. But I know also that the upkeep of my body requires my
co-operation. I should no longer be interested [in] the preservation of
a body that cannot be used for the service that the dweller within
yearns after. I am human. Even as a prisoner I cannot divest myself of
the human in me.
I need not give the assurance, perhaps you will be able to give it,
if any be required, that my presence among my companions will not
be used to subvert discipline but on the contrary, it is highly likely to
promote it. The moral code of a civil resister requires him willingly to
submit to all prison discipline that is not in conflict with self-respect.
Lastly I would like to draw the Government’s attention to the
fact that when a somewhat similar incident occurred in 1923 in this
very prison, I was allowed to see two prisoners with the result that what
promised to be a grave tragedy was averted. 1 The present Inspector
General of Police is aware of the facts of the case.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3852; also Bombay Secret Abstract, 750(5)/A, p. 207

94. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
September 21, 1930
CHI. LILAVATI,

I got your letter. If you do not become impatient, you are
bound to get the strength to put your ideals into practice. As we get
indigestion if we start eating all at once, so also we fail in our attempt
if we try to put anything in practice without first judging our capacity
and this gives rise to despair. If we ourselves cannot judge our
capacity we should follow the advice of some person in whose
judgment we have faith and who has given the advice after
considering our capacity. It will be enough if, after pouring out your
heart before Gangabehn, you do what she asks you to do.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9566
1

66

Vide “Letter to Jail Superintendent, Yeravada”, 12-2-1923.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

95. LETTER TO AMINA QURESHI
September 21, 1930
CHI. AMINA,

I got your letter. Many kisses to Mian Abdul Majid. As for
Sultana, she would not even let me touch her. How is your health
now? Take proper care about food.
Have you kept up your study of Urdu?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6658

96. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 21, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I got your letter. God has given us wings, no doubt, but we
don’t use them. If we forget the body, can’t we fly as if we had
wings? We are where our mind is. Don’t we sometimes feel that while
our body is in one place, our mind is in another? Where is the mind of
a person who is dead? I know it is easy to say this, but difficult to live
in that spirit. But, as you had mentioned wings, I have poured out this
wisdom. You may follow it only to the extent that you can.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9288

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

67

97. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 21, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

It is rather strange that you don’t get my letters. I am writing to
Narandas about this. I have not let a single week pass without writing
to you. I keep good health. The weight is 103. Instead of raisins, I eat
gourd or some other vegetable. Milk and curds remain of course.
Kakasaheb, too, is in good health. He gains one pound every week.
Don’t worry about us at all. How is Mrityunjaya?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Do you go out for a daily walk there?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3371

98. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
September 21, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (DESAI),

I got your letter. I hear that you yourself are ill. How is that? If
there are mosquitoes, you should ignore what others say and use a
mosquito-net. If you cannot fix one, you may rub kerosene [on your
body]. I cannot straightway request the authorities to keep Pyarelal
with me. I had not made such a request even for Kaka. It is the
authorities who transferred him. I am, however, trying to see Pyarelal.
I made a request to be permitted to see him as soon as I heard that he
was suffering from diarrhoea. He is better now. You should remember
that I do not know who are lodged in this jail. You should assume that
I am confined in a cage. You should have written to me as soon as
you knew.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1804

68

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

99. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI PANDYA
September 21, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I read your letter. Overcome your resentment of Manibehn.
Forget that she is your wife. Regard her as one of the countless
women. Also forget the children that are with her. Regard them as not
yours. Since you are susceptible to carnal urge, you should
understand that you have no right to [accept] service from Manibehn
even as a sister. You should not call to mind whom you have to forget;
leave, therefore, all worry on her account and shake the burden off
your mind. Show this letter to Gangabehn who will help you to act on
this. Give up jaggery. I would recommend milk even if you could
take only half a seer of it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 324. Courtesy: Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

100. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
September 21, 1930
CHI. MANU,

Both of us feel easy in mind now that you have calmed down.
When a student has grown up and can think for himself, only that
which he is persuaded to do willingly will bear fruit. How much time
did you take to spin 1,000 rounds? What was the count of the yarn?
What was its strength and degree of evenness? Write to me and give
me these details.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7764

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

69

101. LETTER TO JANAKIDEVI BAJAJ
September 21, 1930
CHI. JANAKIBEHN,

You seem to be very clever. You try to evade writing to me
under one pretext or another. And if from making speeches you
become a dictator; a person like me would have to live in constant fear
of you. Jamnalal seems to have established his business well in Nasik.
I had thought he would. No one can escape him. Formerly Madu used
to write to me, but now she has become lethargic like you. If she
remains as lethargic as she is, I shall have to issue an order to separate
her from you. How is her health now? Is Om as mischievous as ever?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 72

102. LETTER TO SATYADEVI GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 21, 1930
CHI. SATYADEVI,

I have your letter. You must get your Gujarati corrected by
someone. Are you keeping up the drawing? Don’t you find any
improvement now and then? Is Dharmakumar1 naughty?2
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalata, p. 34

1
2

70

Younger brother of the addressee
The original was in Gujarati.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

103. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
September 21, 1930
CHI. MRIDU,

I was happy to read your letter containing your account of the
events. I have not reproached you at all. What right have I to reproach
you from here? I have only warned you. A volunteer, man or woman,
who is not cautious, gets defeated. Knowing your nature, I merely
warned you. Those whose means are truth and non-violence, have as
their guide God who is known as Truth. That is the gist of the last
stanza of the last chapter of the Gita. Adhering to it as if clinging to a
tree, leap as far as you can. god will protect you.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11177. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

104. LETTER TO BHARATI SARABHAI
September 21, 1930
CHI. BHARATI 1 ,

I was very happy to have your letter written in such a beautiful
hand. You have a perfect right to write to me. I should like it very
much if you wrote to all your brothers and sisters. My circle of young
friends is vast and I am constantly adding to it. Some jealous young
men in order to denigrate the old, have made fun of them, treating
them as children. If the old really become as innocent as children, the
denigration will be turned into praise. I cherish the hope of getting
such a certificate and so continue to enlarge my circle of young
friends. All you brothers and sisters should join that circle and keep
writing to me.
Your handwriting is good. You must devote a little more
attention to l] .k and r.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11274. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

1

Daughter of Ambalal Sarabhai

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

71

105. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
September 21, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. It is well that you have sought our
Kamalabehn’s1 company. Try to understand her. Do learn from her
the art of nursing. You may if you wish add salt to the curd, but do
not forget that adding salt only changes the sour taste of curd, it
does not neutralize the acidity. I therefore suggest that when the
curd tastes sour you should add soda to it. Soda neutralizes the
acid in the curd. The acid combines with the soda and evaporatesin
the form of carbolic acid gas, leaving the curd sweet.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta papers. courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

106. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
September 22, 1930
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

Let me point out a flaw in your calculation. If you “return the
compliment”, you should find out the love notes I send every week.
So if love may be measured arithmetically your notes must be as
many times long as all my notes put together. But thank God! Love
ignores and falsifies both arithmetic and geometry. Yes, Kamalabehn
is doing very well indeed.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10091

1

72

Kamalabehn Lundy
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

107. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 22, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I have your Calcutta letter. You are having a variety of
experiences1 . Seekers after Truth turn every one of these to good
account. I hope the little illness you had was but a passing thing and
that you were yourself again quickly. I hope you had the rest you
wanted. I am daily making slight improvements in the travelling wheel
and it gives me less and less trouble. It is wonderful what a number
ofdetails you have to attend to when you have not a perfected
machine but a contrivance to help the cunning of your hands. But the
greater the mastery over the wheel, the greater is the pleasure of
spinning and the less the fatigue. Kaka is still struggling with your
wheel. He has much past neglect to make up for. He says, he has
becomea spinner only here. Before, he was spinning but he was no
spinner. You know what I mean. A man can make a table without
being a cabinet-maker. The change to vegetables persists. There is no
setback nor is there visible further progress. I want to give this
experiment a full trial. Dr. Mehta sent word that perhaps sweet
potatoes might induce constipation. I have therefore dropped them
today. Tomatoes are a daily adjunct and a green vegetable.
You will give my love to friends wherever you are.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5412. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9646

1
On her arrival at Howrah Mirabehn was forbidden from joining a women’s
procession which was to take her round the city. Nevertheless she proceeded to join
the procession which was lathi-charged. She was taken to a police station and later
allowed to leave. Some university students who shouted at the police for being rough
with the women were mercilessly beaten. The incidents which led to a hartal the next
day are described, in some detail by Mirabehn in her autobiography The Spirit’s
Pilgrimage, pp. 115-7.

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

73

108. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
September 22, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),

When I don’t get a letter from you, I cannot help feeling that
something is wrong. Why should you feel depressed? Whenever you
feel so, you should immediately pass on your depression to me.
Whatever your age, from the very first day that I met you I have
regarded you as a dear daughter. I can be both a father and a mother.
You should, therefore, immediately let me share your depression and
then be at peace.
If you feel like coming to see Kaka, take the plunge some time.
. . . behn1 is certainly guilty of one mistake, that she went to test
Bhagwanji. Nevertheless, as long as she is eager to remain in the
Ashram and struggle for self-improvement, we should let her remain.
Our experiments are certainly dangerous. God will see us through
them all, if we have but faith in Him.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G. S. Gangabehnne, pp. 41-2; also C.W. 8758. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

109. LETTER TO KAMALNAYAN BAJAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 22, 1930
CHI. KAMALNAYAN,

I have your letter. You should write a clear hand. Your letters
are well formed but not clear. They will not improve later if you do
not take the trouble now. By all means go to Ajmer. Do write
regularly from there too. Do not neglect your health.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirwad, p. 277
1

74

The name has been omitted.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

110. LETTER TO NARAYAN MORESHWAR KHARE
September 22, 1930
CHI. PANDITJI,

It is with a little effort that I can bring myself to put ‘Chi.’
before your name. I do feel for you the love which ‘Chi.’ would
suggest, but I may not have always shown it outwardly. I got your
letter. Learn carding quickly. As for spinning, set apart, if possible, a
fixed time for it. The absence of love of khadi which you notice
around you is but a reflection of some deficiency in us. We are the
centre of the khadi movement. Just as if the sun shines with less heat
the temperature around is bound to go down, so also if we “shine with
less heat”, that is, if we are lukewarm ourselves about khadi, what
wonder that there should be a lack of warmth outside? But love is not
acquired from outside; it must spring from within. If we strive for
such love to spring from within us, good results are bound to follow.
It was very good indeed that Rambhau1 went to Almora.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 213. Courtesy: Lakshmibai Khare

111. LETTER TO ABBAS
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 22, 1930
CHI. ABBAS,

I got your letter. What you have said about the mal is clear
enough, but I think I shall understand it fully only when I read the
letter a second time. I have preserved the letter. Describe to me your
experiences in jail. What did you read, how much did you spin and
card and in what spirit did you observe the prison rules? How was
your health? If you have any views to express about the method of
carding which Mathuradasbhai is persuading people to adopt, please
do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6303
1

Addressee’s son

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

75

112. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Silence Day [September] 1 22, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),

I got your letter. Your son-in-law is released from earthly
bonds. We have taught ourselves to regard Death as a friend. What
would we have done if there were no Death?
You can bring into the Ashram as many children as you wish.
I understand what you say about Kaku. Everyone will get an
opportunity.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G. S. Gangabehnne, p. 38; also C.W. 8750. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

113. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
September 22, 1930
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

On the 18th I had a letter ready for Behn. On the 19th I got a
wire signed by you three. These days I am taken up by the idea of a
book on spinning. Many problems come up which a book should
help us to solve. I shall write more about this if you feel that my
suggestion can be carried out.
Do keep writing to me. I do not know how long the present
arrangement of writing and receiving letters will last. how is your
health?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G. N. 11554

1
The source gives the date as “22nd Monday ’30”. In 1930 Monday fell on
22nd in September and December. This letter, however, appears to belong to
September; vide letters to Gangabehn Vaidya, 22-9-1930.

76

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

114. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 21/23, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

Where is Kamala Gandhi at present? I feel worried about her
because I have had no letter from her for a long time. Where is
Haridas? What is he doing? Prabhavati complains, in her letters of the
last two weeks, that she gets no letters from me. I have been writing to
her regularly. Has she given her correct address to you? The name of
the place is Sitaldiara. As regards Harilal Desai, read the letter I have
written to him. He is likely to be an asset to us. Pay him between Rs.
60 and Rs. 65 for his family and Rs. 40 for his own expenses. In all,
the amount may come to Rs. 100 a month. As for the training, it will
be best to adopt the method I have suggested. During the time that he
is in the Ashram, I think his expenses will be less. They will, I believe,
go up to Rs. 40 when he goes outside the Ashram for studying.
Explain further details and make the position clear as you may think
fit. Is my suggestion all right? I suppose Valjibhai knows all this.
If Giriraj does not recover his calm there, I think it would be
best to let him go to Wardha. However, do what you think proper.
Read the letter to Nanibehn (Budhabhai’s). Read the letter to
Budhabhai, too, and, if Nanibehn agrees, make the arrangements
suggested by him. If, however, she feels hurt, do not interfere. Read
the letter to Manibehn before you give it to her to read. Let
Gangabehn, too, read it. And also read the letter to Zainu. If he does
not understand the position even after this explanation, remember that
he is a guest and tolerate his absence. Read the letter to Bhagwanji,
too. I think the only medicine for him is the one I have suggested.
You have done quite right in sending Balkrishna to Vinoba. You also
did well in offering to send others.
It fills me with great joy to know that the boys and girls have
taken charge of the prayers. And, moreover, no light is required! My
effort to memorize [the Gita verses] is in abeyance for the time being.
I simply do not get the necessary time. What work can a prisoner have
to keep him so busy? But that is how it is. I have to be careful about
every minute. I read a little by snatching a few minutes from other
work. I agree with your opinion about mixed picketing. Read the
letter to Joshi. I got the cotton and the leather, and Kakasaheb his
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

77

sandals. I got mine repaired and they should now last me for at least
two or three months. I accept your namaskars on your birthday. May
God strengthen your soul and grant you a long life.
Tuesday morning, September 23, 1930
EQUALITY OF RELIGIONS. This is the new name we have given to
the Ashram observance which we know as ‘Tolerance’. ‘Sahishnuta’
is a translation of the English word ‘Tolerance’. I did not like that
word, but could not think of a better one. Kakasaheb, too, did not like
that word. He suggested ‘Respect for all religions’. I didn’t like that
phrase either. Tolerance may imply a gratuitous assumption of the
inferiority of other faiths to one’s own and respect suggests a sense of
patronizing whereas ahimsa teaches us to entertain the same respect
for the religious faiths of others as we accord to our own, thus
admitting the imperfection of the latter. This admission will be readily
made by a seeker of Truth, who follows the law of Love. If we had
attained the full vision of Truth, we would no longer be mere seekers,
but would have become one with God, for Truth is God. But being
only seekers, we prosecute our quest, and are conscious of our
imperfection. And if we are imperfect ourselves, religion as conceived
by us must also be imperfect. We have not realized religion in its
perfection, even as we have not realized God. Religion of our
conception, being thus imperfect, is always subject to a process of
evolution and re-interpretation. Progress towards Truth, towards God,
is possible only because of such evolution. And if all faiths outlined
by men are imperfect, the question of comparative merit does not
arise. All faiths constitute a revelation of Truth, but all are imperfect
and liable to error. Reverence for other faiths need not blind us to
their faults. We must be keenly alive to the defects of our own faith
also, yet not leave it on that account, but try to overcome those
defects. Looking at all religions with an equal eye, we would not only
not hesitate, but would think it our duty, to blend into our faith every
acceptable feature of other faiths.
The question then arises: why should there be so many different
faiths? The soul is one, but the bodies which she animates are many.
We cannot reduce the number of bodies; yet we recognize the unity of
the soul. Even as a tree has a single trunk, but many branches and
leaves, so is there one true and perfect Religion, but it becomes many
as it passes through the human medium.
78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

All religions are divinely inspired, but they are imperfect
because they are products of the human mind and taught by human
beings. The one Religion is beyond all speech. Imperfect men put it
into such language as they can command and their words are
interpreted by other men equally imperfect. Whose interpretation is to
be held to be the right one? Everybody is right from his own
standpoint, but it is not impossible that everybody may be wrong.
Hence the necessity for tolerance, which does not mean indifference
towards one’s own faith, but a more intelligent and purer love for it.
Tolerance gives us spiritual insight, which is as far from fanaticism as
the north pole is from the south. True knowledge of religion breaks
down the barriers between faith and faith. Cultivation of tolerance for
other faiths will impart to us a truer understanding of our own.
Tolerance obviously does not disturb the distinction between
right and wrong, or good and evil. The reference here throughout is
naturally to the principal faiths of the world. They are all based on
common fundamentals. They have all produced great saints. There is
some difference between tolerance towards other religions and
tolerance towards their followers. We should have equal regard for all
human beings—for the wicked as for the saintly, for the impious as
for the pious—but we should never tolerate irreligion.
This idea may need elaboration. If you do not follow it easily,
ask me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
If you have not followed the discourse fully, it would be best not
to translate it. I will certainly try myself to translate it.
There are 86 letters today.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

115. LETTER TO V. G. DESAI
September 23, 1930
BHAISHRI VALJI,

You must be aware that formerly I used to write dates according
to our calendar. Later I realized that this insistence was wrong.
Everywhere outside India they use dates [according to the Gregorian
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

79

calendar]. We must recognize this fact. Besides there is no single
calendar accepted throughout India. Different regions follow different
calendars. Surely we are not going to reject everything foreign. There
are other arguments too. But this would do for the present. Let me
know what you think is the right thing to do. What are your activities
just now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7407. Courtesy: V. G. Desai

116. LETTER TO MOTIBEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Tuesday [September 23, 1930] 1
CHI. MOTIBEHN,

Here’s a short reply to your long letter. Instead of brooding
over the past, we should think of what lies ahead of us. Look upon all
the inmates of the Ashram as Meghji and shower sweet love on them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3741

117. LETTER TO VINOD KUMAR
Y. M.,

September 24, 1930
CHI. VINOD KUMAR,

I got your letter. congratulations to the Sena. How old are you?
You have done well in adopting Madalasa as your sister. She is a very
good and simple-hearted girl. I like your decision to observe brahmcharya. Simple food is very essential for that. But it is equally
important to cultivate simplicity in everything else. You should never
let impure thoughts enter your mind. For that you must always think
good thoughts and try to live according to them. He whose mind and
1

The original letter has a remark in a hand other than Gandhiji’s, “About
25-9-1930”. The nearest Tuesday was on this date.

80

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

body are engaged in good thoughts and useful work will never have
impure thoughts. To achieve this it is necessary constantly to think of
God.
Your must improve your handwriting.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10618. Courtesy: Madalasa Shrimannarayan

118. LETTER TO P. G. MATHEW
September 26, 1930
MY DEAR MATHEW,

The things you write about are ultimately decided by faith.
Reason can take us only a little distance. Man is a person, God is not
in the same sense. Man sins because he has the sense of right and
wrong. Our difficulty arises through our effort to measure God by
our little selves. And He eludes all measure.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1553

119. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
September 26, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (DESAI),

I got your letter. I wrote to you about Pyarelal in my last letter. I
have not yet been able to see him, but I can get news about him now. I
shall of course be able to see him. Whether he will be kept with me
rests on God’s will. In any case, we shall meet when I am released and
he will live with me then. But who knows what the future holds?
Kakasaheb will be released at the end of November. I suppose
Pyarelal’s term will also have expired by then. At last, he now finds
support in the Gita and the Ramayana and I feel greatly relieved. I
could not understand why they did not help him till now. You
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

81

yourself admit that you can be safe only if you write to me. Well, then,
give me full details whenever you write.
I did not ask for my old pair of sandals. There was a new pair
about which you seem to have forgotten. But at present I carry on
with the one I have.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1805

120. LETTER TO PANNALAL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 27, 1930
CHI. PANNALAL,

I have your letter. I hope you know that some persons in
Wardha can spin on the takli 200 rounds an hour. I was amazed to
read this. Write to someone in Wardha and find out how one may
acquire such speed. Chhotelal did give me the details.
Don’t let despair come near you. It means lack of faith in God.
Faith in God means hope. How is your health?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3105

121. LETTER TO YUKTI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 27, 1930
CHI. YUKTI,

Why did you write in pencil? As far as possible, children should
not use a pencil. Write to me regularly now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III

82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

122. LETTER TO VINODBALA
September 27, 1930
CHI. VINODBALA,

Why do you suppose that, because you do not write to me, I
don’t think about you? Nor should you believe that I don’t think
about those to whom I do not write. I think about many such persons
every day. Your letter was very good. I had sent to the Ashram a
translation of a poem by Ramdas Swami about handwriting. If you
have not read it get it from there and read it. Write to me regularly
now. And be a very good girl.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Give my blessings to Mother. Has she now recovered peace of
mind?
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III

123. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 27, 1930
CHI. MANI (PATEL),

You ask me to write to you every week. But will the prison
authorities allow you so many letters? I also doubt whether you will be
able to write to me. Preserve your health. Make good use of every
minute and keep a record of your work.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 74

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

83

124. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
YERVADA MANDIR ,

September 27, 1930
CHI. LILAVATI (ASAR),

I have your letter. I think it best for you that till you have
sufficiently recovered you should remain in the Ashram and serve
there. If Khurshedbehn calls you, Narandas will not stop you from
going. A volunteer should be happy to work anywhere, doing any
work she is asked to do. Surely, you have not remained behind in the
Ashram because you wanted it or because you were lazy? Moreover,
what is the Ashram if not a place of service?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9567

125. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PARIKH
September 27, 1930
CHI. MANIBEHN,

Narahari and Ramniklal seem to be flourishing in jail.
How did Mohan get the fever? Do you keep a proper check on what
he eats?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5961

126. LETTER TO NARAYAN MORESHWAR KHARE
September 27, 1930
CHI. PANDITJI,

It would be wise for me to climb step by step; otherwise I shall
fall. Moreover, if I start writing “Narayan” and also address you as
“Narayan” when speaking to you, I may attain my moksha. What
then?
84

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If you have to address public meetings, that also is a good
experience. All the workers are having various useful experiences. If
you get any news about Rambhau, write to me and let me know. I
have not heard from any of the three after they left the Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 211. Courtesy: Lakshmibai Khare

127. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 27, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I got your letter. If we smile and remain happy even when we
are alone or no one speaks or listens to us and instead people abuse
us, then that is true happiness. We should never let the praise or the
censure of the world affect our soul. That is what is meant by the Gita
verses describing the character of the sthita-prajna, which we daily
recite. If we go on reciting them every day, with sincere devotion in
our hearts, some day we shall be able to live in that spirit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9289

128. LETTER TO GANGABEHN JHAVERI AND
NANIBEHN JHAVERI
September 27, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN AND NANIBEHN,

I have letters from you both. I do remember you once every
week, but afterwards give up the thought of writing to you. In a sense
I look upon you as an ideal pair. You don’t seem to be mother-in-law
and daughter-in-law, but are more than sisters to each other. It is true
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

85

that Pannalal has had a share in bringing this about; but what could he
have done if you two did not have such a quality in your nature? We
have to rise much higher still. You three do have the capacity so to
rise. Tell Bhai Panachand that I got his wire.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3104

129. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 27, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),

The responsibility on you is great. God will give you the
strength to shoulder the burden.
Ambalal1 wrote to Kakasaheb. The latter is in excellent health.
He spins and cards. He walks at regular hours and eats normal food.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Ramibai has got what she wanted.2 It becomes her well indeed.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G.S. Gangabehnne, p. 42; also C.W. 8759. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

130. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
September 27, 1930
CHI. RAIHANA,

I have your letter. I am glad to learn that your health has
improved a little. Tell Kamaladevi when you write to her that I often
think of her. Tell Father that a translation of the whole of the Sirat
would not be fully appreciated, but it would be a valuable book if he
translates its most important portions. Maulana Shibli wrote the Sirat
1
2

86

Ambalal Chaturbhai Patel, then Kalelkar’s student
She had been arrested.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with Muslims in view and the book is all right for them, but the
general public would not read the translation of so big a book. We
already have the works of Amir Ali, Maulvi Mohammed Ali Kadiyani,
Washington Irving and Carlyle. It would be a good addition to them
to get a small book giving a translation of some portions of Maulana
Shibli’s volume. Ramdas writes and tells me that Father is becoming
younger day by day, for he puts in six hours’ labour of writing and
his memory has improved. If so, what does it matter that his beard has
turned grey? And, moreover, he teaches Mahadev French! Who would
not envy him? You daughter and mother have done fine work indeed
in the Kheda district, and Hamida there has been rousing the Surat
district.
Khuda Hafiz.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Do you find it difficult to read my handwriting?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9621

131. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 27, 1930
CHI. MANGALA,

Are you a walking-stick or a spoilt girl or both? You have tried
to improve your handwriting. Your must try harder. Learn the second
chapter by heart and pull Pushpa’s1 nose for me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11089. Courtesy: Pushpa Naik

1

Addressee’s sister

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

87

132. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 27, 1930
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

Prabhavati writes that you are not keeping well. After acquiring
so much learning, why can’t you keep your body perfectly healthy?
It is essential to make an effort in this direction. What are you doing
now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3374

133. LETTER TO KALAVATI TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 27, 1930
CHI. KALAVATI,

I was glad to get your letter. Be firm as you are in observing the
rules. Ignore those who criticize. Do not even be angry with them, but
love them.
There is much scope for improvement in your handwriting.
With some effort you can improve it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5252

134. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 27, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

I have both your letters. Kalavati is showing very good progress.
You have done well in deciding to keep to the policy of selfsufficiency in khaddar. Spare diet, physical and mental labour are the
remedies for nocturnal emissions. Benefits of concentration while
88

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

doing physical work are twofold: the performance improves and
passions automatically remain under control.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5253

135. LETTER TO TULSI MAHER
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 27, 1930
CHI. TULSI MAHER,

It is well that your letter came. I think of you a good
deal. Mirabehn had written; it is good that your letter has also
come.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6538

136. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
September 28, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter.
You did not get or take even the full four days’ rest at
Muzaffarpur. Next time I should stick to such promises. Why should
rest not be taken in the spirit of service? Of course, it can be easily
abused and often is. But that is no reason why honest people may not
honestly give themselves rest so as to enable them to keep fit for
further service. I regard it as self-delusion if not worse when a person
says he is wearing himself away in service. Is such service preferred by
God to service steadily and detachedly performed? Body is like a
machine requiring to be well kept for full service. Enough however of
sermonizing from a safe retreat. Only I do feel that I have not felt
ashamed to take the required rest. That people about me have thought
otherwise is because of their ignorance of the laws of rest. Rest
properly and in due time taken is like the proverbial timely stitch.
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

89

Kaka has had to give up your wheel. He could not pull more
than 70 rounds on it per hour. He uses the box wheel. Yesterday was
the third day and he pulled 119 in one hour. He expects to do much
better. I am making daily progress and do not know what fatigue is on
that wheel. It runs with perfect smoothness. It will do still better when I
have myself made the mal of the required thickness. The carding
gives real music. Vithal wrote saying that we should use a candle for
dressing the gut instead of leaves. This change has made the gut give
much better results. I wish those who have new experiences will pass
them on to me. Whatever are feasible here, I shall certainly try. I want
to reach a high standard both in spinning and carding. There is no
reason why I should stop at 160 rounds per hour. I have now
confidence that I should do better. For me it is God’s work. If He
wills it, He will give me the strength and the ability.
Narandas tells me you are not hitting it off with Kumarappa.
Charity is our talisman. I should let him do as he pleases. But of
course I know nothing of the differences. N. gives only one ortwo
lines in his letter. My weight is between 103 and 104, the food about
the same.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5413. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9647

137. LETTER TO KASUMBA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 28, 1930
CHI. KASUMBA,

You did a very good thing in going over to Chalala. You should
live as you agreed to do during our talk. Give up the idea of being
polluted by anyone’s touch. I trust Umiya is happy. Take interest in
all the activities of Jaisukhlal. I was pleased by the virtue of firmness
which I observed in you. I should like you to use it in serving others.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III

90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

138. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
September 28, 1930
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

I got your detailed letter. I was glad that you wrote. It was only
from your letter that I learnt that Umiya is expecting a baby. Now I
understand the cause of the pain which she suffers. Is she as happy
still as she was at first?
While strictly adhering to your principles, see that you do not
hurt Kasumba. She has the same freedom of conduct which we claim
for ourselves. If you get angry with her, she will only suppress her real
feelings. I have made that mistake myself and I tell you this from
experience. I have observed some fine qualities in Kasumba. But why
should it matter even if she does not have any? She should not
obstruct you in your way of life and you should not obstruct her in
hers. Write to me from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
What you write about capitalists is true. Them too we will win
over with love.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III

139. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 28, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I have your letter. How am I likely to forget that, when covering
me with rugs, you often made mistakes about their order? What an
excellent father he must be who tolerated the same mistake being
made day after day?
In the 84th bhajan in the Ashram Bhajanavali,1 the third line
runs thus: “Kamal myane mot bandhi.” If you know the meaning of
1

This was translated on September 27, 1930.

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

91

this line, tell me what it is. If you do not know it, learn it from
Valjibhai or Totaramji or somebody else who knows it and write to
me, or ask any person who knows it to write to me and let me know.
You have done well in making friends with Kamala. See that she
does not feel uncomfortable there. Have you become a friend of
Zaulinger too? If you have not, try now. She has some doubts
regarding the Ashram rules and if she wants to discuss them with you
let her and do satisfy her.
How are you now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10236; also C.W. 6684. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

140. LETTER TO RADHABEHN GANDHI
September 28, 1930
CHI. RADHIKA,

I have separate letters from you all. Since you post your letters
separately they do give them to me. But the understanding is that
ordinarily all letters should be included in one packet.
Your leg seems to be taking a long time to improve. Probably
the general weakness of your body is partly responsible for the slow
recovery. Narandas complains that none of you join in prayers, etc. Is
this true? Tell me clearly what the position is.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8686. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

141. LETTER TO VENILAL GANDHI
September 28, 1930
CHI. VENILAL GANDHI,

I have your letter. For your two-year-old illness the proper
remedy is not a vaid’s medicine but change of air and diet or, if
necessary, a long fast. Hundreds recover their health in this manner.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 916. Courtesy: Venilal Gandhi

142. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
September 28, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

Do not worry about letters from me. I will continue to write to
you every week so long as I am able to write letters. How are you
now? What are you reading in English? How much are you able to
read every day? Have you learnt to starch the yarn? Do you weave on
the flying-shuttle loom or on the small loom?
Blessings to brother.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
national Museum and Library

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

93

143. LETTER TO BALBHADRA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 29, 1930
CHI. BALBHADRA,

I got your letter. It was a good one. You can write one still
better. What is the cause of your losing weight? Do you chew your
food properly? Are you suffering from any disease? How much milk
do you drink? Your weight must improve. Show this letter to
Narandas and follow his advice. Let me know what you do.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9211

144. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI MADHAVJI
THAKKAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

September 29, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

Was there any letter of yours which remained unanswered? Of
course I do remember all of you women every day. I too would have
been glad if you could have spent a few months with me. But both of
you have made such progress, even while you were away from me,
that I cannot imagine what you could have achieved if you had been
all the time with me. It is good that the children still live on fruit and
so on and that you have come back to it. Why has Dahibehn not
written? Blessings to all the women.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6797

94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

145. LETTER TO PUNJABHAI
September 29, 1930
CHI. PUNJABHAI (JUNIOR, BARODA),

I got your letter. Your illness has lasted too long. That is always
the way of the body. It is more brittle even than a glass bangle. We
should, therefore, take care of it only in order that we may be able to
serve others. Get well soon. Write to me from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4016

146. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
September 29, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

I have your two letters to answer. First, Satis Babu’s question.
The literal interpretation of the battle in Chapter II of the Gita may
certainly be physical conflict. But I have not a shadow of doubt that
the spirit of the Gita inclines us to interpret it as mental conflict. The
moment this is doubted, the Gita will cease to be sacred scripture for
me.
I hope you are well. After consulting Vinoba, do send the boys
desirous of learning Sanskrit to Wardha. Chhotelal is now in jail. I am
very glad to note even the slight improvement in Tarini. Give my
blessings to Tarini, Charu, Arun and others. The tapovanas1 like those
of ancient India can exist even now, it all depends upon our
tapashcharya. Certainly their form may be different. Our duty lies in
going a step ahead of the achievements of our ancestors.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1671

1

Sylvan hermitages

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

95

147. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

September 30, 1930
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,

It was on 21st instant that I sent you my letter requesting that I
should be permitted to establish touch with the civil resistance
prisoners in this jail. I made the request about seeing my secretary and
co-worker Pyarelal even earlier. I must now press for an early answer.
I know the Government’s preoccupations and, as a prisoner, I should
like to spare them all the trouble l can on my behalf. But the request I
have made is a peremptory call of my fundamental being. I can no
longer restrain myself now. The deprivation of touch with these
fellow-prisoners is unbearable for me. Unless, therefore, I get
satisfaction by Saturday noon next, I must begin to withdraw my
co-operation as to the upkeep of my body. To what extent I shall
carry the non-co-operation, I am unable to say at present. It will be
determined, as the days proceed, by the inner urge and my courage
and strength. The commencement will be made with my refusing all
food except the ordinary convict diet, i.e., such of it as I can
religiously take. I can take only five natural ingredients in addition to
salt. Therefore so far as I can see, I can take only kanji and bajari and
juwari chapati. I may not take dal or vegetables as they contain more
than five ingredients. The kanji and chapati I shall take on the
responsibility of and at the desire of the authorities. I am not sure that
after years of abstention from them, my system can cope with either. I
have arrived at this compromise to start with, because I am anxious to
cause as little embarrassment as I can. I would like the Government
not to regard this letter as a threat but consider it as an act of courtesy
and consideration. My desire is not to take the Government unawares
in any serious steps I may take in order to vindicate what is to me a
human right.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3853; also Bombay Secret Abstracts, 750(5)/A,
p. 207

96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

148. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 25/30, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

This time I start with your letter. Last week I ran short of time
and had to be very brief about some points. Write and tell me, if you
know, all about the persons who live in Rajagopalachari’s Ashram,
where Subbiah and his wife are and so on.
Punjabhai must now endure his suffering and pass his days in
peace. If you can, have a further discussion with Mrs. Zaulinger. She
seems to be a wise and good lady, but she takes time to understand
our point of view in everything. I don’t see anything wrong in letting
her join the night-watch, if she feels so inclined. Her argument is
correct. Indian sisters may not be ready to move as freely as she is
ready to do; if, however, anyone wishes to join her, she may. I have
merely expressed a view from here without knowing all the
circumstances there. Do what you yourself think proper.
What shall I say about Keshu and others? Read the letter which I
shall write to them this time and give it to them. Keshu is an upright
young man. He will probably understand his dharma in the course of
time, and so I don’t feel like writing anything to him. You, for your
part, should be bold and tell him what you think right. This time, of
course, I will write to him.
My diet consists of three pounds of milk turned into curds and
taken at two meals, and milk once. Then nine tomatoes, small or big as
supplied and the required quantity of boiled vegetables such as
cabbage, pumpkin, etc. I add salt afterwards if I require. I gave up
sweet potatoes four days ago. Dr. Jivraj visited Kakasaheb and he
thought that it would cause constipation. I had again found it
necessary to take enemas. I, therefore, decided to see the effect of
giving up sweet potatoes. I observe no change. If I keep up my
strength, I will not resume sweet potatoes. I didn’t think they were
doing me any harm. It is the water of this place which seems to cause
constipation to a person of my constitution. There is, however, no
cause for worry at all. I shall be weighed this evening and will mention
the weight in this letter. Enemas are nothing new to me, but I should
certainly like to do without them if possible. I wish to carry on without
fresh fruit as long as I can. If by eating vegetables I do not
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

97

succeed in getting rid of enemas and if I feel weak in the slightest
degree, I will resume dates and raisins. No one should worry on my
account.
My spinning is improving. The speed seems to be increasing. At
any rate, I don’t feel tired now. I will not be too eager for the present
to increase the output. I feel a little unhappy that I have had to
abandon the effort to memorize the Gita verses. But I am waiting for
an opportunity to resume it. In the beginning, I used to try to
memorize them while spinning. But I saw that that interfered with the
spinning. I realize every day the necessity for ever more concentration
for good spinning. I see that there is a great difference between mere
spinning and the art of spinning. I wish to learn the art. Maybe I shall
not succeed in acquiring it during this life. I will be satisfied if I am
not slack in my effort. I realized that my eagerness to learn the Gita
verses by heart while spinning was a sign of my slackness. That was
against the teaching of the Gita. I wish to memorize the Gita verses if
I can do that and at the same time acquire proficiency in spinning, but
I would be false to the teaching of the Gita as I understand it if I tried
to learn its verses by heart at the cost of my spinning. Plead with
Amidas. I am writing to him. How can we ask a person like him to
leave the Ashram?
I shall not be able to send two discourses. Perhaps I will
continue the discourse on equality of religions. I feel inclined to omit
the subject of swadeshi. I feel that by writing on it I may violate to
some extent my resolution to make no reference to political subjects.
Even if I write about swadeshi from a spiritual standpoint, I am bound
to include in the discourse something which would have an indirect
connection with politics. If I feel that I can write on the subject
without touching on politics, I will try. Let me see if I can do so.
There is no point in forcing Giriraj to stay there against his
wishes. If Balkrishna invites him to go to Wardha, what harm do you
see in his going? He is a good man, but he cannot think clearly.
Balkrishna’s company is likely to benefit him. Since you have written
to Vinoba offering to send more persons, why not Giriraj? If he feels
happy, he will certainly work. It does not seem right to me to abandon
him. But, I again seem to be meddling with what I should leave alone.
Don’t, therefore, attach much weight to what I have said. Treat this
merely as a suggestion intended to help you to come to a decision. It
is possible that I may have formed my opinion without knowing all
98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the facts of the case. I have so much confidence in your decisions that,
when my reason does not accept any of them, I feel that that must be
so because of my ignorance of some facts. And now I reply to your
questions:
1. There is no question of asking him to leave the Ashram,
but I would not ask him to stay on either if he decided to leave.
2. He should not go to Wardha without the consent of the
Ashram authorities.
3. If he does anything against the wishes of the Ashram
authorities and forfeits their confidence, the Ashram cannot
support his children.
4. If the Ashram is not in a position to look after Katu and
Vimu, I cannot think where we can send them. If at present
Giriraj has no share in looking after them, the Ashram may, if it
can, look after them in case he goes to some other place with the
consent of the Ashram authorities. If, however, the children have
become unmanageable, Giriraj should be told so.
5. I think the Ashram should give Giriraj the necessary
financial help to enable him to make some other arran- gement.
The amount of such help should be fixed by the Ashram. I
think I have now replied to all your questions.
Read my letter to Giriraj.
I do not have the necessary data to enable me to decide about
Manibehn. But from what I have understood I feel that she should be
permitted to go to her place if she is very keen on doing so. It is a
question not of what Bhagwanji wishes, but of what Manibehn wishes.
If she wants to stay on, she should be welcome to do so, on this
condition, however, that she should forget Bhagwanji. She should not
wish or hope to see him. She should submit to the Ashram rules as the
other women do. If she is not willing to do this, she should leave.
I understand what you say about Mirabehn and Kumarappa.
Your decision seems right. I am writing to Mirabehn.
Where is Jethalal at present? The names of the fruits which you
said would be on display in our exhibition gave me a pleasant
surprise. I didn’t even know that you had planted grapes.
You need not send my worn sandals. There was a new pair. If
Kanti does not know about it, that is the end of the matter. As I told
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

99

you in my letter, I have been able to manage for the present. We shall
see later what we should do if you do not succeed in finding the new
pair. Why shouldn’t a pair from the stock of sandals in the Ashram do
for me? A pair like the one you sent for Kakasaheb will be all right
for me. I would like the sandals better without the dalia such as
Kakasaheb’s pair has. Do send the money for Pyarelal’s living
expenses. You can adopt no other course in his case. He ought to have
drawn money even earlier, which he did not do. The Ashram is all that
he has in the world, call it his friend or anything you will. What you
have done about Gokibehn is worthy of you. Of course, nothing
could have been sent to her from the Ashram. You could have
approached Dr. Mehta, but I liked it very much that you gave the sum
from your own resources. I am sure she needed it. I went through the
figures of spinning on Rentia Barash1 . They are very good indeed. I
think Khurshedbehn wants some more women. Find out exactly what
she wants and send someone if you can. If you cannot, give her
convincing reasons why you cannot. As far as I can see, no mature
woman worker is now left there who can go and join her.
September 26, 1930
I was weighed today. The weight is a little above 103, which
means that there has been some improvement. Kakasaheb weighed a
little below 115. That means that there has been no improvement
during the past week. It may not be unusual for him to lose half a
pound or a quarter of a pound occasionally.
You did the right thing in not sending me B. J.’s leaflet. You
cannot send it.
September 27, 1930
Lilavati has again become impatient to go and join
Khurshedbehn. If the latter knows her condition and still calls her, I
think it may be best to let her go. Rather than that she should remain
in the Ashram and feel restless, it is better that she should go and
return wiser from experience. Do what you think best. Satis Babu had
made a balance costing 3 annas for weighing slivers, etc.; if you can
find that or any other similar balance, send it with someone who may
1

The twelfth day of the dark half of Bhadrapad, which was Gandhiji’s birthday
according to Vikram Calendar

100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be coming here. Do you have any news about Anna who was
spreading Hindi in Madras?
September 28, 1930
Did you get the yarn which Kakasaheb had sent through Bal for
the Goseva Sangh? He had sent, through Shankar, 8,500 yardsfor the
Charkha Sangh. Will it be delivered to you there or will it be delivered
at Ahmedabad? Read what I have written about Miss A. in my letter to
Mirabehn.
Tuesday morning, September 30, 1930
As I told you in my letter last week, I have translated into
English the discourse on Equality of Religions and send the
translation herewith. If Valjibhai has translated it and if his translation
has already been printed, he should read the translation which I am
sending. Anybody else who wishes to read it may do so and the last
person should hand it over to Mirabehn. If Valjibhai’s translation has
not been printed, he should carefully go through my translation and
then publish whichever he likes. Do you intend to publish the
discourses in Gujarati only or their English translations also?
This subject is so important that I dwell a little further on it. My
meaning will perhaps become clearer if I describe here some of my
experiences. In Phoenix we had our daily prayers in the same way as
in Sabarmati, and Mussalmans as well as Christians attended them
along with Hindus. The late Sheth Rustomji and his children too
attended the prayer meetings. Rustomji Sheth very much liked the
Gujarati bhajan. “Dear, dear to me is the name of Rama.” If my
memory serves me right, Maganlal or Kashi was once leading us in
singing this hymn, when Rustomji Sheth exclaimed joyously “Say the
name of Hormazd instead of the name of Rama”. His suggestion was
readily taken up, and after that whenever the Sheth was present, and
sometimes even when he was not, we put in the name of Hormazd in
place of Rama. The late Husain, son of Daud Sheth, often stayed at the
Phoenix Ashram, and enthusiastically joined our prayers. To the
accompaniment of an organ, he used to sing in a very sweet voice the
song “Hai bahare bagh”, “The garden of this world has only a
momentary bloom”. He taught us all this song, which we also sang at
prayers. Its inclusion in our Bhajanavali is a tribute to truth-loving
Husain’s memory. I have never met a young man who practised Truth
more devotedly than Husain. Joseph Royeppen often came to
Phoenix. He was a Christian, and his favourite hymn was “Vaishnava
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

101

jana”. He loved music and once sang this hymn saying “Christian”
in place of “vaishnava”. The others accepted his reading with
alacrity, and I observed that this filled Joseph’s heart with joy.
When I was turning over the pages of the sacred books of
different faiths for my own satisfaction, I became sufficiently familiar
for my purpose with Christianity, Islam, Zoroastrianism, Judaismand
Hinduism. In reading these texts, I can say that I felt the same regard
for all these faiths although, perhaps, I was not then conscious of it.
Reviving my memory of those days, I do not find I ever had the
slightest desire to criticize any of those religions merely because they
were not my own, but read each sacred book in a spirit of reverence
and found the same fundamental morality in each. Some things I did
not understand then, as I did not in Hindu scriptures. I do not
understand those things even now, but experience has taught me that it
is a mistake hastily to imagine that anything that we cannot
understand is necessarily wrong. Some things which I did not
understand first have since become as clear as daylight. Equimindedness helps us to solve many difficulties and even when we criticize
anything, we express ourselves with a humility and courtesy which
leave no sting behind them.
One difficulty still remains. As I stated last time, the acceptance
of the doctrine of Equality of Religions does not abolish the
distinction between religion and irreligion. We do not propose to
cultivate tolerance for irreligion. That being so, some people might
object that there would be no room left for equimindedness, if
everyone took his own decision as to what was religion and what was
irreligion. Such a question may be raised and one may even make a
mistake in deciding what is religion and what is irreligion. If, however,
we follow the law of love, we shall not bear any hatred towards the
irreligious brother. On the contrary, though we see that he follows
irreligion, we shall love him and, therefore, either we shall bring him
to see the error of his ways or he will convince us of our error, or each
will tolerate the other’s difference of opinion. If the other party does
not observe the law of love, he may be violent to us. If, however, we
cherish real love for him, it will overcome his bitterness in the end. All
obstacles in our path will vanish, if only we observe the golden rule
that we must not be impatient with those whom we may consider to be
in error, but must be prepared, if need be, to suffer in our own person.
102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As I have stated earlier in this letter, I think I will omit the
subject of swadeshi. I have yet to think on what subject I shall write
next.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There are 70 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

149. LETTER TO R. V. MARTIN
October 2, 1930
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,

Mr. Quinn has been having a chat with me about my letter of
30th ultimo. If you are authorized to let me see periodically in the
yard where I am kept, those of my friends whom I may find it
necessary to see for the sake of service, I should be quite satisfied. Of
course, I would not discuss politics with them nor send any political
message, nor say or suggest anything calculated to subvert prison
discipline. As I told you this morning, my object in wanting to see
these friends is to serve them and, if you would believe it, assist the jail
authorities wherever it may be possible even as I did in 1923.
From a photostat: S.N. 19982

150. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 2, 1930
CHI. SHARDA (BABU),

Your letter. The beauty of trees and plants surpasses that of
electric lights as the beauty of real tomatoes surpasses that of clay
ones. Have you ever heard any one’s hunger being satisfied by clay
tomatoes?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9891. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

103

151. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 2, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

If you wish, you may certainly keep the wooden sandals. But
what will you do with those bits of wood? Keep them if you think that
they will add an inch or two to your stature. I would condemn your
action as smacking of idolatry. I used to keep with me a photograph
of my father. I had hung his photographs in the drawing-room and
the bedroom when I was in South Africa. When I used to wear a chain,
it had a locket which contained small photographs of my father and
elder brother. I have now put them away. That does not mean that I
feel less reverence for them now. In fact they are more deeply
engraved in my heart today. I think of their virtues and try to cultivate
them. I can worship countless gods in this manner. If I tried to keep
with me photographs of them all, I would have no room to put them
in. And if I tried to keep their wooden sandals, I should have to
acquire a piece of land for the purpose. As a man of experience, I
advise you, therefore, to follow me when I am walking on the right
path. That will be a thousand times better than keeping my wooden
sandals, and if anybody follows your example, I would welcome that.
On the contrary, if anybody saw the sandals with you and followed
your example blindly, would he not fall into a pit? Think on this and
then do what you wish.
He who understands and does his duty, his cravings have already
left him. A person whose cravings have not left him has no sense of
duty. Our cravings are like a huge mountain which no man
can cross over by climbing. The only course for us is to raze the
mountain to the ground. To give up our cravings is to
become conscious of our duty. Suppose that I wish to go to Kashi.
I even know the path which I should follow to reach it. What
other craving, then, will force me to stray from that path? I have
no other craving but to reach Kashi, and that is satisfied. What more
do I want then? You have an opportunity for service which has
come to you unsought. You should get fullest satisfaction in doing
that service with single-minded devotion. Whatever opportunitiesfor
human company and for reading you get while doing that duty, may
104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be availed of. Apart from that, you should desire nothing. This,
according to me is yoga, “skill in works”, “equimindedness” and
samadhi.
If, however, all this seems idle preaching to you and you thirst
for reading, by all means satisfy your craving. Reduce the burden of
work on you and take rest. How you may do this, you can decide only
in consultation with Narandas. He is a man of profound
understanding, patience and goodness. He will certainly help you.
What more can I say to cheer you? A person like me can only suggest
the direction which you should follow. It is on oneself, however, that
you and everyone else should depend for peace of mind.
I understand what you say about Sushila. In future, let her send
her good wishes in Marathi. My blessings to her.
I understand that after having enjoyed Panditji’s music, a
person like you will not enjoy music by anybody else. But why
should you not, yourself, lead the bhajans? If you have the courage to
do so, ask them to let you do it. If you wish, I will write. You certainly
know how to sing. I have not forgotten that you used to sing bhajans
almost every night. How are your tonsils? Did you get them examined
by Dr. Haribhai?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10237; also C.W. 6685. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

152. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI M. PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 2, 1930
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

As advised by the doctor, do take a full month’s rest. The work
of service will never end. If you become stronger, you will be able to
work better. Moreover, our programme is such that wherever we are,
we can do some work. Write to me regularly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8989

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

105

153. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 2, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),

I have your letter.
If you think you are not worthy of being a daughter, how much
more fit should I become to be a worthy mother and father to you? If
I who claim to be both, am slack in my effort to be so, I shall have no
place anywhere in the three worlds. Let us, therefore, not argue who is
worthy and who is not. If a son or daughter is unworthy, the parents
bear no small responsibility for that.
I understand the reason for your depression. Instead of thinking
that you have to do this, that or the other thing, you should think that
God does all that and uses you as His instrument. If you think thus,
you will feel no burden at all. It is God who carries the burden, and
His shoulders are so broad that however heavy the burden we place on
them He does not feel it even as much as we would a speck of dust on
our hand. We should, therefore, forget ‘I’ and ‘Mine’. “It is I who
do this— that is our ignorance, like that of the dog who thinks he
draws the cart”: this line by Narasinh Mehta expresses his own
experience. ‘Shakat’ in this line means a cart. If we believe that the
dog who walks under a moving cart draws it, then we may believe that
the burden of our tasks is on us; but anyone who works for the love of
God will never find his task a heavier burden than he can carry. He
does not have to take upon himself anything. Tasks come to him
unsought. He goes on working cheerfully, with God’s name upon his
lips. You sing with sincere emotion: “Make me your servant.” Think
over the meaning of that bhajan. Also think over the meaning of the
two verses which we have added to the prayers for women. It is the
Lord’s assurance to those who surrender themselves to Him that He
will carry the burden of their happiness and welfare. Why, then,
should we worry? This is looking at the matter philosophically.
But even if you and I feel agitated, what escape is there
for us? Our relationship with the Ashram is like the Hindu marriage
bond. The tie can never be loosened. Instead of thinking
whetherothers are half-hearted or firm in their attitude, you should ask
106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

yourself whether you are half-hearted or firm, and that is all that is
necessary. Certainly seek what comfort Nath can give you. Talk with
Narandas and pour out your heart every week to me. If you can free
yourself for a few days and pay a visit to Kakasaheb, that, too, will
give you some comfort.
Do not work so hard that you get exhausted. One should always
preserve a sense of proportion in undertaking work in the spirit of
service. We can do that only if we have cultivated the attitude of
non-attachment. Non-attachment means freedom from the sense of
‘I’ and ‘Mine’. The saying that while sleeping one should stretch out
one’s limbs according to the length of the covering has great wisdom
behind it.
Read this letter again and again, think over it and overcome
your depression and put your heart in the bhajan when you sing
“Make me your servant”.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G. S. Gangabehnne, pp. 42-4; also C.W. 8760. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

154. LETTER TO BALVIR SINGH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 2/31 , 1930
BHAI BALVIR SINGH,

Your letter. The work at Khadi Bhandar constitutes not only
proper work but also excellent work. Performance of yajna implies
spinning for half an hour at least. These jobs cannot be evaluated on a
comparative basis as both are part of your duty. Hence you have to
find time for spinning just as you have to find time for meals. It takes
only one day to prepare enough slivers to last for a month. Fewer
slivers will be required if you spin to the fineness of 20 or 30 instead
of 10. Talk it over with Mahavirprasadji. Kakasaheb sends you his
blessings.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 10538
1

Not quite legible

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

107

155. LETTER TO MAJOR MART1N
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

October 3, 1930
DEAR MAJOR MARTIN,

With reference to our conversations, by ‘friends’ I mean those
civil resistance prisoners whom I know. I should want to meet only
those who may be reported to be suffering from illness or
ill-treatment or might have been reported to have so suffered. This
right too, I should exercise with as much restraint as possible. If it is
necessary to explain my meaning further, you will please let me know.
I want to have no mental reservations.
As for postponing the enforcement of my resolution, I am sorry
I must not do it, if satisfaction cannot be had in time. But it need cause
no immediate worry as in the initial stages, I should be eating such
ordinary convict food as I can religiously take.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 3854; also S.N. 19983

156. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
October 3, 1930
DEAR MOTI BAPU,

I have replied to your wire. I must not exert myself to give you
a long reply to your loving letter of 15th instant. I appreciate your
deep love and know that the Sangh is with me in all acts of love.
Sardar and Mahadev join me in sending you love.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 11037

108

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

157. LETTER TO PARASRAM MEHROTRA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 3, 1930
CHI. PARASRAM,

Your letter. Do as Shankerlalji says. You must go on with your
task despite the world’s ridicule. Do not picket the dealers in
mill-made slivers, but persuade them with love. On no account give up
truth and non-violence. You will then automatically acquire mental
strength.
Continue to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C.W. 4965. Courtesy: Parasram Mehrotra

158. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
October 4, 1930
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. What you write about weavers is true. There is
a special class of workers in Ahmedabad who starch yarn. We see such
workers elsewhere too. Cannot we supply starched warp to weavers? If
you ask Ramjibhai and the others, they also will come and help. They
will have to do the work entrusted to them by Chhaganbhai or
Surendra. If, however, you feel that I should write to them, write to me
again. I have had no letter yet from Motibehn.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3745

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

109

159. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
October 4, 1930
BHAI RAMESHWARDAS (DHULIA),

Your letter. Do not take it so much to heart. Recite Ramanama
and be cheerful. Bear whatever pain there is after taking the necessary
treatment and do whatever service you can. No reason to worry if you
cannot get up [early] in the morning.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 177

160. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 5, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I am writing this after taking silence. Have just seen your
portrait in a group published in the Times Illustrated Weekly. You are
spinning on the takli and looking fit. Then I saw in the columns of
The Bombay Chronicle that you were in the women’s procession and
spoke at their meeting. So you are again near my lodgings and
probably this will be in your hands at the Ashram.
Yes, S. Aiengar’s daughter is a very good woman but she was
hysterical even when we were travelling from Mysore. When you write
to her please give my love to her and tell her I often think of her. It is
a sad thing—her father’s case. It is the same thing with him as with the
daughter. He can be hardly considered responsible for many of his
strange acts. Did you see him at all? Where did you stay whilst in
Madras?
Last week, Kaka having been given my wheel, I thought I would
finish my quota on yours. I tried hard but I could not make it work.
The spindle won’t turn. Whether the resin was ineffective or what the
cause was, I could not divine. But there it was refusing to turn. Then I
thought of the Gandiv of Surat. I found it to be an extraordinarily
effective thing. For the last two days I have been finishing the whole
110

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of my quota on it and that in very good time and without the slighest
fatigue. It has captivated me and I want you to try it. It is essentially a
poor man’s wheel. The inventor is no mechanic. How it has come to
him, I do not know. But every part of it, in my opinion, shows
solicitude for the starving. It costs Rs. 11 /2 but it can be made for only
8 annas, I am sure. It is the lightest wheel going in India. It requires
the least attention. It occupies the smallest space of all the wheels I
know. A little child can work at it. Thousands of these wheels can be
manufactured in a day if the discs and spindles are kept in stock. Its
mechanism is simplicity personified. You naturally draw a fine thread.
The very first I drew was over 30 counts. And I fancy that it can
compete with any in giving speed. It admits of certain improvements,
which can be made without adding a pice to the cost. I have made two
and this reduces the cost. The original has noisy wooden holders. I
have discarded them and put on coir rope picked up from rubbish. I
have broken up the jingling glass bars on the spindle and wound a few
turns of yarn to hold the spindle in position. This has made it
absolutely noiseless. Such is the opinion of a new convert, who has
tried it only for the last four days. It may, therefore, need
modification. But it is undoubtedly a case for believers to give it a fair
trial. I am writing to the inventor suggesting certain improvements and
am writing to Keshu too to examine, try and if my preliminary
observation is at all sound, to improve it. There are other merits I must
not describe, as I have many more letters yet to write. If you can think
of the reason that has prevented the spindle on your wheel from
turning, please tell me.
How did you find Brajkishore Babu? Is he better? Did you see
Prabhavati? She is much reduced and her latest letter says she had
high fever.
And your health? You must not break down at the Ashram.
You will have met Kamalabehn Lundy. Of course you will befriend
her. She appears to be a very good woman.
Both of us are keeping excellent health. My weight, if anything,
shows a slight increase. The vegetable experiment seems to have
proved a success and it gives me joy to know that the disappearance of
even dried fruit reduces the cost very materially. In vegetables, for the
last two days, I have been taking spinach which has moved the bowels
automatically. I take sweet potatoes off and on. I hope you have by
now got all my letters. I have missed no week.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5414. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9648
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

111

161 LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
Y. M.,

October 5, 1930
MY DEAR ANAND,

I have your letters. Of course you are in your place being there.
If you are uniformly gentle, you will win Father over completely.
You must not damage your health by denying yourself the food
you may need. You may not accept furniture that you do not need
from Father but you should ask him to send you something that it will
please him to send you and that you may need. you should have no
hesitation in asking Father for gifts and should not take it ill if he
refuses to give them.
Love to you and Vidya.
BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand
T. Hingorani

162. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
October 5, 1930
CHI. MANU,

How did you get fever? Ordinarily you would deserve a prize
for the way you take care of your health. You have succeeded, by
your own efforts, in building up a strong body. It is for you now to
preserve your improved health. When Kakasaheb is released, let him
find you a trained worker in a fit condition.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7765

112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

163. LETTER TO DUDHIBEHN DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 5, 1930
CHI. DUDHIBEHN,

I have your letter. I am very glad that you teach in the class.
Give your whole-hearted devotion to the work and cultivate the utmost
interest in it. Love all children as you do Manu. A letter from you will
not increase my burden in any way. Write to me from time to time
and ask me any question you wish to. How is your health now? What
do you think has been the effect of the fast on the whole?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7454. Courtesy: V. G. Desai

164. LETTER TO GOVIND PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 6, 1930
CHI. GOVIND,

I have your letter written in a beautiful hand. Write to me from
time to time about your activities. Do you read anything? What is
your weight now?.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3945

165. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 6, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

You must have received my letter posted directly to you. I am
expecting a wire from you. Why should you become ill? See that you
do not harm your health. If you cannot improve your health there, go
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

113

and live in the Ashram. No one will oppose your going there for the
sake of your health. Since you are in Patna, you can give me news
about everyone there. I am quite all right. Kakasaheb’s health keeps
improving.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3375

166. LETTER TO SHANTA SHANKARBHAI PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 6, 1930
CHI. SHANTA (PATEL),

I have your letter. You have given much information, but the
handwriting has not yet improved. If you make an effort to improve
it, you will certainly succeed. If you don’t improve it at this age, it will
for ever remain bad, as mine has remained. I hope you do understand
that we commit violence in writing to anyone in a bad hand.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4054

167. LETTER TO BALBHADRA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 6, 1930
CHI. BALBHADRA,

I have your letter. If Mathuradasbhai is really ready to take you
with him and if Narandasbhai permits you to go, I see no harm in
your going. Improve your handwriting. And increase your weight.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9212

114

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

168. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI PANDYA
October 6, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I have gone through your letters. Your opinion is not likely to
be free from faults because it is in your nature to suspect rather too
much. Your duty just the same is to guard your own self. Your duty is
to keep quiet after having promptly informed Narandas about
whatever evil you happen to notice. Only in this way will you be able
to make some progress. Do not regard the Ashram as forsaken so
long as there is even a single votary of the vows of truth, etc.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 325. Courtesy: Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

169. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 2/7, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got the Ashram packet yesterday. Mostly the packets are
handed over to me on the very day on which they arrive.
Read the letter which I am writing to Harilal Desai. I have
nothing to write about Giriraj this time. Do what you think best. I was
glad to read about Zainu. I am writing to Bhagwanji. His letter will
have no effect on me. I know his nature. I felt after reading Madhu’s
letter that she was a very innocent girl. I am sure Navin and others will
learn simplicity by and by. I am happy that you trust others. No one
who does so has ever lost anything in the world. The suspicious gain
nothing; on the contrary, they often lose something and exchange
worry for peace of mind. Take care about three things in regard to all
who have got malaria. They should see to it that they clear their
bowels. If they do not do that in the natural course, they should take
either a purgative or an enema. Even after the fever has come down,
they should take 5 grains of quinine daily for a week, dissolvingthe
quinine in lime juice and adding 10 to 15 grains of soda bicarb to the
mixture, drinking it as they would soda water. There will be, and
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

115

ought to be, effervescence, when the mixture is prepared. Further, for
at least one week after the fever has gone they should live on milk and
black dried grapes or boiled vegetables. Those who have had no
attack of malaria should, if they sleep where there are mosquitoes, rub
kerosene over the exposed parts of the body before going to bed. In
any case everyone should keep his stomach light. Amidas does cause
me worry. I should be happy if my letter has had any effect and he
has started taking milk.
Punjabhai may follow his inclinations and live as he wishes. If
Jamna is treated by the Udasi Vaid who treats Chandrashankar, she
may also benefit. Chandrashankar is all praise for him. Go and see
him once. Read my letter to Gangabehn. Give her some time and
console her. If she comes to Poona even on the excuse of visiting
Kakasaheb, she will have change of air for three days. Keep urging
Nathji. His presence, too, may give peace to Gangabehn. Tell
Mahadev’s mother that you are glad she has come, and that she
should not think of returning to Dihen in the immediate future. If
possible, she should stay on permanently in the Ashram. Read my
letter to Chhaganlal. You will see from it what restraints should be
observed by those who write to me. If in any letter they are not
observed, it should be kept back and not forwarded to me. I think
Khadag Bahadur’s letter did not observe them. Premabehn, too, seems
worried. Read the letter to her and console her. Read my letter to
Kamalabehn Lundi. Some of her suggestions deserve to be welcomed.
October 4, 1930
Read my letter to Chhaganlal Joshi. Everyone who writes to me
should observe the restraints which I have mentioned in it. Any letters
which violate them should be kept back. Khadag Bahadur’s letter was
of that type. 1 I don’t want to burden you with the responsibility of
reading all letters. But you may glance through a letter by anyone
who is writing for the first time. Letters by the women never contain
anything objectionable. You will, therefore, need to read only a few of
them. I certainly feel sometimes that I should put in a separate packet
the letters which I write to people there. Perhaps the task of redirecting
the other letters is much too heavy a burden on you. I cannot think
what I should do to reduce it. Since those letters are not such as I
1

116

Repetition of the four preceding sentences seems to be inadvertent.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

need not write, I continue to burden you with the task of redirecting
them.
Read my letter to Harilal Desai, so that you may bear in mind
the suggestion I have made in it. I have recently started spinning on
the Gandiv spinning-wheel. I like it. I can spin on it with almost the
same speed as on the portable spinning-wheel. I hope to increase the
speed. With a few improvements, this wheel can perhaps be made a
perfect model. Read what I have written about it in my letter to
Ishwarlal Vimawala. Read what I propose to write about it in my letter
to Mirabehn too. I should like someone in the Ashram to try it. You,
too, may examine it. I have suggested to Ishwarlal that he should send
two or three wheels. I have seen quite a number of models, but at the
moment I think that among them all this is the only one worth trial
and examination. I will write further about it after I have had more
experience of it.
Tuesday morning, October 7, 1930
I got the cotton and the yarn belt. The cotton was particularly
welcome, as Vallabhbhai is being supplied with slivers from here. I am
awaiting the scale, but there is no urgency about it.
Humility cannot be an observance by itself. For it does not lend
itself to being deliberately practised. It is, however, an indispensable
test of ahimsa. In one who has ahimsa in him it becomes part of his
very nature. A preliminary draft of the rules and regulations of the
Satyagraha Ashram was circulated among friends, including the late
Sir Gurudas Banerji. He suggested that humility should be accorded a
place among the observances. This suggestion could not then be
accepted for the reason that I have just mentioned. But although
humility is not one of the observances, it is certainly as essential as,
and perhaps even more essential than any of them. Only it has never
come to anyone by practice. Truth can be cultivated as well as Love.
But to cultivate humility is tantamount to cultivating hypocrisy.
Humility must not be here confounded with mere manners or
etiquette. One man will sometimes prostrate himself before another
although his heart is full of bitterness against him. This is not
humility, but cunning. A man may chant Ramanama or tell his beads
all day long, and move in society like a sage; but if he is selfish at
heart, he is not meek but only hypocritical. A humble person is not
himself conscious of his humility. Truth and the like perhaps admit of

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

117

measurement, but not humility. Inborn humility can never remain
hidden, and yet the possessor is unaware of itsexistence. The story of
Vashishtha and Vishwamitra furnishes a very good case in point.
Humility should make the possessor realize that he is as nothing.
Directly we imagine ourselves to be something, there is egotism. If a
man who keeps observances is proud of keeping them, they will lose
much, if not all, of their value. And a man who is proud of his virtue
often becomes a curse to society. Society will not appreciate it, and he
himself will fail to reap any benefit from it. Even a little thought will
suffice to convince us that all creatures are nothing more than a mere
atom in this universe. Our existence as embodied beings is purely
momentary. What are a hundred years in eternity? But if we shatter
the chains of egotism and melt into the ocean of humanity, we share
its dignity. To feel that we are something is to set up a barrier between
God and ourselves; to cease feeling that we are something is to
become one with God. A drop in the ocean partakes of the greatness
of its parent, although it is unconscious of it. But it is dried up as soon
as it enters upon an existence independent of the ocean. We do not
exaggerate when we say that life on earth is a mere bubble. How is it
possible to cultivate such utter humility? It develops of itself if we
understand the spirit of our observances. Can one who aspires to
follow truth ever be a proud man? A life of service must be one of
humility. He who would sacrifice his life for others has hardly time to
reserve for himself a place in the sun. Inertia must not be mistaken for
humility, as it has been in Hinduism. Because it has been so mistaken,
lethargy and hypocrisy have often flourished in its name. True
humility means most strenuous and constant endeavour entirely
directed towards the service of humanity. God is continuously in
action without resting a single moment. If we would serve Him or
become one with Him, our activity must be as unwearied as His. There
may be momentary rest in store for the drop which is separated from
the ocean, but not for the drop in the ocean, which knows no rest. The
same is the case with ourselves. As soon as we become one with the
ocean, in the shape of God, there is no more rest for us, nor indeed do
we need rest any longer. Our very sleep is action. For we sleep with
the thought of God in our hearts. This restlessness constitutes true rest.
This never-ceasing agitation holds the key to peace ineffable. True
humility, therefore, requires us to dedicate ourselves to the service of
all living creatures. When we have surrendered our all in this manner,
no day in the week is a day of rest for us. This supreme state of total
118

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

surrender is difficult to describe, but not beyond the bounds ofhuman
experience. It has been attained by many dedicated souls, and may be
attained by ourselves as well. This is the goal which we of the
Satyagraha Ashram have set before ourselves; all our observances and
activities are calculated to assist us in reaching it. We shall reach it
some day all unawares if we have truth in us. It is unattainable if we
consciously strive for it.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There are 61 letters today.
Some women from the Ashram should go and see
Khurshedbehn. If you have some news about Manibehn, let me have
it.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

170. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 7, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (DESAI),

I was able to see Pyarelal last week. They had permitted very
little time for the meeting. He had certainly become weaker, but is
better now. He gets milk, etc. He is well looked after. I hope that I
shall be able to see him several times again.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1806

171. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 10, 1930
CHI. SHARDA (BABU),

I have Your letter. One reason why you do not like to spin is
that you are not fully aware of the fact that through spinning you
can serve millions, or, maybe you are not as much interested in
serving them. If that is the case you should correct your attitude.
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

119

Another reason may be that you have still not mastered the art of
spinning. Interest is bound to develop if you could spin fine yarn, the
thread does not snap and the spinning-wheel hums along without a
jarring sound. Have you ever seen the Andhra women spinning at an
exhibition? Who would not be interested in spinning if he could spin
like them. The same applies in the case of the Gita. You will like it if
you realize its worth.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10023. Courtesy: Sharda G. Chokhawala

172. LETTER TO HARI-ICHCHHA DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 10, 1930
CHI. HARI-ICHCHHA,

I have your letter. My congratulations to Chandan. You also
should give your name for the competition. If you get the prize, you
may use the money for helping somebody. Those who do not require
any incentive such as a competition provides, should none the less join
one for the sake of other people. My blessings to Chandan, Tara and
Vasant.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7466

173. LETTER TO KAPILRAI MEHTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 10, 1930
CHI. KAPIL,

They got your letter at Vile Parle. Although one’s home may be
near, one should not go there for the sake of the comforts one may
get there or for the love of one’s relations. But there can be no
objection to a worker going to his home to get proper nursing during
illness, with the willing consent of his co-workers and in order to
lessen the burden on them. It depends on one’s attitude. You should
120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

take care of your health and improve it. How can you let it become
delicate at this young age? Sun-bath, pranayam1 , shavasan2 and eating
less help considerably in asthma.
Kakasaheb is quite well. He sends his blessings.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3975

174. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
Y. M.,

October 10, 1930
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

I have your letter. I got the tomatoes, lemons and papayas sent
by you and Nirmalabehn. It irks me that you should spend the least
bit of time or money on such things. You have surely gone beyond
the stage where you needed to give outward expression to your love.
One may incur such expense if it is necessary—here it is not. We both
keep good health. The exhibition seems to have gone off very well. I
have also received the booklet3 contaning quotations about swadeshi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G. N. 11555

1

Deep breathing
Lying still on one’s back
3
By Nandlal; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 9/14-10-1930.
2

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

121

175. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 10, 1930
CHI. MANGALA,

Your handwriting is gradually improving. I can see from your
letters that you are trying. Learn well by heart the chapters of the
Gita. Be particular about the pronunciation. Is Pushpa learning
anything by heart?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11090. Courtesy: Pushpa Naik

176. LETTER TO NARAYAN MORESHWAR KHARE
October 11, 1930
CHI. PANDITJI,

I have your letter. I hope your fever has completely left you. I
approve of your idea of reading the Ramayana among the village
people and cultivating contacts with them by that means. But do not
let the opportunity for contacts with them be your motive for reading
the Ramayana. If you read the Ramayana among them, it should be
only in order that they may learn wisdom. If you incidentally get an
opportunity of coming into contact with the villagers, that should of
course be welcome. That is, you should start reading the Ramayana
with the intention of keeping up the practice. Or you may read it
occasionally as a means of cultivating contact with the people, as you
do many other things for the same purpose; that would, then, be a
different thing. Understand the distinction between the two points of
view. I don’t think I shall be able to write the reminiscences of
Gokhale. My preoccupation with spinning will let me do nothing else.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 240. Courtesy: Lakshmibai Khare

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

177. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 11, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have your letter. The postcard addressed to you at Patna does
not seem to have reached you, for I had asked you in it to send me a
wire but I did not get any. I now learn from the letter that your
mother-in-law has passed away and that both Jayaprakash and you
have been a good deal shaken. Why should we ever grieve over death,
which no one can escape? Moreover, the lady was quite ill. She
hasbeen released from her suffering. Hence, those whom she has left
behind suffer because of their selfishness. Your duty now is to see that
you get strong quickly. I don’t think your disease has yet left you.
For some time, you may also write directly to me. This in addition to
the letters which you should continue to send through the Ashram.
May God grant patience in suffering to you all. I keep good health.
The weight is 104. I think that is quite good.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3372

178. LETTER TO MOTIBEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 11, 1930
CHI. MOTIBEHN,

At last you have written to me, after having kept me without a
letter for a long time. Treat all children who are put under your care
as your own. If you learn by heart some chapters of the Gita, you will
find that you feel more peaceful in mind. If not more, learn only one
verse at a time. Try to memorize a verse after you have understood its
meaning and learn to pronounce each word in it correctly. Vithal,
Mahavir and some others can do it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3746
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

123

179. LETTER TO MAHAVIR GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 11, 1930
CHI. MAHAVIR,

I got your letter. Who else is there with you in Siddhapur?
Wherever you go, write to me regularly and give me all news, whether
important or unimportant.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6219

180. LETTER TO VITHALDAS JERAJANI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 11, 1930
BHAI VITHALDAS,

I have received your letter, along with the figures sent by you. I
know that stocks of khadi are again accumulating. Do not lose heart.
According to me, the flood has not reached full tide yet. If we have
faith, it is bound to do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9774

181. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

October 11, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. You are greedy. It is of course good to be
greedy when you are young. But while being greedy one should also
exercise restraint. Hence, of all the things you may wish to learn you
should first learn what will be more useful for service. Another
restraint is that whatever you learn you must do thoroughly and not
leave half way. Do learn sewing. But do not be hasty. One reason why
124

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you do not enjoy weaving is that you do not yet know it well. In the
beginning all efforts at learning seem uninteresting. Many people do
not like arithmetic because they find it difficult to learn. But those
who know it can enjoy it as much as they would a novel. Another
reason is that you do not still have enough love for the poor. How can
a person who realizes that every yard of khadi that he produces will
help to cover the back of a poor man fail to take pleasure in
producing it? A mother does with joy for her child and God for his
bhakta what other people would find a boring task. The truth is that
we do not as yet feel real love of service. A servant should find equal
pleasure in all forms of service. All service given sincerely is of equal
worth. Ponder over the verse “He who offers me with devotion a leaf,
a flower, or fruit or water. . .”1 Ask me if you still do not understand.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Write to Brother and give him my blessings and tell him that the
books sent by him have been received. Of course you both have
Kakasaheb’s blessings.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

182. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 12, 1930
CHI. RAMABEHN,

I have your letter. I received it after a long interval. But it is a
perfect one. I believe that the strength which women possess is given
them by God. Hence they are bound to succeed in whatever they
undertake. It is very good indeed that Hamidabehn is with you.
Though a girl, she strikes me as a mature and saintly woman. Ba, it
seems, is doing some good running about. I see that all the women
1

Bhagavad Gita, IX, 26

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

125

will have to shoulder a still heavier responsibility than they are doing.
But let us bear constantly in mind those three verses from Chapters IX
and X1 which we have recently learnt to recite, and remain
unconcerned.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5325

183. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI PANDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 12, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

The Ashram is for the men of ordinary category. It cannot be
said that the Ashram is curt towards Girirajji if he has reached the
height you regard him to have reached, but that his great soul can no
more be accommodated there. The decision taken by Narandas is
spiritual. The spiritual point of view is to act as guided by whatever
ideals we have accepted for the Ashram. Personally I think Giriraj has
fallen into delusion. I would not engage myself or involve another in
the regimen undertaken by us if it is not going to help us realize the
atman. It is possible that God might live in the house of a scavenger
and He may not be found in that of a Vedantin. Our action should
accord with our lofty sentiments. Giriraj is a noble person, he is
humble too; he will therefore come round after his ramblings. The
credit will go to the Ashram even if we were to learn from him in case
he proves our way to be wrong. Please remain calm.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 326. Courtesy: Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

1

126

Of Bhagavad Gita
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

184. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 12, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

I have your letter. There is not the slightest reason to be grieved
by the death of friends. None ever dies before his time. The notion of
untimely death is a delusion. Even the death of a day-old baby is not
an untimely one. It only means that the actions to be performed
through that body had been performed. We feel pained by death only
because of our ignorance and selfishness. We feel agitated over
thedeath of friends or others because of our ignorance of the soul’s
attributes and because we do not wish ourselves to die. Yes, we owe a
duty to the widows. If they come and can observe the rules, in my
view at any rate there should be no objection to admitting them.
However, as the responsibility lies on Narandas and Gangabehn, you
should discuss the matter with them. Show this letter to them.
Though Kalavati is indeed in a hard plight, she will be fully tried
and the strength of her mind tested. I am writing to her. I have
received the Hindi translation of Kumarappa’s speech. Mahavir
Prasad’s zeal is beyond praise. He has already started working for the
third edition of the Gita.
You ought to get over your depression now. If any depressing
thoughts or impure desires arise in your mind, note them every time
and drive them out. Do not let your mind dwell on them; do not even
debate within your mind how they occurred, but keep the mind
engaged in good thoughts. The golden means of doing which is that
the mind, too, should be kept fully occupied in some external activity,
so that it may have no time at all to wander.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 5254

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

127

185. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI MADHAVJI
THAKKAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 12, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

I have your letter. We can easily get rid of any habit when we
begin to dislike it. And a woman with your strong resolve should
experience no difficulty at all in doing so. You are doing well in
clinging to the diet which you have adopted. As we observe others
becoming more indifferent towards or losing faith in the programme
of picketing liquor-booths, etc., we should become more vigilant
ourselves and let our faith shine more brightly. That is bound to
produce an effect.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6800

186. LETTER TO ROHINI KANAIYALAL DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR

October 12, 1930
CHI. ROHINI,

I have your beautiful letter. If Hamida learns Gujarati well,
surely the credit will go to you. It is because picketing of liquorbooths is a difficult job that it has been entrusted to women. It
requires the utmost purity of character and the deepest faith. Women
possess both in greater measure than men.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2653

128

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

187. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 12, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

You need not spare me the trouble of reading a letter. A father
is always eager to get a letter from his son or daughter. For about ten
or fifteen days, I lived only on, vegetables, milk and curds; that is, I
had stopped eating even raisins and dates. I have started taking these
again from today. After some time, I will go back to vegetables. In
that way I shall discover what suits me best. If I can do with vegetables,
that will save money too. But I will not persist [too long in the
experiment]. The present weight of 104 Ib. is quite good. How is your
health?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9290

188. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 12, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I have your letter. You should certainly write to me and let me
know your thoughts on Manibehn’s departure, as also all that you
think about other matters. Your last letter was all right. Let the world
see us as we are. We should especially show ourselves as we are to
those whom we love. No one can immediately put into practice his or
her ideals. But everyone can strive to do so. This you do everyday.
Hence the end is bound to be good.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G. S. Gangabehne, p. 44; also C.W. 8761. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

129

189. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 12, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

Both the interpretations are good. The one suggested by Nathji,
however, is likely to be more authoritative.
It is our good fortune that you have recovered your peace of
mind.
Enter Sarojinidevi’s heart. She needs the warmth of human
sympathy. Try to find some free time for such tasks. You will have to
undertake much more responsible tasks in future.
Are you now free from worry about your health? Do you feel
all right? What do you eat?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10238; also C.W. 6686. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

190. LETTER TO DURGA GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 12, 1930
CHI. DURGA,

Got your letter. I am never late in replying. In fact, you don’t
write and therefore feel that my letter reaches you late. If the
postscript to your letter is in Satyadevi’s hand, her handwriting is as
good as yours. Therefore she should surpass you in a short while.1
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalata, p. 31

1

130

The original was in Gujarati.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

191. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[October 13, 1930] 1
CHI. MIRA,

I hope you have got the straying letters. I am sure they have not
been intercepted, but have been delayed in transit from place to place.
It is evident, my ‘scolding’ as you call it, was well deserved, for
you have returned in a dilapidated condition. On the top of that, you
had a bad accident. Now you would be as good as your word and take
full rest. I was much relieved to understand that you had been visiting
the Sardar. That showed that you were well enough to travel.
I am still at the Gandiv wheel, and my rapture continues, if
anything it has increased. I am spinning scientifically now, i.e., with a
yard measure underneath the track of the yarn as it is drawn. I can
draw 8 threads in one minute and I pull at least two feet to each draw.
This means 240 rounds or 300 yards per hour. But of course, I do
nothingof the sort in an hour but that is not because of any defect in
the Gandiv. The less output is due to breakages and consequent waste
of time. But since adopting the method of concentration, breakages
have very considerably reduced. I therefore often reach 200 yards per
hour which for me is very good. You will publish nothing just yet of
my views about the Gandiv. I want the report of those who may try at
the Ashram. Most of all I want your report, if you have the leisure and
the inclination to give it a trial. I know that you all have not the time
that I have for these experiments. You will therefore do whatever is
possible and if you think it necessary. I, having nothing else to do,
may easily exaggerate the merits of a thing which I may have
disregarded before as I did and which now gives comparative
satisfaction.
1
The 100th hymn, referred to in the postscript, was translated on this date;
Vide “Ashram Bhajanavali”, 15-12-1930. The letter however bears the date
“12-10-1930” in Mirabehn’s handwriting.

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

131

For the past two days I have gone back to raisins and dates just
to see if the cold I have had anything to do with the vegetables.
Whether it is a coincidence or what, it is as good as gone today. In any
event health is quite good. Weight 104.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Today I have finished the 100th hymn. Only two remain to be
translated of the Hindustani hymns. This means I am nearly half
through with this work.
From the original: C.W. 5415. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9649

192. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 13, 1930
CHI. RAMDAS,

As long as you are free, I must get a letter from you every week.
How is your health? Do you digest food properly? Do you still take
medicine? What work have you taken up? How is Nimu? And
Sumitra? What happened about the khadi implements centre? The real
test will be now. But there is nothing which we did not expect.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6860

193. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 13, 1930
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I have your letter. Inspire Dhiru and Rambhau to write to me.
Walk slowly. Do not take upon yourself much work. I liked your
having gone away from Almora. Do not take upon yourself any big
responsibility. Teach those who come. Remain satisfied with what the
132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

three of you can do. Who are the persons now in Almora whom I
know?
Is Mrs. Cook there? Where is Mohan Joshi? Has Shantilal
recovered completely? What do you do about milk there? What is the
expense incurred? Write to me regularly. For the time being,
Kakasaheb has suggested Savyasachi as the name for your
spinning-wheel and it seems to be good. The only fault perhaps may
be that it is a Sanskrit word. There is no harm if you stop thinking
about yourself. ‘Enjoy today, who has seen tomorrow’.
There is food for Abha, too, in this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32938

194. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 9/14, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

Your packet was given to me late last evening. I will certainly
inquire why you got the post late. But that will often happen and you
should not, therefore, worry if you do not get the post on the day
expected. You should, however, be regular in posting the letters at
your end.
Both of us were weighed today. We are weighed every
Thursday. Kakasaheb’s weight is between 115 and 116, which means
that there is some improvement. My weight came to 104. I have
discontinued taking enema since four days ago. I eat tandalja and
that has had a beneficial effect. I have not given up ratalu altogether.
I intend to take it twice or thrice in a week. On the other days I will eat
patakalu or some other vegetable. I still continue tomatoes. So far, I
have not felt the need for fruits. If the weight remains steady, I intend
to continue as I am doing. My promise that I will take care of my
health in whatever experiments I make should reassure all of you.
I do not feel that your letters are too long. I should certainly
like to see that the burden on you does not increase. Your work is to
see the letters which I write, to distribute them to the addressees and to
write to me. I think your having to send letters written by others is an
extra duty. It is so because really speaking it is not right for me to
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

133

express opinions from here. It is a mere accident that we are able to
send and receive letters.
I got Radha’s long reply. She writes in it about . . . 1 having
stolen something and other such matters. She says that Keshu was
upset when he knew about the thing. What are the facts? Read the
letter I shall write to . . .2 .
I have nothing to say about your decision regarding Giriraj. I
think it is perfectly correct. You alone know all the facts. I hope to
know by and by what has been done about the children. What can one
say about Amidas? His courage inspires nothing but respect. I feel
unhappy in so far as I was responsible for his vow of not taking milk.
Now that his father is there, I don’t worry any more about
him. We should do all we can to look after him. It is God who will
protect him.
I suppose Bhagwanji will accept responsibility for Manibehn’s
expenses. I saw Pyarelal. No harm has been done to his health. It is
weak, though. I believe I shall now be able to see him frequently. He
gets bread and milk at present.
I didn’t see any letter from Chitalia. I don’t remember at the
moment the sum which he requires as help. I think I did ask someone
to note it. His letter is likely to be in one of the files. Shivabhai and
Chhaganlal will probably know about it. Perhaps Raojibhai, too, may
know. Chitalia himself will be able to tell you. Has he asked
for
Rs. 1,500 for the building? Ascertain the position and do what
you think best. If necessary, you may write to me again about the
matter. Read the letter I have written to him.
October 13, 1930
I read the new ordinance. You, too, will have to think about the
matter. I myself wish to say nothing from here. Discuss the matter
with the person who is the leader there and go on doing what you
think right. I am not surprised by the ordinance. I did expect some
such measure.
1
2

134

The names have been omitted.
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Tuesday morning, October 14, 1930
In this series, I have dealt cursorily with the importance of vows,
but it is perhaps necessary to consider at some length their bearing on
a godly life. Now that I have discussed all our vows except that of
swadeshi, let us consider the necessity of vows. There is a powerful
school of thinkers who concede the propriety of observing certain
rules but do not acknowledge the necessity of vows. They go even so
far as to suggest that vows are a sign of weakness and may even be
harmful. Again they say that, if a rule is subsequently discovered to be
inconvenient or sinful, to adhere to it after such discovery would be
positively wrong. They say: “It is a good thing to abstain from liquor,
but what harm is there in taking it occasionally, say on medical
grounds? A pledge of total abstinence would be a needless handicap;
and as with liquor, so with other things. Why may we not even speak
an untruth for a good end?” This argument does not convince me. A
vow means unflinching determination, and helps us against
temptations. Determination is worth nothing if it bends before
discomfort. The universal experience of humanity supports the view
that progress isimpossible without inflexible determination. There
cannot be a vow to commit a sin. Such a vow represents a wicked
nature. In the case of a vow first thought to be meritorious but later
found to be sinful, there arises a clear necessity to give it up. But no
one takes, or ought to take, vows about dubious matters. Vows can be
taken only on points of universally recognized principles, which,
however, we do not habitually act upon. The possibility of sin in such
a case is more or less imaginary. A devotee of Truth cannot stop to
consider if someone will not be injured by his telling the truth, for he
believes that truth can never do harm. So also about total abstinence.
The abstainer will either make an exception as regards medicine, or
will be prepared to risk his life in fulfilment of his full vow. What does
it matter if we happen to lose our lives through a pledge of total
abstinence? There can be no guarantee that our lives will be
prolonged by liquor, and even if life is thus prolonged for a moment,
it may be ended the very next through some other agency. On the
other hand, the example of a man who gives up his life rather than his
pledge is likely to wean drunkards from liquor and thus become a
great power for good in the world. Only they can hope some time to
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

135

see God who have nobly determined to bear witness to the faith that is
in them even at the cost of life itself.
Taking vows is not a sign of weakness but of strength. To do at
any cost what one ought to do constitutes a vow. It becomes a bulwark
of strength. It makes no difference whether such a resolve is called a
vow or known by some other name. A man, who says that he will do
something “as far as possible” betrays either his pride or his
weakness, though he himself may attribute it to his humility. There is,
in fact, not a trace of humility in such an attitude of mind. I have
noticed in my own case, as well as in that of others, that the limitation
“as far as possible” provides a fatal loophole. To do something “as
far as possible” is to succumb to the very first temptation. There is no
sense in saying that we will observe truth “as far as possible”. Even as
no businessman will look at a note in which a man promises to pay a
certain amount on a certain date “as far as possible”, so will God
refuse to accept a promissory note drawn by a man who will observe
truth “as far as possible”.
God is the very image of the vow. God would cease to be God if
He swerved from His own laws even by a hair’s breadth. The sun is a
great keeper of observances; hence the possibility of measuring
timeand publishing almanacs. He has created in us the faith that he
always rises and will for ever continue to rise, and thereby given us a
sense of security. All business depends upon men fulfilling their
promises. There could be no commerce if merchants did not regard
themselves as bound by their word to one another. We thus see that
keeping a vow is a universal practice. Are such promises less necessary
in character building or self-realization? We should, therefore, never
doubt the necessity of vows for the purpose of self-purification and
self-realization.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
About the Gandiv spinning-wheel and about my diet you will
get some news in my letter to Mirabehn.
There are 63 letters today.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

195. LETTER TO FENNER BROCKWAY
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

October 15, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

I see your name among the senders of the telegram of birthday
greetings from London. I send my thanks to you and the other
friends through you, as I do not know the Secretary’s address.
I hope there is no after effect left of the wretched accident1 you
had near Madras.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, 750 (34), Pt. I, p. 279

196. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 15, 1930
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

I have your letter. Mirabehn too had made some reference.
No one is perfect in this world. Our duty is to rid ourselves of
the imperfections and that is what human effort is for. Despair has no
place as long as we put in our own efforts. In spiritual matters we need
infinitely greater courage than what we need in worldly matters. One
should never give up self-confidence. Faith can make everything
possible.
I too hold that Pujya Malaviyaji will not fall ill. In fact, I believe
that he will have true rest and peace in the jail.2 He very much needed
both for many years. God has thus granted him both.
1

Fenner Brockway had met with a car accident in late 1927. Vide “Letter to A.
Fenner Brockway”, 11-2-1928.
2
Madan Mohan Malaviya was arrested a second time on August 27 while
attending the meeting of the Congress Working Committee. He was sentenced to six
months’ simple imprisonment.
VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

137

Give an account of your health in the next letter.
I hope you will have no apprehension if khadi accumulates. Are
you making an experiment in regard to the dairy?
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 6187. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

197. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
Y. M.,

October 16, 1930
MY DEAR ANAND,

The authorities have given me your greetings wire. it shows that
Vidya is now with you. I am glad. I hope she is keeping well.
Love to you both.
BAPU

[PS.]
I hope you got my previous letter.
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

198. LETTER TO LILAVATI
October 16, 1930
CHI. LILAVATI,

I have your letter. I was glad to know that you have remained
calm. What was the cause of your fasting for three days? Don’t forget
that you are only a child. A child should not take upon itself the
burden of the whole world. Really speaking, all of us are children.
There is only one grown up being, God. He shoulders the burden of
all. Why, then, need we worry? All that we should do is to serve Him as
His slaves.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9317

138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

199. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI PANDYA
October 16, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I have your letter. Your intentions are no doubt pure but one
should never be content with one’s purity of motive[alone]. The
necessity of knowledge has been accepted for the reason that one may
not commit an error in spite of a pure motive. This also you should
know for certain that as you achieve purity the Ashram too becomes
pure to that extent. The purity of the Ashram is not different from
that of any Ashramite. As far as the Ashram goes, there is no one who
can surpass Narandas in the matter of rendering help in spiritual
difficulties. Totaramji can also help.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 327. Courtesy: Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

200. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Thursday evening [October 16, 1930] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got the letters sent by you. I write this letter specially regarding
Amidas. It will, therefore, be immediately cleared. Will Amidas agree
to take raw eggs? There are two kinds of eggs, one to which exception
may be taken and the other unexceptionable. The former are those
which ultimately produce chicken, and the unexceptionable are those
which produce no life. Hens lay such eggs without their having been
inseminated by cocks. This is a well known fact. Parnerkar will
probably know about it. Such eggs are available in the market. Mostly
Europeans look after the production of such eggs. There is a farm for
this purpose near Miraj. You will find some correspondence on this
subject in my file. You need not, however, search for it. Many Parsis
in Ahmedabad will be able to give you information about where such
eggs are available. Personally I believe that eggs of this kind are less
1

As in the printed source

VOL.50: 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

139

objectionable than milk. In eating them, we do not deprive any
creature of its food, as we do by taking milk.
If Amidas agrees, obtain such eggs immediately. They are to be
used in this manner. Break an unfertilised egg, mix its contents with
eight ounces of water and keep the mixture in a bottle. Give him an
ounce of this mixture every hour. He will soon gain strength. The
mixture will completely serve the purpose of milk. I can say that
Manu’s life was saved by this mixture. Such eggs are a hundred times
better than cod-liver oil. Tell Amidas that if there is any sin in acting
upon this advice, I take it upon myself. I have not publicly advocated
the use of such eggs because, when self-indulgence is on the increase
and all kinds of medicines are being consumed without hesitation, I
did not think it proper to add one more to the list. Amidas’s case is
quite different. I hope Parnerkar has recovered.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Please reply to this soon.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I; also Bapuna Patro—9: Narandas
Gandhine, Pt. I, pp. 144-5.

201. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
[Before October 17, 1930] 1
CHI. SUSHILA,

This time your letter gave detailed information. If Sita is given
enough fruit to eat, she need have no vegetables at all. For the present,
I think fresh milk, fruit and curds, which should not be sour, will be all
right for her. If her teeth are strong enough, she may be allowed to
chew a few hard biscuits or pieces of khakhara during the day. She
should learn to chew properly what she eats. Madhavjibhai’s two
children are being brought up on this diet, and they have radiant
health. Have you consulted a doctor for your ears? I think Manilal
informed me that you intended to consult somebody. If you once get
them examined by a doctor whom you know and understand the
1

From the reference to the forgotten friend, it appears this was written before
the letter to the addressee dated October 17, 1930.

140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

nature of the trouble, you will stop worrying. Go on writing to me
regularly. I have forgotten the name of that friend of mine—the lady
who had become very friendly with me at the time of your wedding.
Give my blessings to all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4781

202. LETTER TO PATRICK QUINN
October 17, 1930
DEAR MR. QUINN,

The accompanying is a letter about a friend who is on his
death-bed at the Ashram. If necessary will you please refer to Major
Martin and post the letter immediately. It may then reach even
tomorrow morning and who knows may be instrumental in saving a
life!
Have you sent the Social Reformer to Sardar Vallabhbhai? Here
is a letter for him to see regarding a common sick friend. And have
you referred his daughter’s letter to him?
If you ordered the dates yesterday, they have not yet been
delivered to me.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

N.B.
The Ashram people have been complaining for the past two
weeks that they get the post two or three days late.
Mahatma Gandhi: Source Material for a History of the Freedom Movement in
India, Vol. III, Pt. III, p. 288

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

141

203. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 17, 1930
CHI. SHARDA,

Your letter. But how did you fall ill? Was there any mistake
about your diet? As far as your asthma is concerned you must treat it
so ruthlessly that it does not visit you again. You will succeed if you
are firm. Do you take sun-bath? Do you massage your chest? Do you
keep your bowels clean? After the morning prayers you must do
deep-breathing on an empty stomach. This would clear the lungs. We
must take deep breaths so that the oxygen may clear our lungs. You
must understand this point from Chimanlal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9892. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

204. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 17, 1930
CHI. CHHAGANLAL (JOSHI),

I have your two letters. It is not likely now that you will get this.
Don’t take your worries with you to the jail. We have learnt from the
Gita that God takes upon Himself our cares. Remember, moreover,
that when our thoughts are waiting for an opportunity to show
themselves in action, they become more powerful than action. Those,
therefore, who are ever ready for work, their thoughts, too, bear fruit.
You should not mind if you get rest and the others outside are tested.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5495

142

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

205. LETTER TO GOKIBEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 17, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

I was very glad to have your letter. Death is a highway which all
of us must tread, whether we wish or no. And though countless
travellers tread it, it ever seems deserted. Hence this is also the path of
supreme peace. He who is afraid to take it, feels agitated; he who
remains fearless enjoys the bliss of peace.
Jai Shrikrishna from

MOHANDAS
S MT. G OKIBEHN
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9811

206. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 17, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I have your letter. I have never believed anything against
Dahibehn. I have seen no sign of impurity in her conduct or in her
eyes. I think she has done well in refusing to leave the place. I had a
letter from Raojibhai.
The time seems to have come now for the women to shoulder a
heavy responsibility. God will help them to do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9291

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

143

207. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 17, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (DESAI),

I have your letter. I shall expect letters from you from time to
time. For the present, you should write regularly. Do not get
disheartened. I saw Pyarelal again. I shall see him once more. He has
no complaint now. I read in the papers about the Government having
taken possession of the Sevashram hospitals too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1807

208. LETTER TO RATILAL SHETH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 17, 1930
BHAI RATILAL,

I have your letter. You may send me the valkal1 . In the past also
someone had sent a garment like that from Africa. I think it was given
away to some person at his request.
I hope all your difficulties in your business are over.
Vandemataram to Narbheram and other friends.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7165

1

144

Garment made from tree bark
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

209. LETTER TO PUNJABHAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 17, 1930
CHI. PUNJABHAI,

I have your letter. I am sure you will not be left free for many
days. When you are back in jail, try not to fall ill. If you have
discovered the cause of your illness, remove it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4017

210. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 17, 1930
CHI. SUSHILA,

I got your letter. I must apologize to Bharati. She can certainly
ask what sort of a friend I must be if, after having been such a friend, I
forget even her name! But won’t she show regard for the infirmities of
old age and forgive me? If she doesn’t mind, ask her to write to me.
Personally I believe that the only remedy for your ear complaint is
better general health. Since you also believe so, you should take
Kuhne-baths and sun-baths as I have advised you to do. You should
also do sufficient exercise. You should go out for a walk in the early
morning. What is the condition of Tara’s head? I was pleased to see
Nanabhai’s handwriting. Tara should send my blessings to them both.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Did Manilal lose 40 Ib.? It could not be. Inquire again.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4773

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

145

211. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 17, 1930
CHI. RAMDAS,

I got your letter. Why pine over what you do not get? Formerly,
prisoners were not allowed to receive any visitors. Now they have
relaxed the rule somewhat. For the present, therefore, I receive visitors.
Is it not our principle that once we are in prison, we must not mind if
we are not permitted to receive visitors? Rather, that is a matter of
honour for a prisoner. If we think this way, we would not feel hurt.
Does Sumitra still suffer from constipation? She must get over it. I
have already asked you concerning Nimu. Now that you have fallen
in love with reading, do not leave it off. Read a little of whatever you
like, even if you get only ten minutes for it. When you go again, try to
improve your arithmetic.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarat; original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

212. LETTER TO DURGA GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 17, 1930
CHI. DURGA,

I am not satisfied with your letter so far. Tell me your daily
routine. When you start writing regularly, you may merit a different
adjective. Your handwriting is good this time. I was glad to see
Maitri’s handwriting at the end of your letter. I shall await her full
letter. 1
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalata, p. 32

1

146

The original was in Gujarati.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

213. LETTER TO KALAVATI TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 17, 1930
CHI. KALAVATI,

I have your letter after a long time. We should form the habit of
being indifferent to what pleases or does not. Wherever we may have
to stay by way of duty should be agreeable to us. What is like or
dislike to one desirous of serving! Do not fear people’s talk. Stick to
your decision. That woman alone who does not waver from her
resolve even at the gallows truly observes dharma.
Write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5256

214. LETTER TO RADHABEHN GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 18, 1930
CHI. RADHIKA,

I have your letter. In your previous letter I saw no impropriety.
You had only poured out in it the thoughts which agitated your mind
and you had a right to do so.
Humility cannot be learnt through formal training, but it grows
of itself as one cultivates the spirit of non-violence. Outward humility
of behaviour, which we find in royal families, can be learnt in a formal
manner. It is, however, not true humility, but is only a part of cultured
manners. In the humility which I advise, one has to forget the sense of
‘I’ and become a mere cipher. Can that be learnt through any
lessons? But one who has realized the body’s transitoriness and has in
some measure become aware of the self soon becomes humble. What
fine humility would it be on your part if, even though I should speak
in anger to you, you merely listened with lowered eyes like those of a
poor cow and did not even feel angry with me? Such humility comes
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

147

only when you have learnt true self-respect. If you have not
understood my meaning, ask me again and again. I shall not get
tiredof explaining it. Have you completely recovered now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 8687. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

215. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 18, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I have your letter. Describe to me your experience in Bombay.
You are not well advised in refusing to get your throat examined by a
doctor. A disease must be nipped in the bud. A stitch in time saves
nine. This saying is completely true.
I interpret image-worship in two senses. In one form of
image-worship, the person who contemplates the image becomes
absorbed in the contemplation of the qualities for which it stands. This
is image-worship in its wholesome form. In the other form of it, the
person who contemplates the image does not think about the qualities
but looks upon the image itself as the primary thing. This is idolatry
and is an evil.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10239; also C.W. 6687. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

148

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

216. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 18, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got your wire, but very late. Did you get my letter afterwards?
Both of you must have recovered your peace of mind now. I see from
your wire that now your health at any rate is all right. The weakness
must disappear. Do you go out for a walk daily? What does
Jayaprakash intend to do?
My health is good. I have again started eating dates and raisins.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3373

217. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI MADHAVJI
THAKKAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 18, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

I got your letter. From others’ letters I see that you had fever.
How is that? I hope no one there will fall ill. The time for real work
seems to be approaching now. Even when working the hardest, we
should never feel worried within. It is God who does everything and
we are only instruments in His hands. If this truth sinks into our heart,
we shall never feel worried.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6801

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

149

218. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 18, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

God is testing you in every way and so far you have emerged
successful. Why should we grieve when Tarini died discharging his
duty? Because Tarini was performing much service we may grieve out
of selfishness, but from an unselfish point of view Tarini’s death was
preferable. Such a frail body caused his soul much pain. We may
believe for certain that a dutiful soul like his is bound to be
reincarnated and serve even more.
I have received Satis Babu’s translation1 . I am tempted to brush
up my Bengali in order to understand it well but the thought of
charkha deters me. See the annotation on the tenth2 shloka for
“Better is knowledge than practice.” 3 The meaning will then be
clear.But if you have doubts still, write to me. How are Charu and
Arun? Give my love to all brothers and sisters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1672

1

Presumably of Anasaktiyoga; vide “Letter to Hemprabha Das Gupta”,
14-12-1930.
2
Of Bhagavad Gita, Chapter XII, which reads: “If thou art also unequal to this
method of constant practice, concentrate on service for Me; even thus serving Me
thou shalt attain perfection.”
3
Bhagavad Gita, XII. 12

150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

219. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 19, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter from Bombay.
I was glad to learn that you were feeling better. You must not let
the mind get into the state described by you. If you work with
detachment, you will refuse to be rushed and you will refuse to let
anything get on your nerves. Having put one’s whole heart into a
thing entrusted or undertaken, one can leave the result to God. Then
there can be no rush and no worry. You know the story of King
Janak. He was Duty personified. His capital was in flames. He knew it.
But some busybody reported it to him. His answer was, “What care I
whether my capital is reduced to ashes or remains intact!” He had
done all he could to save it. His going to the scene of operations and
fussing would have distracted the attention of the fire-brigade and
others and made matters worse. He was but an agent of providence. As
such he had done his part and was therefore ‘quits’ and at ease. So
may, must, we be, if we have done our best, whether our work
flourishes or perishes.
The Gandiv still gives me joy and satisfaction. Nothing has yet
broken down. Whereas I took five hours before, I now finish well
within 3 hours. The afternoon is now free for other work except for
the takli. So on your travels you may take the Gandiv if it gives you as
much satisfaction as it gives to me. The cost of the pattern that I have
is one rupee including the spindle and a box scooped in the platform
and an incredibly simple device for keeping the spindle on one side
of the platform. For price and simplicity this wheel has no match. I
have discarded the bamboo holders and the wretched glass cylinders. I
think I told you this. And it works without any foreign sound at all.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5416. Courtesy: Mirabehn

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

151

220. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 19, 1930
CHI. RAMABEHN,

I hope you have not been overcome with fear. Chhaganlal will
have some peace now and the people will be tested. For the women,
too, the time of testing is approaching. My faith is becoming stronger.
We should become all the more resolute and vigilant, and be ever
filled with joy in our hearts.
You should write to me more regularly now. God will assuredly
bless us.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Whenever there is further news about Dhiru and Vimu,
let me have it. Where is Kevalram? And Nirmala? Ask them to write to
me.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5326

221. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 19, 1930
CHI. RAIHANA,

You seem to be a very clever girl. After writing two or three
letters in Gujarati, the poor girl now writes to me in Urdu! But how is it
love which asks for a return? All the same, I will do my duty and
make the return. I found no difficulty in reading the letter since you
have written it in such a clear and legible hand and the words you
have chosen are so simple. Now onwards you may write half your
letter in Urdu. It will help me since it will brush up my Urdu, and I
may even write to you in Urdu provided all of you do not laugh at me
among yourselves. If I do that, will you not then consider it a full
return?
152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

And you are as jealous as you are cunning, and jealous of no
other than Father. But no matter; now that he is becoming
youngerday after day, he will ask you to give him an account of your
work. I could not decipher one or two words in your letter. I have
kept the letter with me, and I will read it again and decipher those
words; at any rate I will try to do so. The letter paper is full now, and
there is no space to apply a third adjective to you. About that some
other time.
Khuda Hafiz.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9622

222. LETTER TO KASUMBA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 19, 1930
CHI. KASUMBA,

I see that there is still no harmony between Jaisukhlal and you.
Having come to know you better, I don’t feel inclined to lay the
blame on you. It is only that you two have different natures and,
therefore, cannot live in harmony with each other. In these
circumstances, it is best that you should now live apart from each
other. God has blessed you with a large family. You ought not to feel
unhappy that you have no son. We make no difference between a son
and a daughter. A daughter is the same to us as a son. Moreover, all
the girls are wise. You should, therefore, live perfectly contented.
Jaisukhlal will meet your expenses. Be devoted to each other, though
living apart. Don’t feel unhappy in any way. Neither of you is
following an improper path. When you can forget yourself and feel
one with Jaisukhlal, you may certainly go back and live with him. If
you encourage the girls to go and live in the Ashram, they will be
happier in life.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Write to me a full letter.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U /III
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

153

223. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
Y. M.,

October 19, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

I have your letter. I had also received the previous one. I have
already written separately to Kalavati.1 I am now writing to
Benarsidas. 2 You did well to inform me. Behn Shanta3 must have fully
recovered now. She requires hip-baths and frictionbaths. Consults
Kuhne’s 4 book for a description of both. It is the experience of
women that friction-bath brings quick and significant benefit. You
seem to have had a fair measure of success in stopping funeral feasts.
If pure-minded people make a sustained effort they are bound to
succeed sooner or later. The difficulties experienced in sending
Kalavati home should have been anticipated. That is what the world
has come to. When the times are changing people of older generation
are bound tofeel some of the things of the new age irksome. If the
new age bears with their displeasure while firmly going its way, it will
prevail without much noise.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5290\

1
2
3
4

154

Vide “Letter to Kalavati Trivedi”, 17-10-1930.
Benarsidas Chaturvedi, who had lost his wife
Addressee’s younger sister, residing in the Ashram at this time
Dr. Louis Kuhne
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

224. LETTER TO BANARASIDAS CHATURVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 19, 1930
BHAI BANARASIDAS,

Bhai Kashinath has given me the news of your wife’s death. A
great calamity has befallen you. We have given up the fear of death,
but we grieve out of selfishness. I understand you have children of
tender age. But why grieve over that too? Such things do happen in
the world. All such events are moments of trial to us. Only such an
occasion can prove if all our assiduously acquired knowledge is truly
assimilated. May God grant you peace.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2525

225. LETTER TO AJITENDU DE
October 20, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

I have carefully gone through your letter. It is difficult to advise
you without coming in personal contact with you. But generally I can
say that if you hear the clean voice of conscience you should follow it
at any cost. If you have the slightest doubt, you should obey your
parents’ wishes.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. A JITENDU DE
8 HARI P AL ’S LANE
BEADEN S TR. P. O.
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat: G. N. 10515

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

155

226. LETTER TO H.S.L. POLAK
October 20, 1930
MY DEAR HENRY,

I had your and Millie’s loving message. You are never absent
from my mind. How is Leon?
My love to you all,
BHAI
P ROPERTY OF H.S.L. P OLAK
265 S TRAND
LONDON, W.C.R.
From the original : Gandhi-Polak Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India

227. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 20, 1930
BHAISHRI KHAMBHATTA,

I felt happy on reading your letter. I keep good health. How is
your health? I have no doubt at all that you two will always use your
gifts in the service of noble causes. Do you intend to stay in Poona for
the present?
To you both,
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6596

156

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

228. LETTER TO TEHMINA P. JOSHI1
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 20, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

I was very glad to read your letter. I very well remember all that
we talked about. I am pleased to see your name in the papers
occasionally.2 I would have been surprised [only] if you did not work
as much as you do. I had observed your capacity in our very first
meeting.
Please write to me regularly.
How is Bhai Godrej’s health? How is his farm work getting
along? Please convey my Vandemataram to him.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 114

229. TELEGRAM TO MOTILAL NEHRU
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON, P OONA ,

[On or before October 21, 1930] 3
P ANDITJI NEHRU
MUSSOORIE
PRESS

REPORTS

FULLY.

SUGGEST

HEALTH
ISSUING

DISTURBING.
DAILY

BULLETIN.

PLEASE

WIRE

LOVE.

GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, (34) 750, Pt. I, p. 269
1

Younger sister of Ardeshir Godrej who had donated Rs. 100,000 for the cause
of temperance and untouchability, and had in consequence lost his Government
contracts.
2
As a speaker at meetings on temperance and untouchability
3
This was forwarded by Major R. V. Martin to G. F. S. Collins, Secretary to
the Government of Bombay, with the following note on October 21, 1930:
“Gandhi wishes to send the attached telegram to Motilal Nehru. Will you
please let me know if there is any objection to its dispatch?”
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

157

230. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 16/21, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have your letter. The occasional delay in your getting my
letters can’t be helped. “Make the best of today, for who knows what
tomorrow will bring?” This is true of our present circumstances too.
If the men in charge of the factory at Bardoli have not been arrested,
what about the goods in factory? I read in newspapers that they, too,
were confiscated.
It was a matter of surprise that the Ashram had remained free
from malaria. At last it could remain so no longer. I think it can be
kept free from it. In the malarial season, one should take care and see
that one’s stomach is light. Starchy and other indigestible foods, like
pulses, should be avoided. If those who have escaped malaria so far
take care, they will be able to preserve their health. The water in the
well should be disinfected with potassium permanganate or chlorine. I
think these can also be added in the water fetched from the river. If a
few drops of the solution are poured into the river water where it is
stored, it will acquire a light rose colour. After a while, the colour will
settle at the bottom. You should consult a doctor for more
information about this. I will write a separate letter about Amidas,1
which is likely to be posted only tomorrow. Inform me on what day
you get it.
Inform Jamnalalji that I do not request the authorities to bring
anyone here. I did not do that even for Kakasaheb. Jamnalalji or
anybody else who wishes to come may do so by trying on their own
or through Government’s kindness. I have been able to arrange that
Pyarelal should see me from time to time. There is an element of
selfishness in requesting to be provided with a companion and,
therefore, I do not make such a request. What I should like is to be
kept with all the others. But how can I expect such good fortune?
Somebody who came to visit Kaka told him that Mathuradas, too, had
made a similar request. I have already written to you about Giriraj. I
don’t feel that your decision is wrong.
1

158

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 16-10-1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Write to Rajaji and tell him that generally I do not write to
eminent leaders and, therefore, I will not write to him either. But I
remember him every day.
Ask him to give me news about Lakshmi and Subbiah’s wife.
What state of health has he brought with him?
October 19, 1930
I see Prabhavati’s name in your list of letters, but I don’t find
her letter. I don’t think they have kept it back here. Either it must
have been left out there or her name came to be included this time just
because she writes every week. Anyway I had a wire from her giving
me news about her health. She seems to be all right.
In Wardha they have been spinning on the takli very regularly.
You must have read a description of their work in Balkrishna’s letter.
Bhau’s speed is 132 rounds for half an hour. This is wonderful. You
should find out how such speed can be acquired and publish a
detailed description. My satisfaction in regard to the Gandiv
spinning-wheel remains what it was; if anything, it has increased. Read
my letters to Mirabehn and Ishwarlal Vimawala on the subject. The
latter has written to me saying that he will send one more wheel to me
too. Pay him for it and for the wheels which may be received in the
Ashram. Send me your conclusions after you have tested the model.
Also send me the figures of the count, strength and evenness of
Kakasaheb’s yarn received there.
Read what I have written in my letter to Maganbhai about the
spindle-bearer in use in Bardoli. My own experience is that it is
superior to the type fitted to the spinning-wheel in use in the Ashram
and in all other models. If this is true, we should fit our spinningwheels with the same type of spindle-bearer as they use in Bardoli. If
my judgment is wrong, I should be corrected. If anyone prefers the
type being used in the Ashram and if he has had experience of that
being used in Bardoli, he may write to me about this matter. It is my
belief that even from the point of view of speed the Bardoli
spindle-bearer would ultimately be found superior to the others. If I
get the necessary facility, I will try to fit even the Gandiv spinningwheel with that type.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

159

I wrote to you last Friday about Amidas. You must have
received the letter. I may even get your reply before this letter is
posted. Send me a wire if you have not received that letter. I will then
discuss the matter again.
October 20, 1930
Read my letter about Kanta. It seems she wants to go out
for a few days at least. Think about the matter. From here, what
I feel is that she may go for a few days wherever she likes. She is
both truthful and brave. She will be able to look after herself. She will
also keep any promise she makes. This is my own experience,
however. You should do what you think best. Find out what she
wishes.
Tuesday morning, Diwali,
October 21, 1930
My blessings to all the friends there. My Vandemataram and
due regards to everyone. May we be filled with greater spirit of service
during the next year, and become fitter instruments and more awake
to our duty in that regard.
We make frequent use of the word ‘ yajna’. We have raised
spinning to the rank of a daily mahayajna. It is therefore necessary to
think out the various implications of the term ‘yajna’. ‘Yajna’ means
an act directed to the welfare of others, done without desiring any
return for it, whether of a temporal or spiritual nature. ‘Act’ here
must be taken in its widest sense, and includes thought and word, as
well as deed. ‘Others’ embraces not only humanity, but all life.
Therefore, and also from the standpoint of ahimsa, it is not a yajna to
sacrifice lower animals even with a view to serving humanity. It does
not matter that animal sacrifice is supposed to find a place in the
Vedas. It is enough for us that such sacrifice cannot stand the
fundamental tests of Truth and Non-violence. I readily admit my
incompetence in Vedic scholarship. But the incompetence, so far as
this subject is concerned, does not worry me because, even if the
practice of animal sacrifice be proved to have been a feature of Vedic
society, it can form no precedent for a votary of ahimsa.
From this definition of yajna it follows that a primary sacrifice
must be an act which conduces the most to the welfare of the greatest
number in the widest area, and which can be performed by the largest
number of men and women with the least trouble. It will not,
therefore, be a yajna, much less a mahayajna, to wish or to do ill to
160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

anyone else even in order to serve a so-called higher interest. And the
Gita teaches, and experience testifies, that all action that cannot come
under the category of yajna promotes bondage.
The world cannot subsist for a single moment without
yajna in this sense and, therefore, the Gita, after having dealt with true
wisdom in the second chapter, takes up in the third the means of
attaining it and declares in so many words that yajna came with
Creation itself. This body, therefore, has been given us only inorder
that we may serve all Creation with it. And therefore, says the Gita, he
who eats without offering yajna eats stolen food. Every single act of
one who would lead a life of purity should be in the nature of yajna.
Yajna having come to us with our birth, we are debtors all our lives
and thus for ever bound to serve the universe. And even as a
bondslave receives food, clothing and so on from the master whom he
serves, so should we gratefully accept such gifts as may be assigned to
us by the Lord of the universe. What we receive must be called a gift;
for as debtors we are entitled to no consideration for the discharge of
our obligations. Therefore we may not blame the Master if we fail to
get it. Our body is His to be cherished or cast away according to His
will. This is not a matter for complaint or even pity; on the contrary, it
is a natural and even a pleasant and desirable state, if only we realize
our proper place in God’s scheme. We do indeed need strong faith, if
we would experience this supreme bliss. “Do not worry in the least
about yourself, leave all worry to God,”—this appears to be the
commandment in all religions. This need not frighten anyone. He
who devotes himself to service with a clear conscience will day by day
grasp the necessity for it in greater measure and will continually grow
richer in faith. The path of service can hardly be trodden by one who
is not prepared to renounce self-interest and to recognize the
conditions of his birth. Any service rendered by such a person will be
tainted by selfishness. But, then, men of such utter selfishness are rare
in this world. Consciously or unconsciously, every one of us does
render some service or other. If we cultivate the habit of doing this
service deliberately, our desire for service will steadily grow stronger
and will make not only for our own happiness but also for that of the
world at large.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There are 58 letters today.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

161

231. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 23, 1930
CHI. SHARDA,

There is no question of jealousy when it comes to learning from
somebody. Who says it is jealousy? Don’t again let asthma come
anywhere near you. Your handwriting is not bad at all. It will no
doubt improve gradually. Where is Shakaribehn? Tell her or write to
her that she should write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9893. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawala

232. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM D. SARAIYA
October 23, 1930
CHI. KAKU,

You wrote in a really beautiful handwriting. But your letter was
a blank sheet of paper, so to say. You didn’t even tell me what work
you had in Bombay. Where do you live? Kakasaheb sends his
blessings.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Do you pray? Do you understand the Gita correctly?
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 2806. Courtesy: Purushottam D. Saraiya

162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

233. LETTER TO PADMA
October 23, 1930
CHI. PADMA 1 ,

So you blame me! You yourself never write, but expect letters
from me. What is the nature of the tumour in the throat? You should
get that ascertained immediately. Did you show it to Gangabehn? Do
you spin daily on Prabhubhai’s spinning-wheel? I should be happy if
you do. How fine it would be if you spin that number of rounds every
day! How is Sharda’s health? What do you read? What food do you
take? Do you go to bed daily exactly at nine? What work did you do
in the U.P.? Whom did you meet while there?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6113

234. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 23, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),

I have your letter. It is the opinion of an experienced doctor that
to guard against rheumatism in old age one must regularly take soda
bicarb. You probably know that I must be taking nearly 20 grains of
soda every day in one form or another. Plaster may help a little. The
cause of the disease is inside the system. This pain is a warning to you
not to mind expense on fruit. You should live mainly on milk and
fruit. If you let the rays of the sun fall on the knees, that will help you.
Eight in the morning is excellent time for doing that.
Kaku does not tell me in his letter what work he has taken up.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 8762. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya; also Bapuna Patro6: G. S. Gangabehnne, p. 44

1

Daughter of Sitala Sahai

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

163

235. LETTER TO MANGALA S. PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 23, 1930
CHI. MANGALA,

I have your letter. Does your mind wander while you are
reading the Gita? Do you follow the meaning of the verses? Tell
Pushpa that if she insists on not learning anything, I shall have to pull
her long nose and make it longer.
Your hand must be all right now. Does Kamala write to you
occasionally? Ask her to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11091. Courtesy: Pushpa Naik

236. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
October 23, 1930
CHI. RAMDAS,

I have had no letter from you. I have asked you to write to me at
least once a week so long as you are free. Reply to my questions.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

237. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 23, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

Your letter. Why should Satis Babu mourn the loss of Tarini?
We all have to reach the same destination to which Tarini has gone.
We must not grieve even out of selfishness. Tarini did not run the
Pratishthan nor do you. God does it, we are merely the instruments. If
we accept this, what does it matter if God transfers us from one
assignment to another?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1673

238. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
Y. M.,

October 24, 1930
MY DEAR ANAND,

Your letter. The best way you can return Mother’s love is to
deny yourself the joy of her company and personal service to her. Till
Father wants you under his roof, you are better away from home. I am
sure mother will feel happy in the thought that you are doing well in
body and mind. At the same time you should shed all irritation
against Father. Do not count against him every remark he may make
about you. You must cultivate a big heart. And then you will find that
Father will be reconciled to you the sooner for your broadmindedness.
My love to you and Vidya.
BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

165

239. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 24, 1930
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

It was a very happy coincidence that you went to Mussoorie and
were able to meet everyone. I have found Nandlal’s booklet
about spinning quite satisfactory. There are of course mistakes in it. I
have pointed out some of them. I am still corresponding with him.
He may be able to write if he makes more effort. I do not think
Prabhudas can write. Krishna would be able to write better than him.
Prabhudas has not worked much with his hands. Kaka (Kalelkar)
would be arriving there within a month.1 It is being arranged that he
should make a major contribution to it. The book must be made
perfect.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32733

240. LETTER TO BALBHADRA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 24, 1930
CHI. BALBHADRA,

This time your letter was good. There is no reason why your
weight should not increase now. If you take exercise, keep your mind
cheerful and masticate your food properly, it is bound to increase.
Never despair. When you go out for a walk, run for some time. While
you do so, keep your mouth shut and breathe through nostrils.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9213

1

166

D. B. Kalelkar was released on November 29, 1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

241. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI PANDYA
October 24, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

You ought to understand that one whose [own] mind is not
integrated cannot weigh the merit or demerit of others. I for one know
Giriraj well. He has lofty ideas but his strength to live up to them is
very inadequate. Yet I have hopes for him because he is always
striving. The aim of the Ashram is to insist on truth and on conduct
conforming to truth. Everything is organized with Truth as the focal
point. There are not many ideals in the world and there ought not to
be. The apparent manifold is only a golden lid hiding the Truth.1
When it is removed we will see the One alone.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 328. Courtesy: Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

242. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
October 24, 1930
CHI. MATHURADAS,

In fact I had intended to write to you last week, but I just forgot
to do so. I have gone through the whole of the manuscript of your
proposed book. I liked it very much indeed. I felt in it your
overflowing love for the carding-bow. I was spell-bound by the work
and could not read it critically. Now I shall get only a printed copy. I
will then read it critically and make suggestions, if I have any. You
advise rubbing [the string] with leaves even after it has been rubbed
with candle-wax. Vithal says in his letter that if it has been rubbed with
candle-wax, nothing more is necessary. Please clarify who is right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3747

1

Ishopanishad, v. 15

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

167

243. LETTER TO RADHABEHN GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 24, 1930
CHI. RADHIKA,

I have your letter. Write to Rukhi and ask her to write to me.
What will Benarsi do in Kashi? As the climate there is said to be very
good, Rukhi is bound to keep good health there. I have a letter from
Navin, in which he declares his innocence. See him and speak to him
gently; tell him firmly what you know and of the truth of which you
are convinced. If Navin proves himself innocent and you find that
you or Keshu had mistakenly thought him guilty, we should feel
happy. Investigate the matter in a perfectly detached spirit. The matter
is not light and should not be dropped. Nor should you let your mind
be exclusively occupied with it. Your handwriting seems to me like a
beautiful picture to look at. This time your margin is not quite
straight, and draws attention to itself, in contrast to the beauty of your
handwriting, as a black particle of dust floating in milk does.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 8688. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

244. LETTER TO DURGA GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 24, 1930
CHI. DURGA,

Why do you say: “What more can I write?” So many things
happen within the span of one week! You must be capable of
describing them. A multitude of thoughts arise in the mind of a girl of
your age. The thoughts can be written down, but on one condition—
one must have the zeal and the concentration of mind for it. If you
maintain diary and note down everything, you can find from it the
topics to write upon.1
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalata, p. 32
1

168

The original was in Gujarati.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

245. LETTER TO NARAYAN DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 25, 1930
SHRI NARAYANRAO,

Or should I address you as Bablo 1 ? You have drawn beautiful
lines2 and curves indeed. But, instead of scribbling such marks, learn
to make every letter in a word as beautiful as a picture. I believe you
must be full of fun now because Mahadev has returned. Don’t send
him back immediately.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9474

246. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 26, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter as also your detailed directions about the working of
the Bihar wheel. I attended to all the matters as you have put except
the point where the mal should cross. I do not know whether it crossed
nearest the platform or away from it. However I shall make another
effort to see whether it works at all or not. It ought at least to work.
Meanwhile the Gandiv continues to give much satisfaction. It has not
yet caused any trouble and did I tell you that it did not require the
removal of the spindle after each day’s work. After the work, it is
hung up on the wall. It thus requires no attention every morning as all
the other wheels do. And the more I work it, the greater becomes the
conviction that it is capable of giving as much output as any single
wheel. I have got the scales now. I seem to spin 24 counts and over
and my highest speed is 200 rounds, very considerable improvement
on the box wheel. Only once do I remember having attained that
1
2

A baby boy
The word is illegible here.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

169

speed on it. However I know that my opinion is worth nothing unless
more efficient spinners confirm it from their own.
I am glad you are not going to tour just now. You should build
up your body anew. We are both keeping good health. I weighed last
Thursday 105 and Kaka 117. I have considerably reduced the
vegetables and gone back to dates. There will be still variations.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5417. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9651

247. LETTER TO MAHENDRA V. DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 26, 1930
SHRI MANSINH 1 ,

Decide whether I should address you as ‘Desai’ or ‘Chi. Manu’
and let me know in a letter written in beautiful handwriting. Do your
President and Secretary still play childish pranks, or, now that they are
office-bearers, have they become serious-minded?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7408. Courtesy: V. G. Desai

248. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 26, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I have your letter written from Nasik. Do you remember that I
wrote to you about Dhurandhar’s translation? It is all right if he has
translated the book, but, now that Limaye has also translated it, we
shall have to consider whether we should publish Dhurandhar’s
1

170

Son of Valji G. Desai; Gandhiji lovingly called Mahendra “Mansinh”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

translation. The fact that with rest you feel better shows that you
always carry the burden of work on your head. The virtue of
non-attachment consists in doing the work but not feeling its burden.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10240; also C.W. 6688. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

249. LETTER TO GANGABEHN JHAVERI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 26, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (JHAVERI),

After many weeks I have a letter from you. It seems Nanibehn is
not with you. How did you fall ill? Whenever you have no appetite,
you should fast. It does not matter if you feel weaker. That weakness
will not be real. If you cannot fast completely, you may eat fresh
fruits like grapes, oranges, etc., but nothing else, and take an enema
every day to clear the bowels. You should take care and preserve your
health. It would be advisable to drink only boiled water. Write to me
regularly. There is still much work to be done by women. Who is the
other woman worker with you? My blessings to Bhai Panachand.
Blessings from

BAPU

PS.
Both of us are in good health.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3106

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

171

250. LETTER TO KUNVERJI MEHTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 26, 1930
BHAI KUNVERJI,

I have your letter. If you have not yet become a beloved guest
of the Government, you will get this letter. Lakshmidas having gone,
let me know what new arrangement is made. When you meet the
inmates of the temple1 , give my blessings to them. After all these years
of work, people should be able to devise means on their own.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2687

251. LETTER TO LAKSHMIBEHN KHARE
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 26, 1930
CHI. LAKSHMIBEHN,

Though the letter is from Panditji I am writing to you. I always
wish to write to anyone who is unwell. Why should you fall ill while
serving? But illness always comes like a thief, however watchful one
may be. I hope you have driven out the intruder. Do not neglect your
health. Does Mathuri still feel weak? Some children become sturdier
after an attack of smallpox. This happened in Manilal’s case. Write to
me in detail.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 277. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn Khare

1

172

Prison
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

252. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
October 26, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

Tell brother that he should now leave only after improving his
health. It is possible to serve even while remaining in the Ashram.
Blessings to him from us both. Doing a thing intelligently is bound to
give joy. Such work becomes artistic. And true art always gives joy.
One may even say that art means joy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

253. LETTER TO KALAVATI TRIVEDI
October 26, 1930
CHI. KALAVATI,

Kashinath sends some extracts from your letters. I see from
them that you are extremely disturbed. There is nothing like
perturbation for those who are devoted to duty in a detached manner.
One who has consecrated all to God has no occasion for agitation.
There is no possibility of any harm resulting from Jiji’s1 exertions due
to grinding.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5255

1

Presumably the addressee’s mother-in-law

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

173

254. LETTER TO SHANTA1
October 26, 1930
CHI. SHANTA,

Kashinath writes that you are expecting a letter from me. I had
no idea that any letter was still unanswered. I am glad to learn that you
are keeping well and devoting your time to various tasks. All are
conscious of the gains directly derived from the Ashram, but the
devotees of Truth know that their unseen gain is immensely greater
than what is obvious. I wish you could realize this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5257

255. TELEGRAM TO JAISHANKAR TRIVEDI
P OONA ,

[October 27, 1930] 2
P ROFESSOR TRIVEDI
VIDYAPITH
AHMEDABAD
BOTH

GRIEVED

WE

PRAY

FOR

LEARN

MANU’S

ILLNESS.

WIRE

CONDITION.

RECOVERY.

GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 1000

1
2

174

Younger sister of Kashinath Trivedi, residing in the Ashram at this time
From the postmark
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

256. LETTER TO V. A. SUNDARAM
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 27, 1930
MY DEAR SUNDARAM,

I am glad you are giving yourself rest. Hope Savitri1 and
children are well. Please thank Prof. Radhakrishnan2 for the book and
the paper.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 3186

257. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
October 27, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

You have become very nervous. But you have no reason for it.
If now the burden of running the home has fallen on you, you are
strong enough for that. If the responsibility is yours, you ought to
have the corresponding rights too. You can manage your home as it
seems best to you. Jayaprakash will certainly help you in that. You
may talk about everything with your father-in-law with the freedom of
a daughter. At first he will feel embarrassed but by and by you will
see that he, too, will talk freely with you and remove the difficulties
from your path. Moreover, you have servants to help you. You should
take due care of your health while looking after the affairs of the
home. Do not work beyond your strength. Save some time for
reading, for going out for a walk and resting, and make yours a model
home. It will be a problem for you only if you do not have full
authority to do what you wish to do. But I simply cannot believe at the
moment that you will not get such authority. Have confidence in
yourself. Learn to be firm. God will save you and lead you. In any
1
2

Addressee’s wife
Dr. S. Radhakrishnan

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

175

case,donot be cast down by grief. You may write to me more often if
you wish to. You can write to me even directly, without thinking
whether or not I shall get your letters. May God protect you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3376

258. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI ANUPCHAND MEHTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 27, 1930
BHAISHRI BHAGWANJI,

I got your letter. I felt unhappy on reading the news about Bhai
Revashanker. His simplicity was indeed as you describe it to be. I have
no doubt that his soul rests in peace.
I send with this a letter to Devchandbhai in regard to Sudarshan,
but what more can I do from here in this matter?
I am very much pained to know what you say about Bhai
Narbheram. It would give me a great shock to believe that he could be
dishonest. My advice regarding him is that you should suggest to him
to let an arbitrator examine the claim against him and give his
decision. If he does not agree, you should put up with the loss. I
would not advise you to take the matter to a court of law. The prestige
which the Bank of England enjoys in London, or rather in the whole
world, is enjoyed by Kars [anji] Moolchand in our small world of
Rajkot. In their respective spheres, they enjoy equal prestige. I should
very much like that prestige to be re-established. You should certainly
not fight [in a court]. Money is not the only important thing in life.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5813

176

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

259. LETTER TO JAISHANKAR TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 27, 1930
BHAI TRIVEDI,

You two, husband and wife, your relations and your friends have
again cause for worry about Manu. I shall know tomorrow whether
you got the wire which I have sent today on behalf of us both. I know
that you have a strong mind and I need not, therefore, try to give you
courage. Such illnesses also test us. We should not think that we shall
always be happy because we believe in God. However, both
Kakasaheb and I feel sure that Manu is safe. It is God’s will that he
should serve Him in this very body. As long as the illness remains
serious, send me news daily. I believe it will be possible to arrange so
that I get your message every day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 999

260. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 27, 1930
CHI. MANU,

So you are ill again! But you enjoy God’s grace. Since you
possess great strength of mind, both of us believe that by the time you
get this letter you will be out of danger. You have surely learnt to
remain calm and patient in all circumstances. Take complete rest and
fully recover your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7766

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

177

261. LETTER TO TARAMATI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
October 27, [1930] 1
I got your letter. I felt very happy to read it. Dilip must be
looking big now. I have never seen him after I met him in Deolali. If
you go and mix with friends from time to time, your mind will remain
peaceful. Pyarelal is in this prison, but he is not kept with me. I do see
him occasionally, however. If you have cultivated no love for reading,
I would advise you to do so. There are many books published by the
Navajivan Karyalaya which are worth reading and which you can
easily understand.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 102

262. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 27, 1930
CHI. LILAVATI,

I liked your letter because I found it to be sincere. Read over
and over again what I have written about yajna.2 It is possible you will
find in it the key to understanding the spirit of service. This time too I
am going to elaborate on the same theme. Think seriously about it. Be
patient. God will protect you. Keep writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
According to the source the addressee started writing to Gandhiji in 1930
when her husband fell ill in the prison.
2
Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 21-10-1930

178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

263. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 27, 1930
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

I have received your letter; also Anasuyabehn’s. We do not
know when our real New Year starts. Or shall we say that it has started
on the 12th March? For the time being, I am spinning on a takli. But I
do not like such a slow speed. In Wardha they spin 132 rounds in half
an hour. 80 rounds are quite common. if you have people who are
experts in spinning on the takli, let them write to me about that art of
spinning. I have of course asked for the instructions from Wardha.
Instructions from two or three places would be more than sufficient. I
have acquired good speed in spinning on the charkha. I think I can
still improve.
This is the second urgent letter to you. Harjivandas writes from
Amreli that he is not getting certificate for [his] khadi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32729

264. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 23/28, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

Your packet was given to me on Wednesday (yesterday) in two
parts. It was divided into two parts by the authorities here. Let me
know when and in what condition you received the packet which was
dispatched from here on the 21st. It is enough for me that you do not
feel it as a burden to have to handle my correspondence. So long as
they let me, I shall continue to write as I have been doing. Give me
whatever news you get about Amidas. If you have any comments to
make about my views concerning eggs, please do. I know definitely
that Pyarelal has not been transferred to Nasik. We shall meet again in
a day or two. Ascertain the position about Chitalia and pay him any
sum you think proper. We should not refuse to help him to face his
difficulties. Did you ask Chhaganlal Joshi? He may, perhaps, have
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

179

kept a note somewhere. Does he not live next to you? Also let me
know how he is. I am glad that Mirabehn has for the present dropped
her idea of going out of the Ashram. I have had no letter from
Devdas, whether long or short. Did he send it directly from jail, or in
some other manner? I will inquire about it here after I hear from you.
Ask Jivarambhai to write to me.
There was a note by Chandrakanta to the effect that a letter by
Kumarappa was included, but there was no such letter. Instead, there
was a letter from the Rev. Holmes. It is addressed C/o Kumarappa.
Kakasaheb thinks that that made Kanta say that there was a letter from
Kumarappa. Manilal has asked me for suggestions for reading. I must
have gone to sleep with this thought in my mind, and so I had the
following dream. My advice for reading is as in the dream which I am
narrating. I dreamt that Manilal was standing by my side and that
Devdas, a child, had climbed on to my lap and had fallen asleep.
Manilal told me that he had wasted many years of his life without
reading anything and that the desire for reading had now awakened in
him. He, therefore, asked me to guide him. I expressed my regret that
I had not been able to do much for my children’s education. I then
wrote down as follows for Manilal: “Study the whole of Gokhale’s
book on arithmetic. Study his books on algebra and geometry too, if
you get time. You should learn the history and geography of India in
some detail, and of the world in outline. You should read Tolstoy’s
The Kingdom of God Is within You, for Sanskrit Bhandarkar’s books
and the Gita, in Gujarati Navajivanmala and K’s 1 Jivanshodhan, and
finally Tulsidas’s Ramayana and a text on. arithmetic, both in
Gujarati. You should get the books through Maganbhai.” At this
point I woke up from the dream. There was something more still, but I
do not recollect it. That is, I had forgotten it even when I woke up at
3.30 a.m. I like the advice I gave in my dream. Manilal may read what
he can, and what he finds interesting, from the above. Or, rather, it is
Mahadev who has awakened Manilal’s interest in reading. He should,
therefore, be guided by Mahadev. I should not hold on to an opinion
expressed in a dream; and, moreover, I cannot at present think out a
reading list for Manilal. I would give the same advice to Ramdas. I
attach no importance at all to the dream. Manilal’s problem was in my
mind. I had also been thinking about Devdas’s letter. It is not,
therefore, surprising that, owing to some disturbance in the stomach, I
1

180

K. G. Mashruwala’s
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

got such a happy dream. Write to Brijkrishna and tell him that the
understanding is that, as far as possible, I should not write to prisoners
and hence I do not write to him. I think about him every day, all the
same. Tell him that he should take the utmost care of his health. He
should make the best use of every minute and keep note of how
hespends his time. Let him take this as a letter to him. And he should
continue to write to me.
Tuesday morning, October 28, 1930
I wrote about yajna last week, but feel like writing more about it.
It will perhaps be worthwhile further to consider a principle which has
been created along with mankind. Yajna is duty to be performed, or
service to be rendered, all the twenty-four hours of the day, and hence
a maxim like “The powers of the good are always exercised for a
benevolent purpose” is inappropriate, if benevolence has any taste of
favour about it. To serve without desire is to favour not others, but
ourselves even as in discharging a debt we serve only ourselves,
lighten our burden and fulfil our duty. Again, not only the good, but
all of us are bound to place our resources at the disposal of humanity.
And if such is the law, as evidently it is, indulgence ceases to hold a
place in life and gives way to renunciation. For human beings
renunciation itself is enjoyment. This is what differentiates man from
the beast. Some object that life thus understood becomes dull and
devoid of art, and leaves no room for the householder. But I think in
saying this they misinterpret the word ‘renunciation’. Renunciation
here does not mean abandoning the world and retiring into the forest.
The spirit of renunciation, should rule all the activities of life. A
householder does not cease to be one if he regards life as a duty
rather than as an indulgence. A cobbler, a cultivator, a tradesman or a
barber may be inspired in their work or activities either by the spirit of
renunciation or merely by the desire for self-indulgence. A merchant
who carries on his business in a spirit of sacrifice will have crores
passing through his hands, but he will, if he follows the law, use his
abilities for service. He will, therefore, not cheat or speculate, will lead
a simple life, will not injure a living soul and will lose millions rather
than harm anybody. Let no one run away with the idea that this type
of merchant exists only in my imagination. Fortunately for the world,
he does exist in the West as well as in the East. It is true such
merchants may be counted on one’s fingers but the type ceases to be

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

181

imaginary as soon as even one living specimen can be found to
answer to it. All of us know of a philanthropic tailor in Wadhwan. I
know of one such barber. Everyone of us knows of such a weaver. 1
And if we go deeply into the matter, we shall come across men in
every walk of life who lead dedicated lives.
No doubt these sacrificers obtain their livelihood by their
work. But livelihood is not their objective, but only a by-product of
their vocation. Motilal was a tailor at first, and continued as a tailor
afterwards. But his spirit was changed and his work was transmuted
into worship. He began to think about the welfare of others and his
life became artistic in the real sense of the term.
A life of sacrifice is the pinnacle of art and is full of true joy.
Such life is the source of ever fresh springs of joy which never dry up
and never satiate. Yajna is not yajna if one feels it to be burdensome
or annoying. Self-indulgence leads to destruction and renunciation to
immortality. Joy has no independent existence. It depends upon our
attitude to life. One man will enjoy theatrical scenery, another the ever
new scenes which unfold themselves in the sky. Joy, therefore, is a
matter of education. We shall delight in things which we have been
taught to delight in as children. And illustrations can be easily cited of
different national tastes.
Again, many sacrificers imagine that they are free to receive
from the people everything they need and many things they do not
need, because they are rendering disinterested service. Directly this
idea sways a man, he ceases to be a servant and becomes a tyrant over
the people. One who would serve others will not waste a thought upon
his own comforts, which he leaves to be attended to or neglected by
his Master on high. He will not, therefore, encumber himself with
everything that comes his way; he will take only what he strictly needs
and leave the rest. He will be calm, free from anger and unruffled in
mind even if he finds himself inconvenienced. His service, like virtue,
is its own reward, and he will rest content with it.
Again, one dare not be negligent in service or be behindhand
with it. He who thinks that he must be diligent only in his personal
business and unpaid public business may be done in any way and at
1

182

The allusion probably is to Kabir.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

any time he chooses, has still to learn the very rudiments of the
science of sacrifice. Voluntary service of others demands the best of
which one is capable, and must take precedence over service of self. In
fact, the pure devotee consecrates himself to the service of humanity
without any reservation whatever.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The person in the Ashram who spins best on the takli should
write to me and explain how he spins, how he imparts spinning motion
to the takli, what is the length of the thread which he draws out at one
time, etc. I feel unhappy that I cannot go beyond 44 rounds per hour.
Prof. Trivedi has sent me a pair of scales, and, therefore, you need not
send one from there.
There are 72 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

265. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 28, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

The stock of uncarded cotton with me is about to be exhausted.
Till now, I used to get it from the Ashram. This time may I trouble
you? My hope in making this request is that, if you do not keep a
stock of such cotton, you will start doing so. The cotton should have
been ginned by hand. It is difficult to card with hand the cotton from
the bales prepared in a ginning press, and the yarn spun from such
cotton is not of good quality. If you do not keep a stock of such
cotton ginned by hand, you may obtain some from the Ashram or
from Vithaldas Jerajani. It may also be available in the Khadi
Karyalaya. I make this request so that you may take all this trouble.
Kakasaheb and I have been making the fullest use of your
sewing-machine.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4814. Courtesy: Premlila Thackersey

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

183

266. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
October 28, 1930
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

Your spiritual restlessness is in a way to my liking. True peace
will emerge out of it. Bhai Mahavir Prasad may continue to do the
khadi work and you need not worry about it. But I am confident that
you will gain some peace by putting not only money but your heart
too in some noble work. I can understand that you have to devote a
great deal of your time to your business, but being engrossed in it all
the time will neither profit the business nor bring you peace of mind.
Read carefully what I have written during this week about yajna. Be
that as it may, I believe that your efforts are so determined and your
heart so pure that you will surely gain peace and discover your true
way.
Yours,

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
Where is the lady I met in Mussoorie and how is she? My
blessings to her.
From Hindi: C.W. 6188. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

267. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 30, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

You sent me the cotton by return of post! It is of very good
quality indeed. I had forgotten to mention the quantity required. You
guessed it correctly. When it is exhausted, I will certainly trouble you
again. I hope you did suppose that my motive in persuading you to
stock hand-ginned cotton could not be merely that you may have a
stock of such cotton with you. I take it that spinning is being done in
your. “cottage” 1 . But in case you secure the slivers from elsewhere or
have been using the cotton of pressed bales, I thought that you
1

184

Punning on the word “Parnakuti”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

alsomight, if required to send me hand-ginned cotton, start stocking
and using such cotton for your own spinning. I did get, on the 12th of
Bhadrapada, a tin jar and three glass bottles containing dried grapes
and other fruit, but I was told that they were sent by Sundaram. It is
only from your letter that I learn that you also had sent fruit, whether
it was the same that I have mentioned above or different from that.
Otherwise I would have certainly written to you to acknowledge
receipt of the gift. If you give me more details about it, I will make
inquiries here.
Blessings from

BAPU
LADY VITHALDAS THACKERSEY
“PARNAKUTI”
YERAVDA HILL
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4815. Courtesy: Premlila Thackersey

268. LETTER TO UPTON SINCLAIR
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

October 30, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

I read your Mammonart1 with absorbing interest and Mental
Radio 2 with curiosity. The former has given me much to think, the
latter did not interest me. Nobody in India would, I think, doubt the
possibility of telepathy but most would doubt the wisdom of its
material use.
I will now avail myself of your kind offer and ask you to send
me your other volumes or such as you think I should read.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
UPTON S INCLAIR , E SQ.
S TATIONA P., P ASADENA
C ALIFORNIA
From a photostat: G.N. 2552

1
2

Books by the author, published in 1925 and 1930, respectively
ibid

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

185

269. LETTER TO JOHN HAYNES HOLMES1
YERAVDA ,

October 30, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your warm letter of 9th Sept. last. I may not say anything
beyond thanking you for the letter.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
R EV . J. H. H OLMES
From a photostat of the original : C. W. 113520. Courtesy : Robert D.
Berman. New York

270. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
October 31, 1930
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

I am glad you have expressed yourself freely on the question of
‘vows’.
You seem to me to misunderstand my meaning. No fault of
yours. You have not the original before you. I have not seen the
translation. The word ‘vow’ is also an unsuitable equivalent for the
original ‘ozr’. But the best thing for me is to explain what I mean and
then leave you to find the exact word if you endorse my position. If
you contest it, you should continue the correspondence till we have
thrashed the subject out.
You seem to think of vows publicly administered to audiences.
This may or may not be good. The ‘vow’ I am thinking of is a
promise made by one to oneself. We have to deal with two dwellers
within: Rama and Ravana, God and Satan, Ormuzd 2 and Ahriman 3 .
The one binds us to make us really free, the other only appears to free
us so as to bind us tight within his grip. A ‘vow’ is a promise made to
Rama to do or not to do a certain thing which, if good, we want to do,
1

The letter was written while Gandhiji was in custody and not able to speak his

2

The holy and the evil spirits according to Zoroastrian scriptures
ibid

mind.
3

186

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

but have not the strength unless we are tied down, and which, if bad,
we would avoid, but have not the strength to avoid unless similarly tied
down. This I hold to be a condition indispensable [to]1 growth. I grant
that we are higher than the sun, how much more necessary for us to be
at least as true and faithful as the sun if not truer and more faithful? If
in matters of commerce, a man who vacillates is useless, why should he
fare otherwise in matters spiritual which carry with them infinitely
greater consequences? If you hold that I must speak and do the right
thing at any cost, you grant my whole position and so you also do if
you grant that, at the peril of my life, I should be faithful to my wife
or friend. You can easily multiply such instances. For me Jesus was
pre-eminently a man of unshakable resolution, i.e., vows. His yea was
yea for ever. A life of vow is like marriage, a sacrament. It is marriage
with God indissoluble for all time. Come let us marry Him. Verb Sap.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10081

271. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

October 31, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I have been wondering why there is no letter from you. I hope
you have not come away from Sarbhon defeated or tired. It does not
matter even if that is so. Can anybody rise above his or her nature?
Our duty lies in trying to go as far as our nature will permit us to do.
The rest is in God’s hands. We should be satisfied if our conscience
tells us that we have spared no effort. I suppose I shall know by and
by what you intend to do now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9292

1

The original has “of ”.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

187

272. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 1, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have both your letters, the one which you wrote directly and
the one which you sent through the Ashram. All this nervousness
doesn’t become you. Learn to endure the misfortune which has
befallen you. If your health does not recover there you must go to the
Ashram. After your health has improved, you may again assume the
responsibility of running the home. With weak health, what can you
do even if you remain there? I simply cannot understand why you
should get fainting fits. It seems you fret too much. Stop doing so.
Have faith in God. Let His will be done. We are mere puppets in His
hands. For some time, you should drop me a postcard every day. I
shall always get it. I have written to Jayaprakash. If he shows the
letterto you and and wishes to discuss the matter with you, advise him
as you think proper. Give up all worries. You may freely write to me
anything you wish to. I don’t know why you did not get my postcard.
I hope you will get these letters without delay.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3377

273. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 1, 1930
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

This letter concerns Bhai Jayaprakash Narayan. He belongs to a
respectable family of Bihar and he is also the son-in-law of
Brijkishore Babu, the noble worker of Bihar. Till now he was with
Jawaharlal in the Congress office. He has studied in America for seven
years. Now, after his mother’s death, he feels the necessity of earning
some money. He needs Rs. 300 per mensem. In my opinion, Bhai
Jayaprakash is a worthy young man. If possible, absorb him
188

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

somewhere and pay him his requirements. Bhai Jayaprakash will
himself give you further details about his antecedents.1 I know Babu
Brijkishore’s daughter2 very well. She has lived in the Ashram for a
considerable time. I have rarely seen a girl like her, resolute and
utterly devoted to duty.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 6189. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

274. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 1, 1930
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

I have your letter. I am glad. You are entitled to write as you do.
Your grief moves me. Your love for your mother 3 is commendable
and becomes you. I enclose a letter to G.D. Birla. 4 Take it to him
and see him. However, I must caution you. I myself have drunk deep
from the fountain of motherly love. I was devoted to my parents; I
worshipped them. And yet in your love for your mother I see
attachment. Your love should be informed with knowledge.Your
mother has died in the body. Her spirit has not perished. The body
had to perish one day. Your love should now undergo a
transformation. Our true mother is the motherland. Your filial love
should be transformed into love of the motherland and to make it
endure you should dedicate yourself to the service of the motherland.
You must not distress yourself that an expert doctor was not called.
Millions of mothers get no medical assistance. And I cannot admit
that they are thereby necessarily the losers. Even the best of doctors
cannot confer immortality on anyone. Therefore, in my view you and
everyone else should give expression to your filial love by dwelling
on the virtues of the departed and emulating them and you should
devote all your energies for the cause of the motherland. Please
1

The letter from Jayaprakash Narayan was enclosed with this letter.
Prabhavati, wife of Jayaprakash Narayan
3
Who had passed away in early October; vide “Letter to Narayan Moreshwar
Khare”, 11-10-1930.
4
ibid
2

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

189

discuss this With your father. If what I say appeals to you show this to
your father and seek his consent for dedicating yourself to the work
of service. Of course you had already made such a dedication. But the
death of your mother has created a new situation and reconsideration
may be the duty. However, if my advice does not appeal to you, you
may use the letter to Ghanshyamdasji and earnestly try to earn a
livelihood. I shall not be distressed thereby. Consult Prabhavati also.
Keep writing to me and if at any time you need my help let me know.
If it is not beyond my power I will help you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

275. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 2, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

I got your letter. If Shanta has been trying the bath cure, let me
know the effect it has. We had two copies of Kuhne’s book. I think
there is a Gujarati translation also. Kalavati had good experience of
life at home and it is also to the good that she is now returning of her
own accord.
Rukmini’s suicide excites deep pity. I think that there must have
been some other cause also behind this suicide. Has anybody
investigated the matter further? Has not the women’s group discussed
it? As the place is near Godhra, Mama is likely to know something. If
the report is correct, there should be widespread public agitation about
the case. If you get time, inquire further and let me know the result.
Who is the writer of the original letter? You cannot send me the Kashi
newspaper. But is it not clear enough, what he must have stated?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5258

190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

276. LETTER TO RADHABEHN GANDHI
November 2, 1930
CHI. RADHIKA,

I have your letter. Read mine over and over and go on asking
me about what you do not understand in it. I preserve both my
self-respect and humility if, when someone kicks me and tries to force
me to salute him, I suffer the kicks but do not get angry and wish well
of the person kicking me, do not utter even one word in reply and still
refuse to salute him. Once a person kicked me and tried to force me
to sit at his feet, but I said nothing to him, never wished him ill even in
a dream, and yet refused to sit at his feet. I believe I had preserved
both self-respect and humility. When the incident took place, I was
notat all conscious that I was being humble or anything of the sort. I
narrate it now only in order to explain my meaning. You can think of
many similar situations. You may even recall some from your own
life, and it would be very good indeed if one formed the habit, and
learnt the art, of reflecting on such incidents in one’s own life rather
than in another’s. In doing so, one should not search for incidents in
one’s life which show one’s own virtues. Our virtues are for others to
see. We should try to discover our shortcomings.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
It is also humility to see one’s own shortcomings.
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 8689. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

191

277. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI MADHAVJI
THAKKAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 2, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

You are doing fine work indeed and winning credit for yourself
and for the cause. You at any rate should keep illness at arm’s length.
Ramabehn must have arrived there now. If the children have arrived,
and if they can write, let them write to me. Ramabehn should write and
tell me what she saw in Bombay. Have the children returned with
improved health? My blessings to all the brothers and sisters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6802

278. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
November 2, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

I am very glad to receive your letter. Those who regard even
death as God’s favour ultimately stand to gain. You too are benefiting
thus. There is no end to your progress. Today you are doing more
than a man could do. And I expect this from all women. Woman’s
capacity is in no way inferior to man’s for God’s work, but, in ahimsa
and the like, it is definitely superior. The description of Tarini’s
shraddha is enlightening. When is Satis Babu to be released? I hope
Arun and Charu are well. My blessings to all the Ashram inmates.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1674

192

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

279. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 2, 1930
CHI. RAMACHANDRA 1 ,

I was glad to have your letter. Boys of your age spin with
proficiency, recite the Gita and understand the Ramayana. What do
you study? How much do you spin in an hour and what is the count?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5259

280. LETTER TO JAISHANKAR TRIVEDI
November 3, 1930
BHAI TRIVEDI,

We have received the letter you sent us. The telegram also
reached me. I am relieved. Manu has survived a real danger to his life.
From this we should believe that he is destined for some great
achievement. At any rate such are the qualities of character we observe
in him at present. After consulting a doctor . . .2 I do feel that it would
be good if he becomes fit enough to be taken . . .3 to Almora or some
other place like that. Revashankerbhai’s Dhiru benefited much by
such a visit. His bone disease was even more serious than Manu’s.
Prabhudas also improved by staying there. Some defect seems to have
been left still in the ribs, etc. If it disappears completely, we may
perhaps rest somewhat free from fear.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7767

1

Seven-year old brother of Kashinath Trivedi who was then residing in the

Ashram
2
3

Here a line is missing in the source.
ibid

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

193

281. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 3, 1930
CHI. MANU,

Both of us were very happy to read Father’s wire about you. Do
not be in a hurry to resume work. It would help you very much if,
after you have regained strength, you were to go to Almora or some
other place like that and stay there for some time. When you have
recovered your normal strength, write and tell me how you got such a
serious illness.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I got your letter after I had finished the letter. We were very
happy. Kakasaheb had written to you and advised you to go to Poona
after discussing the matter with me. Do go there. But you see that I am
looking beyond the immediate present. May God protect you.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7768

282. LETTER TO PANNALAL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 3, 1930
CHI. PANNALAL,

It is a good question you have raised. Exactly the same question
was raised formerly regarding Andhra. The decision arrived at in the
end was that we at any rate should try to produce in Gujarat the khadi
required for Gujarat. The same thing applies in the case of the Punjab.
The principle of local production is the very basis of the khadi
movement. Every province, every district and in fact every village
should produce the khadi which it needs. In the final analysis, the
difference in price between khadi and other cloth does not count.
Khadi will be dearer than mill cloth if people, though they understand
the principles of economics, do not spin to meet their own
requirements; if, none the less, they wear it for the sake of the poor,
194

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

they would find khadi cheaper in the long run than other cloth. Think
over my definition of swadeshi. We have only one way open to us to
meet the difficulties which we now experience, and that is, to decide
the principle and then cling to it. For all that, private dealers are sure
to order khadi from the Punjab or other places. We will not obstruct
them. If you do not understand why this is the right course, you may
ask me again.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3107

283. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 3, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (DESAI),

Write to Sushila and tell her that I had seen Pyarelal on
Saturday. He has now completely recovered. He has got back his
original weight. He drinks three pounds of milk and eats one pound
of bread. When he wants, he eats vegetables too.
What shall I say about your irregularity?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1808

284. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 3, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

If you have symptoms of jaundice and get acid eructations, I am
sure what you should do is to fast for at least seven days. While you
are fasting, you should drink every day at least four pounds of water,
mixing soda bicarb and/or salt with it. You should break the fast with
fruit juice and then start whey and rice in required quantities. During
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

195

the fast, see that you take an enema and Kuhne bath daily. I am sure
that you will not become bed-ridden with a seven-day fast. You may
even be able to do a little work every day. In any case the fast will do
you no harm.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 6689. Courtesy: Premabehn
Kantak

285. LETTER TO JAMNA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 3, 1930
CHI. JAMNA,

You did very well in going to Bombay. If you keep good health
there, don’t be in a hurry to return. My blessings to Kalyandas,
Dharamdas, Premkunvar and other men and women whom I met but
whose names Iforget. What occupations do Kalyandas and Dharamdas
follow at present?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 545. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

286. LETTER TO SHANTA SHANKARBHAI PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 3, 1930
CHI. SHANTA (SHANKARBHAI),

You were restless when you wrote your letter. You have said
thrice in your short letter, “I can’t think what to write.” If you write
slowly, as if you were practising in a copy-book, you would certainly
be able to write a good hand. You who have some work or other to do
during the whole day, why can’t you think of anything to write
about? It is natural that you wish to meet me. We shall meet when God
wills, and till then should keep patience.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4055

196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

287. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

November 3, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. Since you have not said anything about your
health recently I conclude that it is all right. Do you go for walks?
Blessings to Brother from both of us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

288. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 3 1930
CHI. NIMU,

I had a letter from you after so many days. It seems nowadays
you have become Ba’s secretary. How is your health? Is Sumitra all
right? Does she still suffer from constipation? So long as one can get
ink, one must never write with a pencil.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

289. LETTER TO DURGA GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 3, 1930
CHI. DURGA,

This letter of yours is good. Some errors in expression there are,
but they do not matter. You must cultivate the habit of revising the
letter. Some errors can thus be corrected. It is preferable to brush the
teeth before prayers. What are you learning in sewing? Tell me how
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

197

much can you spin on the takli and the charkha in an hour and of
what count? If you have not noted the speed, please do and inform
me. Do you know how to ascertain the count? It is a very good habit
to recite Ramanama while going to bed.1
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalata, pp. 32-3

290. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
October 30/ November 4, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your packet today. The piece of leather which you sent for
the sandals was not good enough for repairing the soles. It is hardly a
month since the repair was done but the soles have again worn out.
The hard leather required for soles and heels is made from hide of a
particular part of the body, generally of a buffalo. If you get such a
piece, send it to me. In the alternative, you may send another pair of
the same number as, or of a number higher than, the one you sent for
Kakasaheb.
I think I wrote to you that you need not send the pair of scales.
If I did not, please understand from this that I don’t need it. Trivedi
came and gave me one.
I know your attitude. So long as Mahadev is outside, you will
not take upon yourself the burden of making a final decision, and
you are right in that. I had a long letter from Keshu. He seems to have
been deeply hurt. He has bitterly complained against you, but his
letter has had no effect on me. You should, however, take him into
confidence and ask him to tell you all that he feels. I know that he is
impulsive by nature. But he is a sincere youth and very eager to do
service. He is, however, impatient to increase his knowledge and do
original work. I may be wrong in my judgment about him. You
should, however, call him and hear all that he has to say. Afterwards
write to me and give me the impression you form. I know that he
1

198

The original was in Gujarati.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

spends money rather freely. But I have observed that, in spite of that,
he is simple in habits. He adheres to his charge against . . .1 and it is a
serious one.
We need have no fears about Kanta and Sumangal. They are
close relations. They are first cousins and have grown up together.
Despite this, I, too, had a suspicion and expressed it to them. But I felt
that they were innocent. Sumangal was Kanta’s teacher once and she
has great faith in him. And, moreover, if we suspect brothers and
sisters, where would we end? We have adopted an attitude of full trust
in the women. If we burn our fingers as a result of that, we will endure
our misfortune. Unless we are prepared to take some risks, we shall
fail to do our duty towards women. The Hindu man is under a heavy
debt to the Hindu woman.
October 31, 1930
The clock struck nine when I wrote the last sentence and I laid
down the pen. We have resolved not to work after nine, as far as
possible.
I got your letter about Amidas. I am satisfied now. His
firmness will be rewarded. I felt that it was my duty to tell him what I
knew. If you want me to decide about Chitalia, I suggest that you
should send him Rs. 1,500. I think my speech referred to the past but
made no reference to the future. He cannot claim any money on the
basis of that speech. But I do not have sufficient data to come to a
decision on the point. I trust Karsandas and, since he has asked for the
sum, I think it is our duty to pay it. In future, however, he may draw
what he needs with Jamnalalji’s or Kishorelal’s consent; that seems all
right to me. Copy out this part of the letter and send it to
Karsandaswhen you remit the money to him. He should give his
opinion whether or not he agrees with me.
November 1, 1930
Along with this you will find letters to Prabhavati and
Jayaprakash and one to Ghanshyamdas about them. Put all the three
in the same envelope and dispatch them immediately. The couple is
passing through extremely difficult circumstances just now owing to
the death of Jayaprakash’s mother. Do the persons in the Ashram who
spin weigh the quantity of waste yarn? If they do not, they should start
1

The name has been omitted.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

199

weighing it every day. If anyone has been doing this, let me know the
quantity of yarn he or she wastes. What is the highest average speed
per hour attained by anyone in spinning? A person may, after careful
preparation, attain excellent speed on one occasion; but that does not
give the same value as the average speed maintained by someone who
has kept a record for a year. In calculating this, the time spent in
replacing a broken belt or in cleaning a belt should also be taken into
account. Don’t you agree that the figures given by a person would be
correct only if he has included in them the time spent thus?
Tuesday morning, November 4, 1930
We have discussed the Ashram observances, their necessity and
the meaning of yajna. I propose now to discuss the meaning of the
book, as I have understood it, on which we meditate daily and from
which we recite some portion every day so as to complete all the
chapters in a week, the book which we have accepted as our spiritual
lighthouse. A letter which I had once received had suggested this to
me, but Govindji’s letter received last week made me decide to take up
the subject. He says that he tries to read the Anasaktiyoga but finds it
very difficult to understand. Though I have tried to explain the
meaning of the verses in a language which everyone can understand, a
literal rendering is bound to present difficulties to the reader. If the
subject itself is difficult, how much can simplicity of language help? I,
therefore, intend here to present the subject itself in a manner easy to
follow. A book which we want to consult in every activity of our life
and with whose help we try to solve all our spiritual problems—if we
try again and again to understand the meaning of this book from all
possible points of view and meditate over it constantly, we shall
ultimately come to be filled with its spirit. In all my spiritual
difficulties I run to mother Gita and to this day she has never failed to
comfort me. It is, therefore, not impossible that otherswho seek similar
comfort from her may, if they know what new light I get from it every
day, receive further help or see some altogether new meaning in the
work.
I propose today to give the substance of Chapter XII which
deals with bhakti. Whenever there is a wedding in the Ashram, we ask
the couple to learn by heart and ponder over this Chapter as one of
200

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the five sacrifices they have to offer. Knowledge and action in the
absence of devotion are dry as dust and are likely to make us
confirmed bondslaves. Let us therefore commence this study of the
Gita with a heart full of devotion.1
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There are 62 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

291. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 4, 1930
BHAI KHAMBHATTA,

I got both your letters and the Jivan spinning-wheel. It is not
clear from either of your letters whether you got the letter I wrote to
you at your Poona address. I will take care of the Jivan
spinning-wheel and ultimately return it to you. I will also let you
know my experience of it after I have tried it. Both of you should take
care of your health. Your minds, of course, are pure. Kakasaheb is
quite well. He will be released on the 28th at the latest.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6597

1

The discourses, like those on the Ashram vows which preceded them, were
intended to be read out at the Ashram prayer meetings; vide “Letter to Narandas
Gandhi”, 22-7-1930. They were later published under the title Gitabodh and an
English translation appeared under the title Discourses on the Gita. For the text of
these discourses, vide“Letters on the Gita”, 21-2-1932.
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

201

292. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 6, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter. I do not think there is anything special about the
Gandiv I got. It gave all the trouble, you had, to Kaka. I found out the
cause of the trouble, removed it and it has never once given trouble.
The second mal must be as thin as possible. I am using what Narandas
sent from the Ashram. I think 6 threads. For the moving wheel the
mal knot should be from the outside. Neither need be too tight. The
wheel must move without any jerk. It may be that the metal rings are
not rigidly fixed in the wheels or the axles are not straight or in a
straight line. To me its beauty lies in its smooth working and less
liability to go out of order. But as I have said in my last letter, you
need not divert your attention for the sake of the wheel. I suppose it is
true about wheels as it is true about most things that what suits one
does not therefore suit all others. Experts have to adjust values of
different types. We workers must be satisfied with that which will give
the maximum of work with the minimum of trouble. If I had the
requisite mechanical training or was a genius in the art, I should love
to become an expert in carding and spinning and judging bows,
wheels and taklis. But I must treat it as a forbidden ambition, though I
do not leave off the search. The search for me here is duty Lo/keZLong or short, I hope to do at least one bhajan daily. The
Marathi I finished with Kaka’s assistance. The Bengali too I began but
on learning from K. that they were all translated by the Poet himself
or under his supervision, I left off, thinking it a profanation even to
attempt. I have now, therefore, only 42 bhajans to do. Marathi being
very short, I was able to do sometimes even three per night. I hope to
finish before 42 days are out .
One question in your letter just now stares me about the Gandiv.
I mount the wheel end on a beam of wood nearly 3 inches high and I
fix it on to the beam with 2 movable pins. It thus lies slanting from
top downward. It can be even mounted on a box to lie flat. K. tied it
to the cane bottom of a chair and worked seated in a chair. I am glad
you saw Alexander. He wrote to me directly. The letter was given
202

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to me about 10 days after its receipt. I knew from him that he was able
quite by accident to see you. When you write to him please give him
my love and tell him I had his letter. I must not attempt to write
separately to him. Sufficient unto the day is the good thereof.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5418. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9653

293. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 7, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter. I am glad you are feeling yourself again. Please do
not feel bound to try the Gandiv wheel. I know you have many things
to attend to and with a regularly going wheel, you might be able to
finish your sacrificial spinning without any bother.
Give Andrews my love. I can write a formal letter to him. But I
do not want to write a mere formal letter to him. I would far rather let
my silence speak to him. The pen is often a superfluity, if not a
hindrance, to heart’s flow.
Mahadeo must not overstrain himself. I have written to him
strongly about him, but you should pull him up whenever he is
reckless about his health. My cold had disappeared altogether and,
therefore, I did not even think of it when I wrote to you last week. Yes,
just now it is a combination of dates and vegetables, the latter
sparingly. But for the cold, I was getting on all right with the
vegetables. I may not give you more time this week.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
I hope to finish the hymns earlier than I had expected.
From the original: C.W. 5419. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9652

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

203

294. LETTER TO PADMA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 7, 1930
CHI. PADMA,

I got your letter. The tumour must be cured. Do not neglect it.
If Gangabehn were not with you, I would have certainly felt worried
because of your having gone out of the Ashram. But since she is with
you, I feel easy in my mind. Write to me regularly. You should write
your letters in a bold and clear hand.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6114

295. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 7, 1930
CHI. SUSHILA,

I have your letter. Though Manilal has lost 40 Ib., he seems to
have preserved his strength, for he has asked my advice about what to
read. Pragji’s request regarding the Phoenix Ashram seems
reasonable to me. However, it is for Manilal and you to decide about
the matter. Moreover, I do not have even enough facts to arrive at a
decision. Secondly, it is the common experience that, in such matters,
only the person who held charge last can give the right decision. Even
if Bharati’s handwriting is bad, she should write. Why should one feel
ashamed to write to a friend? I must ask Krishnakant to forgive me. I
don’t even remember his face. I have of course heard his name from
you and read it in your letters. Won’t he forgive me if I send him
heaps of blessings? Ask him. If he does not forgive me, plead on my
behalf. Can you say that Sita has now become as strong as she was in
South Africa? Do you give her fruit to eat? Convey my blessings to
Pragji and write to him and tell him that service lies in doing the
dutywhich comes to us unsought. Who are now with Gomati? What
food do they get? Give me all the news you have about her.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4774

204

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

296. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI PANDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 7, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I have your letter. You will realize truth more and more as you
will stop observing what others do and concentrate on your work. Nor
should you plunge too much into thinking. Of course one has to
think up to a point. After that one should depend only on faith. The
mind too like the body suffers from indigestion when overstuffed.
Like the body the mind too needs to be put at rest. That is why there
has been enjoined constant repetition of Ramanama and other
mantras. They instantly put the mind to rest. Now the meaning: The
higher and the lower [para and apara] means, so to say, the
unmanifest and the manifest. The Gita often discusses them. Let us
understand it briefly as the Lord (Ishwar) or Brahman or even Truth.
Self-evident truth is the higher and the other realized by an individual
is therefore finite: [i.e.,] lower. A person who has a glimpse of (this
aspect of) the Lord in His higher form is relieved from the good or
bad fruit of his actions and all his problems and misgivings disappear.
The Gita II. 59, viz., ‘the yearning too departs when he beholds the
Supreme’ also conveys the same sense. A person who becomes
engrossed in discharging whatever duty naturally comes to his lot, has
as good as realized the para1 and this ought to put an end to his
problems. He who cannot experience it has not [yet] identified
himself with his duty. I have here tried to put it across so that you may
understand it fully, but do ask me if you cannot, in spite of this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 329. Courtesy: Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

1

The source has apara which is obviously a slip.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

205

297. LETTER TO BALIBEHN VORA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 7, 1930
CHI. BALI,

I got a letter from you after many days. You may keep Manu
with you and let her live as you wish and as may please Ba. I don’t
wish at all to hurt you and your sister, and at any rate I would not do
so from here. I know the great love that you two have for the children.
Do not worry about Kanti. He is a brave boy and God, the Lord of us
all, protects everyone. You may see him whenever you get an
opportunity and you should afterwards write to me and give me news
about him. I do occasionally have news about him, of course, from
other sources.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5058. Courtesy: Surendra Mashruwala

298. LETTER TO KRISHNAMAIYADEVI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 7, 1930
CHI. KRISHNAMAIYA,

I don’t remember any letter of yours to which I did not reply. If
I have omitted to reply to any question, ask it again.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6220

206

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

299. LETTER TO TARAMATI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
November 7, 1930
I got your letter. I was happy to read it. Besides rotla, what else
does Mathuradas eat? Does he take milk, fruit, etc.? Does he get any
food from outside or does he eat only what he gets in jail? Is there
space where he can walk a little? Does he have the strength to do it?
Does he have any companion with him? Get all this information and
write to me. Pyarelal is quite well. I also had a letter from Shankaran.
When he comes to see you next, tell him that I had replied to his letter.
Does Dilip get sufficient exercise? Do you take regular walks, too? If
you do not, you should. If you have started reading anything, let me
know what it is.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi: p. 103

300. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 8, 1930
CHI. MANU,

I got Father’s last letter. I do not write a separate letter to him.
You will now rapidly recover your normal health. It may also have
happened that, during this illness, you got rid of the toxins in your
body. I suppose all of you are in Poona now. This letter, therefore,
will have wandered about a bit before you get it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7769

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

207

301. LETTER TO DUDHIBEHN VALJI DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 8, 1930
CHI. DUDHIBEHN,

I have had no letter from you recently. I am writing this because
Valji has gone back to the temple. Do you feel nervous? We shall win
true swaraj only through the sacrifices of men of his sincerity and
purity. We should, therefore, rejoice at his self-sacrifice, and not at all
feel unhappy. God protects everyone. Write to me about all your
circumstances.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7409. Courtesy: V. G. Desai

302. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 8, 1930
BHAI NANABHAI,

I read your remarks below Tara’s letter. What you have been
doing is enough. If a person three feet in height feels unhappy
because he cannot reach with his hand as high as a man six-foot tall
can do, he condemns the Creator of the world. He who does his duty
with love and devotion for God and to the best of his ability,
discharges his debt fully. I believe that you do this. Why, then, should
you feel discontented or unhappy? You should, of course, try and
find out why your body is so weak. But it seems that all of you
brothers have weak constitutions from your birth. You should
discover the cause and if, in your own case, there is no remedy, you
should remove it in respect of persons under your care.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati. G.N. 4776

208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

303. LETTER TO TARA MASHRUWALA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 8, 1930
CHI. TARA (OF AKOLA),

I have your letter. (After how many months did I get one?) You
say nothing about the headache from which you suffered after the
injury to your head. Give me one day’s sample from your diary. You
can teach Sita a little Sanskrit even as she plays with you. She should
of course sing Jhanda Uncha Rahe Hamara 1 , but likewise she should
also keep murmuring some easy verse from the Gita.
Give my blessings to Mother.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4775

304. LETTER TO ROHINI KANAIYALAL DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 8, 1930
CHI. ROHINI,

I wrote to you even before I got your letter, after reading in the
papers about Kanjibhai’s arrest. How fortunate all of you are? To
what term has your father been sentenced? How old is he? And you
cannot say that only you have been left out. It was no ordinary
courage you displayed when you held the horse a prisoner. God
inspired you with such strength at that moment. Win many similar
triumphs in future.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2654

1

“May Our flag fly high”

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

209

305. LETTER TO LALITA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 8, 1930
CHI. LALITA,

I have your letter. You have done all right in going with
Gangabehn. Work sincerely now and be brave. For your age, the
handwriting is bad and the language also is not quite correct. Make an
effort and improve both. You can do that even while you stay there.
What you will require for the effort is not time but perseverance.
Progressing slowly, you can improve quite a lot.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9218

306. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

November 8, 1930
CHI. KANTA

I have your letter. It is well that you have gone with Gangabehn.
Serve her with care and be brave. You have the capacity. You have the
desire. You now have an opportunity. May God give you good health.
Promise me that you will never do anything shameful. Gangabehn
also has great faith in you.
May God bless you. Do write to me in detail from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

210

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

307. LETTER TO GOVIND PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 9, 1930
CHI. GOVIND,

I have your letter. If your eyes are weak, it is right that you
should not read much. How many chapters of the Gita have you
learnt by heart? If you learn the whole of the Gita by heart, you will
have plenty of material for reflection when your mind is not occupied
otherwise. Then it will not be necessary for you to read anything else.
You should, of course, fully understand what you learn by heart.
Is the yarn which you spin sufficiently strong? Is it even? Who
makes the slivers?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3943

308. LETTER TO JUGATRAM DAVE
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 9, 1930
BHAI JUGATRAM,

Your letter is full of information. So far, everything seems to be
going as it should. We are being tested well in every respect. As long
as you are free, write to me regularly. The fact that all the activities are
going on normally is a sign of great efficiency.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2686

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

211

309. LETTER TO RAMCHANDRA KHARE
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 9, 1930
CHI. RAMBHAU,

I have your nice letter. Your handwriting too is good. It is all
right that you draw lines. I do not remember having not replied to any
of your letters.
It is good that with the advance of winter you are also gaining
weight. If you take enough exercise you will beat the cold instead of
the cold beating you.
Do you write to Lakshmibehn from time to time? It is good that
you are learning bhajans by heart. You have to preserve and enhance
the prestige of Panditji’s position. That will happen only when you
outshine him. Panditji never had the opportunity that you have at
your age.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 286. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn Khare

310. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 9, 1930
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

I have your letter. It would be nice if Prabhudas wrote about the
science of weaving. I cannot suggest anything right now about
spinning, etc. Discuss it with Kaka when he is released. I have talked to
him mainly about these subjects. He has become quite familiar with
the difficulties faced by the spinners.
Have you come across any spinning-wheels that deserve to be
given a prize at first sight ? If so, we must appoint an examiner and
finish that work. Amubhai and Mathuradas are qualified for it. You
have to be connected with it of course. I suggest that Purushottam and
Kesu of Jeevan-chakra should be taken as advisers. If Annada Babu
has studied the science of the spinning-wheel, he too should be taken
as an examiner. I cannot think of other names at the moment.
212

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Prabha Devi1 wrote to me about Tarini 2 . Satis Babu has been
rendered helpless without him.
I had also read in the newspapers about Brailsford’s3 visit. I also
read his commendation of the work. What are Manhar and Prabodh
doing?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S. N. 32731

311. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
November 9, 1930
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I have your letter. Go and see Devakinandan’s spinning-wheel.
The name Savyasachi4 is of course too high-sounding for your
spinning-wheel. ‘Bharat’ will not do either. Since, however, you
reminded5 me of Maganlal, I have suggested his name for your
spinning-wheel. It was he who transformed spinning-work into a
science. That name, therefore, is not improper for your spinningwheel. ‘Magan’ means ‘roominess’ and also ‘pleasure’. It is your
claim that your spinning-wheel gives people pleasure . And finally,
Maganlal had the virtues of Bharat 6 and Bharat was his ideal. Your
purpose7 also will therefore be served. After this, you may adopt
whatever name you like. If Bhavanidutta is a fit person, you should
take him in. You should not say ‘such a one’ with reference to any
person. If Bhavanidutta does come, you should provide him food and
drink at least.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33009
1

Hemprabha Das Gupta
Who passed away in Octobers, 1930; vide, “Letter to Lilavati”, 16-10-1930.
3
H. N. Brailsford, English journalist, author of Rebel India (1932)
4
‘Savyasachi’ was one of the names of Arjuna, who could shoot arrows with
both the right and the left hand. Here, it would mean a spinning-wheel which could be
turned with either hand.
5
Presumably, by his inventive skill
6
Rama’s devoted brother in the Ramayana
7
Prabhudas’s desire to name his spinning-wheel ‘Bharati’
2

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

213

312. LETTER TO BUDHABHAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 9, 1930
BHAI BUDHABHAI,

I received your letter. Practice writing with ink. Writing with a
pencil is a form of violence to the reader. Of course, when writing with
a pencil cannot be avoided, one is helpless.
A fast is not a substitute for eating less. A fast by itself
sometimes involves eating too much. The right way of ensuring that
you eat less is that at every meal, you should ask them to serve you
only once, and that too, only in a small quantity. Never eat so much
that your hunger may be fully satisfied. Stop eating as soon as you
feel that you have eaten so much as would permit you to eat the same
quantity again. As long as you have not accustomed yourself to eating
sparingly, it would be desirable not to insist on eating only five articles
of food at one meal. Eating sparingly will by itself mean that you eat
only a few articles of food at a time. You may take salt in reasonable
quantity. If you settle down at one place, why should you not grow in
the yard some vegetables which would take only a short time to grow?
For instance, you could grow fenugreek leaves.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Firmly cling to your resolution not to be alone with Parvati.
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 33122

214

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

313. LETTER TO KUNVARJI MEHTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 10, 1930
BHAI KUNVARJI,

I got your cheerful letter. I am very happy to know that you
have regained health. I have often observed that people who
enthusiastically respond to a call for service and plunge into the work
improve in health.
Write to Pragji and tell him that his living in exile is also a form
of service. When the Ruler of our destinies requires him in India, He
will certainly bring him here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2688

314. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 10, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have your letter. You must have received my detailed letters. I
will arrange that you get a Gujarati newspaper. I remember that you
had written to me about it some time ago, but I forgot the matter
altogether. What a careless fellow I am! I want you soon to recover
your calm. I hope my letter to Jayaprakash comforted him. You may
also write a separate letter and post it directly to me, whenever you
wish.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3378

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

215

315. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI
MADHAVJI THAKKAR 1
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 10, 1930
. . . will not remain backward. Both the positions are acceptable
to us. Having shed fear, why should we worry about anything? My
blessings to all the women.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6803

316. LETTER TO BULAKHIDAS
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 10, 1930
BHAI BULAKHIDAS,

I have your letter. It is only through sacrifices such as
yours and your wife’s that the drink evil will end. I hope that your
wife has now fully recovered. Give my compliments and blessings to
her.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3138

317. LETTER TO ABBAS
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 10, 1930
CHI. ABBAS,

I got your letter. I have hit upon a simple method of
ascertaining the count of yarn, and it is this: the number of rounds in
the quantity of yarn equal to the weight of one anna should be taken
1

The addressee cannot be identified. However, the letter is listed in the G.N.
Register among those addressed to Mahalakshmi Madhavji Thakkar.

216

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

as its count. I understand what you say about the rest.
I hope you keep good health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6304

318. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
November 10, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I have your long letter. But it was not too long for me. You
should not worry about your spellings when writing to me. Your aim
should be to explain your meaning, and I follow what you say.
You have undertaken a heavy responsibility. But the Lord
protects you. He has rewarded your work with success in the past and
will do so in future as well.
I am writing to Lilabehn. How can we help her if she herself
does not keep up courage? We have resolved to solve the problem of
women. In fact it is being solved. They have submitted themselves to a
fine test. The whole world has its eyes on the women of India. Write in
detail to me from time to time. If you don’t get time to write, ask
somebody else to do so. You should make someone your secretary.
I have received no letter for Kakasaheb yet.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G.S. Gangabehnne, p. 45; also C.W. 8761. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

319. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
November 10, 1930
CHI. MANUDI,

Your letter was very good. And the handwriting was fine, too.
You should make further progress. I see that your rate of spinning per
hour is greater than mine. Do you spin 306 rounds or yards? I hope
you know that there is a difference between the two. A round=4 ft.,
and a yard=3 ft. On which type of wheel do you spin, and what is the
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

217

count of the yarn? Nobody, including myself, knows when I shall be
released. Even the Government doesn’t know. But why should we
think about the matter? What difference does it make whether or not I
am released? You ask me to send you a picture. But how can I get one
in jail? We can’t get such things in a jail. If, however, I come across
any, I will preserve it for you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1505. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala

320. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
November 10, 1930
Khuda Hafiz
DEAR DAUGHTER RAIHANA,

I have your letter. I was very glad.1
Shouldn’t you regard this much Urdu enough for the day? If,
even after your second lesson I do not write a few lines in Urdu, you
might give me up as an unteachable pupil. What should I do then? If
you don’t have to spend too much time and take too much trouble in
writing Urdu so neatly, continue to write to me in Urdu. That would
help me to keep up some Urdu without special effort. You are all free
to laugh as much as you wish at my bad handwriting and at
spellingthat is still worse. But please don’t give me up as unteachable.
But I must say that there is no limit to your cunning. I don’t
know where you learnt it. I certainly do not remember to have taught
that. The poor girl! As soon as I permit her to write in Urdu, she goes
further and asks me to write in Urdu. But, having adopted you, how
can I get away from the fact? Vandemataram to Mother. Embrace
Father on my behalf, and pull his beard hard.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. R AIHANABEHN
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9623

1

218

The letter so far is in Urdu. The rest is in Gujarati.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

321. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 10, 1930
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

I have your letter. If you keep good health without milk, I don’t
wish to press you to drink it. Don’t wait till your health has
completely gone down before you start drinking it.
For some time, write to me regularly. About Chalala, do what is
possible after discussing the matter with Shankerlal. How are
Ramjibhai and Jivanlal? Convey my blessings to both.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III

322. LETTER TO SHANTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 10, 1930
CHI. SHANTA,

Your letter. Kashinath writes that you have fever again. How is
it? You must be careful in everything. It is well you have gone with
Gangabehn. You can come back if the climate there does not suit you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5260

323. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[November 11, 1930] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

This time, too, I got your packet in two parts, first the English
letters and then on the next day the others. There was also a previous
occasion when this happened. They open the packet and look into the
letters, hurriedly or carefully as they feel inclined before they hand
them over to me. They are of course required to read the letters. The
1

The letter was evidently begun earlier and completed on this date.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

219

letters are given to me in two parts so that I may get some of them at
any rate as early as possible.
I had again a long letter from Keshu. I find much substance in
what he says. He has gone deep into the matter. I have formed the
impression that . . .1 is hiding something. Read my letter to Keshu and
to . . . 2 before you pass them on. I have asked him what he thinks
about Keshu. I think his unpunctuality and other shortcomings are
such as we can tolerate. Being sincere, he does not want to make a
false show. He refuses to do anything which is beyond his capacity or
which does not appeal to him. But he has certainly the spirit of service
in him. Since he is pure at heart, I think it is our duty to bear his
minor faults. But Mahadev is there now and he says that he will abide
by Mahadev’s decision. If Mahadev cannot settle the matter, in the last
resort I will do so.
What you say about Hari-ichchha is correct. If you cannot stop
the marriage from taking place in the Ashram, put up with the event. I
had indeed guessed about it and that is why I put that question to
Harilal in my letter to him.
Did you read the further details about speed in spinning on the
takli which Balkrishna gave in his letter this time? It is increasing
there. I count the attainment of this speed a very important
achievement. I remember that four years ago a speed of hundred
rounds per hour was considered excellent. Now 160 rounds is the
standard for passing, according to Vinoba. Gangabehn has undertaken a big task. But God has always blessed her undertakings with
success. Don’t mind if Kusum has gone. Who will now help you
personally? I am sure you will feel hard pressed for want of enough
workers to help you. Owing to so many hands having left, the burden
of work is likely to increase rather than diminish. Who will take
Kanta’s place? Send me a final list of all the women who leave.
I approve of your diet. If it suits you, it is almost an ideal
combination. Do not increase the quantity of ground-nuts and do not
eat ground-nuts and copra on the same day. The quantity of milk
must not decrease now. Half a pound is the minimum you should
take. It is Dr. Muthu’s view that that quantity supplies the necessary
vitamins. If you feel weak, increase the quantity of milk or curds.
1
2

220

The names have been omitted.
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Read my letter to Bhansali. If he still wishes to be admitted, do what
you think best. If you are firm with him, you will have fewer
difficulties with him. Also read my letters to Lilabehn.
I don’t see any substance in Mathew’s suspicion. Read my reply
to him. Parnerkar should take rest. Perhaps change of air may also be
necessary. He ought to improve his health.
I must get now a strong piece of leather for the soles or a new
pair of utility shoes. There are people who deserve “shoes”, but,
when they get them, they do not accept them very cheerfully. I, on the
other hand, became fit for “shoes” long ago and am now impatient
to get them!
Send with anyone who may come on a visit here Krishnadas’s
books in Kashi’s possession. I am in no hurry about them.1
Tuesday morning, November 11, 1930
Tell Devdas that I have still not received his letter. Where and
when was it posted? What did he say in it? Let him write again. If he
can give me the date of that letter, I can make further inquiries.
Does anyone go and visit Somabhai and others who are in jail? I
know that it is difficult to visit such a large number. But you should
select those who are likely to be visited by nobody else. It would be
good if you could make some arrangement for visiting such
prisoners.
Prabhavati gets no Gujarati papers at all. We regularly
receive Mumbai Samachar and other papers, and out of these you
should send one or two to her. She wrote to me about this once or
twice but I forgot to mention it in my letters. I had a separate letter
from . . . 2 yesterday. Before I could write to him the letter which I
wished to do, I had this letter of repentance from him and so the reply
which I have given to him is altogether different from what it would
otherwise have been. The impression I have formed from his letter is
that he is still hiding much. You will understand this if you read my
1

For the text of the discourse which followed, vide, “Letters on the Gita”—Ch.

2

The name has been omitted.

I.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

221

letter. It has been a painful story.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Read my letter to Surendra Mashruwala. Call him and tell
him that, if he wishes to come and stay in the Ashram, he is welcome
to do so.
There are 82 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

324. LETTER TO SURENDRA MASHRUWALA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 11, 1930
CHI. SURENDRA (OF VIDYAPITH),

I got your letter. You need not feel worried. The disease from
which you suffer is quite common these days. If you take nutmeg,
take only a pinch of it daily. But the real remedy is mental. You
should always keep your body and mind fully occupied. Never
remain in a place where you are alone. You should eat simple food,
and at fixed hours. If you stand it, you should bathe in cold water.
You may live in the Ashram, if you feel happy there, or go to Wardha.
I think you will probably feel uncomfortable at Wardha. If you prefer
to go to the Ashram, Narandas will call you up there. Don’t worry at
all. I will certainly write to you frequently. You should write freely to
me. More in the next letter.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
After Kakasaheb is released, take his advice and then do what
you wish.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1506. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala

222

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

325. LETTER TO BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 11, 1930
BHAISHRI KHAMBHATTA,

I have your letter. I have tried the Jivan spinning-wheel. It works
quite well but at present I am experimenting on the Gandiv wheel. The
Jivan wheel is used by Kakasaheb. He finds it quite convenient to spin
on it, whereas he did not on the Gandiv wheel. Personally, I have
fallen in love with the latter for its simplicity and low cost. However, I
can give no final opinion yet. Why cannot you experiment with a milk
diet in Bombay? There is no risk at all in doing so. Probably curds
will agree better than milk. If the palate is no problem with you, I
would advise you to try the experiment of a milk diet immediately. It
will certainly do you no harm; it provides sufficient nourishment.
To you both,
Blessings from

BAPU
BHAI BEHRAMJI KHAMBHATTA
275 HORNBY R OAD
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6598

326. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 11, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

Are the Gita recitations at Pratishthan conducted on the same
lines as at Sabarmati? In that case, you may note that we have decided
now to complete the recitation within seven days instead of fourteen.
Write what you and Satis Babu think about it. If the period in which
you complete the recitation is different, you need take no notice of
this letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1675.
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

223

327. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

November 12, 1930
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

Though I wrote to Mira only the other day sending you my love
and telling her I must not write to you as I could not write all I wanted
to, I cannot restrain myself from writing to tell you how delighted I
have felt to get a letter from you directly. I think of you every day
and that often. You will give a good account of yourself wherever you
are and you do so because you will always be where you are led.
I have not got any of your two books as yet. I read the Times
review copied in a local newspaper.
I was sorry to hear that Gurudev had not kept well in America
and that he was returning. The marvel is that he can stand the strain at
all at his age. Please give my love to him and the Greggs.
Love.
MOHAN

[PS.]
Kaka is with me given as companion. He sends you his love.
Both of us have kept well.
C. F. A NDREWS, E SQ.
C/ O P HELPS S TOKES F UND
101 P ARK AVENUE
NEW YORK C ITY
U.S.A.
From a photostat of the original: C.W. 9318. Courtesy: Africana Museum

328. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 13, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter. The arrangement about translating my remarks on
the Gita chapters is quite good. I shall look forward to the joint
handiwork. I want to pour myself out into those chapters. This
224

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

means additional work for you and will take up a great deal of your
time. However, I know you won’t feel the strain of it, as you love that
work.
Here is a letter from Andrews, this time, for me to send you. He
could not restrain himself from writing to me directly. I have at last
given him a few lines. Don’t give any time to the Gandiv till Keshu
has obtained mastery over it and gives you a machine in working
order. For me it continues to provide further delights. The original
mal for the motor wheel at last had to be discarded, as I could not cut
it any further for tightening it. It has to be fairly stout and thick. I had
nothing with me in the hand-spun mals of the required thickness. As
you know, I criminally neglected to learn how to make these little
odds and ends. And I was bent on having only the hand-spun stuff. I
had to give full two hours to the first attempt. It was successful and
was possible only because only a short length was required. My
second attempt took me barely half an hour. I had to make another
for emergency, which occurred at once, for the original threads from
which I made the mal were weak. I have now thought of a device of
quickly twisting to the required strength practically any number of
threads. My third attempt will therefore mean still less time. And
meantime I am having now an accumulation of little bits of stout
hand-spun chords which I can use for watchguards and the like. All
this gives me delight and comfort, for it means greater mastery over
the wheel. And this has become so easily possible because of the
incredible simplicity of the Gandiv. But I am not going to regard my
opinion as final or authoritative till I have corroboration from
someone who knows much more than I do of the mechanism of the
charkha. But I warn you against regarding this detailed description as
any incentive for you to tackle the Gandiv. I know if I was outside, I
could not have given all this time, thought and attention to the thing.
It might not have even been desirable if it was to exclude other urgent
matters. I have given you the details merely to share my joy with you.
The charkha, the takli and the bow have become a fascination with
me. I do not seem to get tired of them. Daily I wish I had more time
to give to these things. I want to secure greater output on all the three.
But I am so clumsy and so stupid and slow. Somehow or other I feel
that it is not the rigidity of old age that prevents from gaining a
greater output. I have not the proper knack I fear. However I find
satisfaction from the knowledge that God will accept this little offering
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

225

as the best possible for me in the circumstances. If you can stand the
cold bath in winter, nothing can be more bracing. You will not strive
against nature. If there is no instantaneous warm reaction, you must
revert to the warm bath. The condition of reaction is vigorous rubbing
with the bare hands. I had sorrowfully to give up cold baths only after
that wretched attack of pleurisy in London in 1914. Your food is
quite good. It may be necessary to take more ghee. Experience has
shown that you need a fair measure to keep strength, heat and weight.
Gangadevi may walk a little. She must take measured steps and
begin with a few minutes only at a time. All risk of a setback should
be avoided. She will get rid of the urinary trouble by taking a
hip-bath. If the water is chilly a little hot water may be added to take
the chill off. This hip-bath is almost an infallible remedy.
Is not this uncle, who has married, somewhat elderly and who
vies with you in indifferent spellings, though very learned?
So according to your birthdate, you are only a babe a few
months old!! You have therefore many a summer to look forward to.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5420. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9654

329. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 13, 1930
CHI. SHARDA,

Your letter. Continue to have sun-bath and oil-massage. While
spinning on the takli, the thread should never snap. I could not understand your saying that there is little waste on the spinning-wheel. If
you tell me the amount of waste in a given number of rounds of a
particular count I would understand it. Calculate it this way. There is
another way also. Find out how often you pulled out the yarn and
how often it snapped in the course of half an hour. Is it clear to you
that there is a difference between calculating the waste and [the
frequency of snapping]? If you have understood this, write to me what
this difference is.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the
Chokhawala

226

Gujarati

original:

C.W. 9894. Courtesy:

Sharda behn G.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

330. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
November 13, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I have your insipid letter. How is it that, though participating in
such a great revolution, you could not think of anything to write
about? It is possible, of course, that the mind may be stunned by the
great changes taking place and reason may stop working; if so, one
cannot think of anything to write about. At such a time, one’s mind
may be wholly absorbed in work and can think about nothing else. If
you are in such a sublime state of mind, I have nothing to say. I would
then be satisfied even with a letter to this effect: “Bapu, everything is
going well. Vasumati.”
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9293

331. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI1
November 13, 1930
I also see an error of principle in what you say regarding
spinning and French. Having dedicated yourself completely to
spinning, you cannot do anything else for your personal benefit while
spinning. If somebody comes for a chat with you, you may talk with
him for the sake of good manners. But you cannot argue that, instead
of his taking up your time in talking, he may as well teach you
French. You may, if you so wish, escape from the necessity of having
to talk to him, and he also will not go on talking just in order that he
may stay longer. But once he has agreed to be your teacher, he is
bound to sit with you sufficiently long. All this has reference to the
time when we are spinning for yajna. I have been realizing the force
of this argument in my own experience. If, while I am spinning, I start
thinking about other things, the speed of spinning and the count and
1

The source does not mention the addressee. But in “Letter to Narandas
Gandhi”, 13/17-11-1930 where Gandhiji discusses spinning as yajna he asks Narandas to “understand” what he has said on the subject in his letter to Mahadev Desai.
Presumably this is the letter.
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

227

evenness of spinning are adversely affected. Imagine Romain Rolland
or Beethoven playing on the piano. They would be so absorbed in the
music that they would neither be able to talk with anyone nor think
about anything else. An artist is not apart from his art. If this is true in
regard to the music of the piano, how much more so must it be
regarding the spinning-yajna? It may be true that, as we are today, we
cannot act in this spirit but that is another matter. If we keep our ideal
pure, we are bound to succeed one day in putting it into practice. Let
me repeat that I am not criticizing what has happened. Pitifully
imperfect myself, what right have I to criticize anybody? Do I put into
practice all that I know to be true? If I had done that, the seven lakh
villages would have been filled with the sweet music of the
spinning-wheel long before now. If even now I could live perfectly in
conformity with what I know to be right, the cult of the
spinning-wheel would spread fast all over the country though I am
here in jail. “Though the aspiration is beyond my strength at present,
the mind is set firmly on it. If God so decrees, I shall become the
essence of light.” (Plagiarizedfrom Raychandbhai, with apologies to
him) I shall tire of praising the 33music of the spinning-wheel when
Malaviyaji does of praising the Bhagavata Purana. We cannot, of
course, speak of a spinning-wheel Purana. It will be for those who
come after us to compose a Purana and they will do so if we have
achieved anything which can be a worthy theme. Just now, we are
composing a few tunes of the spinning-wheel music. How great the
music will be which ultimately results from them, will depend on our
tapascharya and the measure of our self-dedication. . . .1
. . . I shall now dwell further on the argument of the previous
letter.
I think the ideal is that we should observe complete silence when
engaged in the spinning-yajna, and think exclusively about spinning,
that is, khadi or go on repeating Ramanama. We should, of course,
understand Ramanama in a wide sense. Really speaking, we should go
on repeating Ramanama silently to ourselves all the time, whether or
not we consciously utter it with our lips. It should be the unvarying
accompaniment to all our thoughts and activities, like the tune on the
tamboora in a musical recital. When, however, our attention is not
1

Omission as in the source. What follows seems to have been taken from a
subsequent letter.

228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

wholly absorbed in the work which we are doing, we should
consciously go on repeating Ramanama. While spinning, we generally
talk with somebody or listen to what people tell us or do some other
work. This kind of spinning is certainly not yajna. If the yajna of
spinning is a sacred obligation, the time which we give to it should be
wholly dedicated to it. He who lives his life in the spirit of yajna and
works without attachment will always be engaged in one task at a time.
Though I know this well enough, I was the first to sin (be it more or
less) in this respect, for it can be said that I never sat down in a
secluded spot to spin quietly, that is, in complete silence. On my
silence days, while spinning I either used to hear the mail being read
out to me or listened to what people wanted to tell me. Even here I
have not given up that bad habit. Is it any wonder, then, that though I
spin regularly I have made no progress at all in the field and have
barely acquired the speed of 200 rounds an hour? I see in myself
many other deficiencies, besides this; for instance, while I am spinning
the thread snaps, I do not know how to make a belt, know very little
about spindle-holders, cannot tell the quality of cotton, cannot as
certain with precision the evenness of the thread and cannot judge the
quality of the fibre. Does this befit one who claims to do spinning as
yajna? Is it then surprising that the progress of khadi should be slow?
If God is in truth God of the poor, and certainly He is that, and if
khadi is the symbol of His grace, then I am the oracle, or what you
will, who proclaimed this truth, and yet how slack have I been in
putting into practice my own teaching! I, therefore, never feel tempted
to criticize anybody else in this matter. I am only trying to describe to
you my own deficiency in this regard and my pain, and the
self-understanding and knowledge which result from that pain.
Though I have occasionally expressed such sentiments while talking
with Kaka, you are the first person to whom I have expressed them so
clearly, and I got the opportunity to do this because you combined
the study of French with spinning. Let me repeat that I see no fault on
your part in having done that. On the contrary, I see what an
imperfect preacher of the mantra of spinning I have been. I knew the
mantra but did not observe its ritual perfectly, and, therefore, it failed
to reveal its full power. Apply to all activities in life the argument
which I have applied here to spinning. You will then be able to feel in
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

229

your imagination the wonderful peace and sense of fulfilment which
we can experience in our life. This is the meaning of the verse, “Yoga
is skill in work”. 1 If we cultivate this attitude, we shall attempt only
what is within our capacity to do and shall rest content with it. I am
convinced that by working in this spirit we shall have contributed most
to our own development and that of society. But all this will be mere
philosophizing if I myself do not follow it in practice in everything I
do. I am certainly making progress day by day in my effort to do so.
What will happen when I am released, God alone knows. If possible,
observe this at least in practice. Spin in this systematic manner the
number of rounds which you regard as your daily contribution to the
spinning-yajna. You may spin the rest in any manner that you can,
for the purpose of increasing the country’s wealth. I feel tempted to
go on writing still further. But I think I should stop here.
[From Gujarati]
Gitabodh, pp. 29-32

332. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI PATEL
November 13, 1930
CHI. SHIVABHAI,

I came to know only from your postcard that you had been
released. Pyarelal had completely forgotten to tell me about it. How
did you get scabies? It is a disease which is in fact quite easy to cure. I
hope you observe proper restrictions in your diet. Write to me and tell
me how long you were in the temple, and describe your experience in
it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9501

1

230

Bhagavad Gita, II. 50
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

333. LETTER TO GANGADEVI SANADHYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 13, 1930
CHI. GANGADEVI,

I have not written for a long time and you seem to have taken a
vow of not writing to me unless I do. I have written to Mirabehn fully
regarding walking and the pain you have. She will explain to you. Do
not hesitate to write to me anything you feel like. How is Totaramji?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2543

334. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 14, 1930
BHURRR TO WHITE-BEARDED YOUNG MAN, THREE WEEKS’ GUEST,

If I write in Gujarati to the daughter, who, though a mere girl,
tries to look old, why should I not write in the mother tongue to the
father who, though old, is getting younger day by day? In the West
people communicate by means of wires, and transmit images too. I
have the gift of the East. I see before me a youthful face,
white-bearded but bursting with hearty laughter, and I hear the man
telling the reporter: “I shall be back in the guest-house within three
weeks.” I have in my pocket the likeness of his face notwithstanding
that I don’t have a pocket. The old man has played his part
marvellously well. The whole family is like him! May God protect
him. Khuda Hafiz.
Bhurrr from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9573

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

231

335. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 14, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

What shall I write to you? Once you sat down to write to me, you
could give me plenty of news. Now adhere to the resolution you have
made. You can, if you wish, complain about your lot to me. We must
find our happiness in suffering. One may say that that is the teaching
of the Gita. I don’t however wish to give a sermon.
I had at last to ask them to send me a pair of sandals. I require
no clothes. I use the rug supplied from here. And I also have with me
the one which I had taken with me when starting for the march. I have
received plenty of khadi. I hope you are all right now. Kakasaheb will
be released by the 28th.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1809

336. LETTER TO TEHMINA P. JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 14, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

I have1 your letter. I am not and will not be bored. Please do not
hesitate to write to me whenever you wish. It was good that you
mentioned Dadabhai [Naoroji] in your letter. He was like a father to
me. When I first reached England he was the only senior person to
whom I had a letter [of introduction]. He took me under his care then
and never left me afterwards.
It was he who led us during our early days in South Africa.
Every fortnight (almost) I used to have a letter from him. Today I am
enjoying the fruit of his paternal blessings.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 115
1

232

Underlined in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

337. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI PANDYA
November 14, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I have your letter. Real progress appears to be slow but in fact it
is the short cut to our destination. As man engages more and more in
the service that has fallen to his lot, without attachment to the results,
he attains freedom from desire without effort. Control over the
sense-organs, too, then becomes an absolutely easy thing.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 330. Courtesy: Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

338. LETTER TO PADMA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 14, 1930
CHI. PADMA,

What a careless girl you are! Why do you write what looks like
the marks left by a fly crawling across the sheet, and spoil your
handwriting right from this age? Can you not get ink there? And you
don’t write anything about your health. You are quite right when you
say that our sacrifices are nothing as compared to the sacrifices made
by the women on that side. Well, then, learn to make similar sacrifices
while you live there and devote yourself wholly to service.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6115

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

233

339. LETTER TO ABDUL KADIR BAWAZEER
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 14, 1930
BHAI IMAM SAHEB,

When you get this letter, you will have been released. I heard
that you had had fever recenty, but I hope you have completely
recovered now. Let us wait and see when you return as the Government’s guest. I have heard from others about your activities in jail,
but I should like to have a first-hand account from you. Has Amina
calmed down now? Did Qureshi see you?
Blessings and Vandemataram from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6646

340. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
November 14, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN,

Your letter to Kakasaheb was received late. I understood the
situation better from it. People certainly give you credit. But exercise
the utmost patience. You have taken upon yourself a great
responsibility. But you should meditate over those three verses which
we have recently included in the prayers. Those who work for God
with His name ever on their lips, He makes them His special concern
and ensures the success of their undertakings, and it is He who guides
them; why, then, should we worry?
Padma seems to have got fever. She has a swelling too. If you
cannot judge what to do to cure her, get her examined by Haribhai. If
you can judge what to do, don’t be afraid to apply any treatment you
think best. Even when doing that, you should feel that you are guided
by God and take measures which seem best at the moment; having
done that, you should rest completely free from worry. Do not take
upon yourself a burden beyond your strength to carry.
Man has ill-treated woman and is still doing so. But the remedy
for this ultimately lies in woman’s own hand. If she stops thinking
234

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that she is weak, she can be free this very day. The really strong are
not those who are strong in body. Ravana, who was a demon, that is,
had physical strength, was helpless before the seemingly weak Sita. I
am sure you remember the story. Sita was under the protection of a
boon to the effect that anyone who cast an evil glance at her would be
instantly burnt to ashes. Ravana knew this and that is why, though he
carried her away, he could not touch her person with impure thoughts.
He had to entreat Sita to let him embrace her. He threatened her time
and again in the hope that she might yield; but unless she yielded of
her own free will he was, in spite of his strength, as helpless as a goat.
Though physically Sita was utterly helpless, in spirit she was a lioness.
We know the meaning of a boon. It is only a symbol. Every
woman who has inviolable purity of character enjoys the same boon
as Sita did. Any man who casts an evil glance at such a woman would
be instantly burnt to ashes. If man hasill-treated woman, the reason is
that she, too, has yielded to lust. Being enslaved by passion, both
forgot their higher nature, forgot that they were souls and remained
mere bodies. So far as the body is concerned, man is undoubtedly the
stronger of the two. Hence woman was enslaved by man and the
impression came to prevail that she was helpless before man, that she
was weak and always needed man’s protection.
As souls man and woman are equal. If a man does not recognize
his spiritual nature but a woman does, the latter is the stronger of the
two, as Sita was stronger than Ravana, and the other remains weaker, as
was Ravana. Don’t believe, moreover, that this was possible only in the
time of Rama. Even today there are countless Sitas in the world who
require no man’s help and are yet safe against all danger. One such is
Janakimaiya. You must have seen her. Whenever I went to Bombay,
she came and saw me. She had not much intellectual capacity to speak
of, but had boundless strength of spirit. She must have been
good-looking in her youth. She embraced a hard path of service in
the prime of her youth. I have known other Indian women like her,
and also Englishwomen. They are examples of but a small measure of
spiritual strength. A woman who has fully grown in soul deserves to
be revered as the world’s mother.
For those who wish to cultivate such strength, satyayuga exists
today. Your task, therefore, is to make women strong. That is the right
method of securing justice from men. A man like me may guide you
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

235

and awaken other men to a consciousness of their duty. But my
capacity for serving women is limited.
Women alone can serve women perfectly. It is my ambition,
through the Ashram, to prepare not one such worker but many. An
opportunity to do so has presented itself to us just now.
If you have not followed this, ask me to explain again.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G.S. Gangabehnne, pp. 45-7; also C.W. 8764. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

341. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 14, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

You must have got my letter acknowledging receipt of the
cotton, and also the one I wrote in reply to yours. Please send again
three pounds of cotton. I hope all you sisters are well.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4816. Courtesy: Premlila Thackersey

342. LETTER TO GANGABEHN JHAVERI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 15, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (JHAVERI),

I got your letter. I see that you are really ill. It will be enough if
you can get fruits like oranges, sweet lemons, fresh grapes, etc. It will
also help you if you take dried black grapes or raisins soaked in
water. As long as there are symptoms of dysentery, you should very
236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

carefully remove the skin, or drink the juice. Whenever the stomach is
out of order, you can certainly fast for a few days no matter how weak
you are and you will always find that fasting benefits you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3108

343. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 15, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I got your letter. You certainly did well in consulting a doctor.
But I cling to the cure I have suggested. You may, if you wish, carry
out the doctor’s treatment afterwards. Fast for at least seven days
before you do anything else. We should never be afraid of fasting.
During a seven-day fast, you will be able to attend to almost all your
work. When I first undertook a long fast, I did not rest for a single day
and experienced no difficulty on that account. It was a seven-day fast.
At that time, I did have some fat on my body. Only a person who has
no reserve of fat is forced to lie down during a fast. After two days of
fasting, you will actually feel stronger. For two days, you may get a
feeling of being hungry, but it will disappear after that and real
hunger will return when the blood has been purified. Till that time,
you should take an enema every day and keep the bowels clean. If,
after taking the enema, you remain in the ardha sarvangasan posture,
the water may even reach the large intestine. You may omit this,
however, if you do not know how to do it. During the fast, you should
drink plenty of water with soda bicarb and salt mixed in it. You may
mix five grains of salt and ten grains of soda in every eight ounces of
water and may safely drink up to eight cups of such water. You
should also take sun-bath. I should like you to do this without any
fear in your mind. You may tell the doctor about it, if you wish.
Probably he, too, will approve of this cure. Many doctors now know
about the miraculous effects of fasts.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N, 10241; also C.W. 6690. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

237

344. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

November 15, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I have both your letter and your report. The report is very good.
As far as possible do not use pencil for letters to be sent by post. Let
me know especially about your mental state there. Serve Gangabehn
well.
Where is Brother? A letter from him was expected but I see
none.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

345. LETTER TO KAMALA NEHRU
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 15, 1930
CHI. KAMALA,

I have your letter. The letter addressed to Ba has also been
sent to me. I do not know what was decided in the end. Ba writes that
she had fallen ill and people told her that her presence was needed
more in areas around Bardoli. Yes, I have seen the prize given to
Jawahar.1 He deserves even more. But for the present this should
satisfy us. It will be a real test for the people when no leaders are out
and only then will the women too get the real chance. I find that
Krishna2 and now Shyam Kumari too have been released. How sad!
There is no need for you to be unhappy over the situation in U. P.
Those who are not awake now will awaken later. Who is going to
1

Jawaharlal Nehru who had been arrested on April 14, 1930, was released
on October 11 and rearrested on October 19, and sentenced to 23 months’
imprisonment.
2
Krishna Nehru

238

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

remain untouched during this final moment of trial? Let us love
everyone and deal with them patiently. Everything will be well if we
remain firm in our duty. Give me all the news about Father.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C. W. 10869. Courtesy: Selected Works of
Jawaharlal Nehru

346. LETTER TO KRISHNA NEHRU
Y. M.,

November 15, 1930
CHI. KRISHNA,

What a clever girl you are? You came out so easily. Let us see
what you do now. Did you have any information about that crazy
man who paid the fine? The same thing happened to Shyam Kumari.
All of you will be having enough chances. You need not feel sad.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C. W. 10868. Courtesy: Selected Works of
Jawaharlal Nehru

347. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 15, 1930
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

All right, I drop ‘Dear Sister’. However I may have addressed
you, I tried to be like a father. Daily I pray to God to make me worthy
of your love and confidence. The thought of women like you makes
me feel the hand of God in the yajna of self-purification. Your Hindi
is so lucid that I don’t find any trouble in understanding it. The truth
is that language is inadequate for heartfelt emotions. They just
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

239

manifest themselves. Krishnadas is now released. Welcome him as one
of your own. I have a letter from him. Anyway I have written to him
to see you.
My letter about the Gita must have reached you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1676

348. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 16, 1930
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

If a man makes an unalterable decision to do or not to do a
particular thing, it is for me a vow. The strongest men have been
known at times to have become weak. God has a way of confounding
us in our strength. Hence the necessity of vows, i.e., invoking God’s
assistance to give us strength at the crucial moment. But I must not
strive with you. It seems to me that we mean the same thing but
express it differently—you in Spanish and I in Italian, shall we say?
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10082

349. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 16, 1930
CHI. SUSHILA,

I have just got a letter for the first time from Manilal. He informs me that he keeps very good health. He has lost not 40 Ib. but
22 lb. Even that is a lot. But he seems to be very cheerful, and has also
been reading a great deal. God has given him the strength to live in all
circumstances. Moreover, he is simple at heart and so God always
240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

protects him. Probably you know all this, but the more often you hear
the same thing the happier you will feel. Write to me regularly. Coax
Bharati to scribble letters of the alphabet.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4777

350. LETTER TO SHANTA SHANKARBHAI PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 16, 1930
CHI. SHANTA (SHANKARBHAI),

I have your letter. It is true indeed that you make a great many
plans in your mind. But, then, you are not too old to carry out many
of them at the proper time. Just now, however, in devoting oneself
whole-heartedly to the work one has taken up lies the pursuit of
painting or music or Sanskrit; it is marriage for those who want to
marry and the vow of virginity for the unmarried. Write to me from
time to time letters as long as the last one and fearlessly put before me
all your thoughts, whether they are wise or foolish.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4056

351. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 16, 1930
CHI. MANU,

I have your letter. As long as you continue to get fever and the
doctor forbids you to leave the bed, you need not yourself write to
me. It will be enough if you ask the person attending on you to write
a few lines. Of course we were happy to read your letter. There is no
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

241

hurry about Almora at all. I certainly would not insist that you should
go. I had only made a suggestion. It is for the doctors to consider it
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7770

352. LETTER TO MAHAVIR GIRI
November 16, 1930
CHI. MAHAVIR,

I got a letter from you after many days. Kakasaheb does read
your letters. When you write a letter to me, it is as good as writing to
him. You cannot write anything specially for him in a letter to me. But
now it will not be even two weeks before he is released. Your
experiences have been useful. You are right when you say that
whether a person learns or not depends mostly on how hard he works.
All that a teacher can do is to point out his error when he goes wrong.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6221

353. LETTER TO RADHA GANDHI
November 16, 1930
CHI. RADHIKA,

I got your letter. A good book too can be a revered guru. But
God is the only true guru. When we learn to feel His presence in our
heart, we shall have met the revered guru whom we seek.
I had heard about Hari-ichchha’s betrothal. But it is from you
that I hear about her wedding. To whom was she married, and how
many persons attended the wedding? If Hari-ichchha is there, ask her
to write to me. What is there to be shy about? What is the age of the
husband? What is he? If you don’t know all this, inquire and tell me.
Rukhi is being tried well. Are you all right now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati: C.W. 9315. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

354. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
November 16, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have your painful letter. I feel extremely unhappy that you get
fainting fits every day. You must get away from there and go and live
in the Ashram and cure your fits. This disease cannot be cured with
medicine. Only change of air and congenial company will cure it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3379

355. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI MADHAVJI
THAKKAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 16, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

Your letters are very precise. I learn many things from them.
Don’t be disheartened, or get angry, if some women do not keep their
word. The wrong habits of many years will not change in a day. But a
rope leaves a mark even on granite, if it rubs against it day after day.
We should have faith that in the same way even hearts as hard as stone
cannot but feel the effect of the rope of love continually rubbing
against them. I have written to Chandra. If Chandra wrote the letter
without help from anyone, it was a very good letter indeed. MY
blessings to all the women.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6804

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

243

356. LETTER TO RUKMINI BAZAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 16, 1930
CHI. RUKMINI,

I got a letter from you after many days. I was glad to learn that
you had completely recovered your health. I hope the others also
have recovered. What does Benarsilal intend to do there? How do you
find the air at Kashi? I suppose you know that Nagardas Gandhi of
Limdi lives there. His wife came and lived in the Ashram for some
time. And Anandshankarbhai1 also is there. If you have not met all
these persons, meet them when you get an opportunity to do so. Ask
Benarsilal to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9054

357. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 16, 1930
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

You must have got my letter. That Prabhavati is daily suffering
from gastric trouble is intolerable. A change of climate and congenial
company can cure it. I would request you either to escort or arrange
to send Prabhavati to the Ashram. She can return when cured.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3380

1

244

Bapubhai Dhruva
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

358. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
4.30 a.m. November 13/17, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

They sent me your packet at 4.30 p.m. on Wednesday, that is,
yesterday.
The devotee “renounces all undertakings”. 1 This means the
devotee will not draw up schemes of future expansion. For example, if
a merchant who deals in cloth now has any plans of selling firewood
as well in the future, or if he, having one shop only, thinks of opening
five more shops, that would be arambha (undertaking) on his part,
and the devotee will have none of it. This principle is applicable to
service of the nation as well. For instance, a worker in the khadi
department today will not take up cow-keeping tomorrow, agriculture
the day after and medical aid on the fourth day. He will do his best in
whatever has come to him. When I am free from egoism, nothing
remains for me to do.
‘The Lord has bound me with a cotton thread; I am His, no
matter where He leads me. I have been stabbed with the dagger of
love.’ A devotee’s every activity is planned by God. It comes to him
as in the natural course of things. He therefore rests content with,‘this,
that or anything else’ ( ÿŸ ∑§ŸÁøÃ˜Ô |) This is the meaning of
‘reonouncing all undertakings’. The devotee does not cease to work;
indeed he is nothing if not a worker. He only ceases to think needless
thoughts about his work. It is these that he hat to renounce.
‘This has been acquired by me today; that purpose I shall gain
tomorrow’2 —this is the opposite of ‘renouncing undertakings’.
I think this answers your question fully. Ask me if anything is
left out. Keep this portion with the discussion which is proceeding.
If, along with the new pair of sandals, you have not sent a piece
of leather for repairing the soles, and if you can get such a piece and
send it, with someone who may be coming on a visit here, please do
send it, or send it by sample post provided it does not cost much, so
that I can use when necessary even the worn-out sandals.
Write to Jamnalal and tell him that I wish him success in his holy
1
2

Vide “Letters on the Gita”, 21-2-1932.
Bhagavad Gita, XVI. 13

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

245

resolves. A time will come when he will not haw to plan undertakings
in this fashion. God will load him with tasks of service one after
another. He will not have to plan for them or seek them. Just now, his
planning for them is all right. From this he will come to taste the joy
of bhakti. So long as there are no rains, we have no choice but to exert
ourselves and draw water from wells, rivers, streams, etc. But, when the
clouds burst in the sky and we have the Ganga flowing at our
doorstep, what else need we do then? I think the work he could do in
Nasik would have been beyond the capacity of anyone else. All the
same, it would be good if others, too, tried. In my own case, I have to
content myself with a sincere effort, and I apply to others the same
yardstick as I do to me. I can say or write much more about this, but
all that can wait till we meet. As for what the heart feels and wishes to
convey, I have set it down above. This for Jamnalal.
I have written to you about . . . 1 . It is but right that none of us is
satisfied with his confession. The evil in his heart is deep. I have of
course written strongly to him. I suppose all of you must have
expressed your dissatisfaction to him. So long as we are not satisfied
about his purity, we cannot ask him to do any public service. He
himself may do it on his own in the spirit of sacrifice. You may act in
this matter as you think best.We need not be angry with him. We
should act as love may prompt us to do. It is only the person on the
spot who can realize what love requires him to do in certain
circumstances. From a distance one can send no instructions about
that.
4.45, November 15, 1930
Tell Manilal that the letter I received this time is the only one I
have had from him. I did not receive his earlier letters. If he did write
any, how did he send them, that is, with whom? I will inquire if I get
definite information. If he is eager to have letters from me, I too wish
to write to him. But I have a general understanding with the officials
that I would not write to prisoners, and I abide by it. I enjoy
sufficiently good freedom in other respects in the matter of writing
letters and so I do not quarrel with them unnecessarily for further
concessions. When our attitude is that we should be content in jail
even if they do not permit us to write any letter at all, we ought not to
quarrel on such grounds. Even so, we do send messages. Manilal,
1

246

The name has been omitted.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

however, should write as often as he is permitted to do. I have already
written to you about his studies and he must have got the message. His
present programme of reading is good enough. But the plan which I
have suggested seems to me methodical and complete. If, therefore, he
can take interest in those books, he should follow that plan. Sushila
wrote to me saying that he had lost 40 Ib. in weight. I suppose that
was an error. Or did he really lose as much as that at any time? Has he
now been recovering it or has the reduction come to stay? How about
his strength? He is right in his view about Phoenix. If the paper is
running at a loss, they should close it. Ask Manilal to write to that
effect. I, too, will write, when I am permitted to do so. I had a letter
from Pragji. The Headman has just gone out and will decide what
reply to give after he returns. Meanwhile you can write to him and tell
him that I think Pragji ought to get all the powers which he asks for.
I am awaiting your reply regarding the letter which Devdas
wrote to me.
You will find something about spinning in the letter to
Mirabehn. I will write to her tomorrow. You will find something more
important still in the letter to Mahadev,1 which I want all of you to
understand. To spin by way of yajna and to take up spinning as
labour in order merely to add that much to one’s earning are
twodifferent things. In yajna, the actual work, though extremely
important, is of secondary value. In spinning undertaken as labour,
the actual work is all that matters. Irrespective of whether it is anything
more than that, even as work it bears fruit. In doing anything as yajna
one is not concerned with the fruit of one’s labour and, therefore, the
fruit is immeasurable. That is, yajna completely fulfils one’s
cherished desires. In performing such a yajna, one must lose oneself
in one’s work. By doing that one learns the science and art of
working. Anyone, therefore, who would work in the spirit of yajna
should have such qualities as purity of heart, etc., and should do his
sacrificial work with single-minded devotion. He would not even think
about anything else when working. A worker inspired with such spirit
of sacrifice should have mastered all that is known about the science
of spinning and should be daily adding to the existing knowledge. If
a peson who has voluntarily embraced the path of sacrifice has made
mistakes through negligence or want of means or for any other
reason, he should have the strength to rectify them as and when he
1

Vide”Fragment of Letter to Mahadev Desai”, 3-11-1930.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

247

detects them. I use the word ‘spinning’ here in a symbolical sense. It
stands for proficiency in all the processes relating to cotton. You will
think this a big task, which it is and is not. It is not a big or difficult
task for those who have recognized its necessity, for they will be
making some progress every day towards mastery of these processes
and will grow in purity of heart day by day. A person who works in
the spirit of sacrifice will be a lover of truth and will, therefore, after
he has realized the necessity of working in this spirit, go on
voluntarily increasing his knowledge and proficiency without having
to make a strenuous effort. Even if he has to do so, he will look upon
that as God’s grace and not a hardship. I feel, therefore, that all of us
should adopt the method which. I have explained in a previous letter
and understand this deeper and truer meaning of yajna. I have
explained sufficiently clearly in my letter to Mahadev how much I
myself am to blame for our failure to understand this and put it into
practice.
5 o’clock, November 16, 1930
I forgot to tell you in my last letter about Kakasaheb’s
suggestion to reduce exactly by half the time for completing once the
devotional reading of the Gita. You must have read about it if you saw
the letter to Vinoba. I forgot to tell you that you should read that
letter. His suggestion is that we shall be conforming better to the
tradition if we complete one reading in a week. Anyone who wants
tojoin in the middle of a week will not then have to think how far
the reading must have progressed. Every week you will be reciting the
same verses on a particular day. If we complete the reading in a
fortnight, the verses read on a particular day of the week change from
week to week. It is true that completing it in a week means twice as
much time every day. If we read through the whole of the Gita at one
time, we would take an hour and a quarter or an hour and a half. At
the rate of an hour and a half for the whole Gita, it will require six and
a half minutes per day to complete the reading in fourteen days and
l3 minutes per day to complete it in seven days. Those who are
interested in the reading will not grudge the extra 6_ minutes. To
those who are not interested, even the 6_ minutes being given to the
reading at present are a burden. This is Kakasaheb’s argument in
support of his suggestion. Both the suggestion and the argument
appeal to me. Think about them independently and, if they appeal to
you, put them before the other members of the group and discuss
248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

them. Discuss them with Mahadev if he is there. Those who join in the
reading voluntarily and with true understanding of its meaning should
be consulted first. If their view is against the suggestion, the matter
need not be pursued further. It should be put before the rest of the
group only if they welcome it. I have even prepared a time-table for
completing the reading in seven days. I do not give it here just now. I
will send it if the suggestion is favourably received. But no, there will
be no need to write about it, for Kakasaheb will be there in two weeks’
time and he will personally explain the scheme. I will add this,
however. I think it would be right to permit those who are not even
today interested in the reading to leave the prayer-meeting when the
reading begins. The reading always comes last, so that everyone will
be present during the main part of the prayer, guests and visitors
excepted of course. In Wardha, and most probably in the Pratishthan
too, they do the reading of the Gita in the same manner as we do at
Sabarmati. We should, therefore, find out whether the suggestion suits
them too, and so I wrote last week to Vinoba and Hemprabhadevi. As
we understand better the importance of the devotional reading of the
Gita and come to look upon the work as the lighthouse which guides
our actions in life, we shall be less inclined to grudge the practice of
completing the reading in one week. Much will depend, of course, on
the person who leads the reading. If he puts his whole heart in it, he
cannot but make it interesting. If we meditate during the whole day on
the chapter which was read at the prayer-meeting, we shall
discovernew meanings in it and understand better those which we
know.
A mahavakya lends itself to ever new interpretations, and the
Gita is a mahavakya.
Afternoon
I got the sandals today. However, send a strong piece of leather
for the soles when you find it, so that I can wear the old pair for a few
months more.
Monday morning, November 17, 1930
On Tuesdays the letters are posted, if at all, only if I hand them
over by 11 a.m. Hence I feel pressed for time for writing the
discourses on that day. If, therefore, I write out the discourse on
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

249

Monday morning, I can finish everything in time and Kakasaheb will
have sufficient time to read it slowly.1
Blessings from

BAPU

Monday afternoon, November 172 , 1930
[PS.]
I have tried the sandals on for a day. They fit me very well.
Since Lady Vithaldas sends me cotton, I don’t want you to send any.
If, therefore, she writes to you and asks you to send some, do so.
Do observe the distinction between letters which may and those
which cannot be forwarded. It is a good rule that news about public
developments which cannot be given to newspapers cannot be given to
me either.
There are 60 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

359. LETTER TO KASHI GANDHI
November 17, 1930
CHI. KASHI,

I see from Chhaganlal’s letter that you suffer from constipation.
I think that if it does not respond to change of diet, enema is the best
remedy. That is the experience of the present-day doctors. I may say
that it is only with the help of enema that I am able to keep well. The
enema water should be lukewarm and should be inserted slowly.
Soda-bi-carb and salt should be added to the water. At least two
pounds of water should be inserted into the intestines and retained for
about five minutes, if possible. Take sun baths. The abdomen should
be massaged daily. Do this patiently. The enema should be taken in
the morning on an empty stomach.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33091
1

For the text of the discourse which followed, vide “Letters on the Gita”—Ch.

2

The source has “November 18”, but Monday was on November 17.

II.

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

360. LETTER TO BABALBHAI MEHTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 18, 1930
BHAI BABALBHAI,

I have your letter. When Kakasaheb is released, he will guide
you. Write to me from time to time. If you have not acquired mastery
over the takli, do so. What is your speed on the spinning-wheel and on
the takli? How much cotton can you card in an hour? What count of
yarn do you spin? Give me all this information.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Kakasaheb has read your letter. He sends you his blessings.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9454

361. LETTER TO B. J. B. GALVIN
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

November 18, 1930
DEAR MAJOR GALVIN,

(1) Here is the usual post I send on Tuesdays. Will you please
order its despatch today?
(2) There should be a spinning-wheel for me there. Could I
have it please?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 4504. Courtesy: Prof. B. J. B. Galvin

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

251

362. LETTER TO PYARE LAL GOVIL1
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

November 19, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

Your touching letter of 28th ultimo has been given to me. My
sympathy goes out to you in your affliction and I should be glad
indeed if this letter brings you any comfort.
In my opinion you are in no way to blame. Having got the lady
doctor you were quite right in trusting her. I do not believe in
constant change of doctors and hakims. We must trust those whom we
get to tell us when they need assistance or are in doubt as to their
diagnosis. Sometimes it may be found that the trust was misplaced.
But these are risks and chances of life which we must take always. I
hope therefore that you will not worry yourself over what you
consider was your negligence. This much you know yourself that you
did not wilfully neglect anything. More no man can do.
1

This was in reply to a letter dated October 28, 1930 from Pyare Lal Govil,
Sub-Judge, Muzaffarnagar, U.P. He had lost his parents some 15 to 20 years ago and
his only sister 16 years before writing. Narrating the circumstances of the death of
his only child, a 24-year old daughter, following a delivery, he wrote that the sepsis
from which she was suffering could not be diagnosed in time. He blamed himself for
“culpable mistakes” resulting in her death. He further wrote: “If God has made
destinies and every thing happens as has been fixed beforehand then there is no use in
praying for mercy. If He is powerless then He need not be approached.
The following shankas [ doubts ] arise:
1. What prayashchitta should I perform to wash off this sin of utter carelessness?
2. How to give rest to her soul?
3. Could she have not been saved if correct and timely help had been given?
4. Is God powerless in changing the course of destinies? If so then there is no
use in prayer, nor in taking medicines nor in asking for medical help, or in making
any efforts that way.
5. Does a soul wander here and there for any length of time after departing from
this body?
6. How should and can I know that she has taken birth anywhere else?
7. The idea that I have been very careless haunts me every moment, although I
can swear that I did not know that I was making any mistake when I made them, else I
would have never made them. I do not know what had become of my discretion and
sense. Now I want nothing but I wish to know if I can in any way help her soul to get
rest and stay in Heaven. If so what should I do?
Very kindly give your ashirvad for the departed soul.”

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Now for the answers to your questions:
(1) No prayashchitta is needed because in my opinion there was
no carelessness on your part.
(2) No one can give rest to another soul. Her rest will come
from herself.
(3) It is impossible to say what would have happened if other
assistance had been procured. In spite of the ablest expert help kings
have to die.
(4) There ought not to be much sorrow or fuss over an
inevitable event. Death is the lot of every created thing, nor need it be
considered as a calamity. Death is in reality a deliverance.
(5) What the soul does after discarding a body is in each case
surmise but it is a certainty that the soul does not perish with the body.
Let us trust the laws of God or nature for the rest.
(6) States before birth and after death are invisible as the Gita
affirms and experience confirms. But we can infer from our present
state that the condition after death is at least likely to be a second,
though modified, edition of the present.
(7) We the survivors can certainly help the departed dear ones
by wearing into our own lives all that was good in them. For if they
know anything of what happens here they must be consoled by the
knowledge that we are treasuring their memories by adopting what
was best in them.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

[PS.]
One question has been omitted by oversight. God is never
powerless. But His laws are immutable. We do not know them. Nor do
we know His will at a given moment. Therefore we adopt within
bounds such remedies as may commend themselves to us. Prayer is to
the God within. It does not provoke God to change His will but it
enables us to know His will which is everything.
M.K.G.
From a copy: C.W. 9305. Courtesy: D. B. Kalelkar; also Harijan, 15-2-1948

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

253

363. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
YERAVDA JAIL ,

November 21, 1930
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

Today I have sent you a telegram about Prabhavati which you
will have received. I await your reply.1 I hope you have sent her to the
Ashram. The best thing of course would be for you to go with her and
have her fixed up there. Any programme about her future work can
be decided after she gets well. I understand your sorrow. I have
thought over it. You should not say anything to Prabhavati. If she is
moved by desire there will be no problem. But if she has no stirrings
of desire, it becomes your duty to protect her. I need hardly remind
you that women have as much right to freedom as men. It is my firm
opinion that if one partner in marriage has sexual urge it is by no
means the duty of the other partner also to have such urge, though it
is the right of the partner with the sexual urge to satisfy that urge. This
is perhaps one of the causes of polygamy. Just as it will be considered
immoral for a man to cohabit with a wife who is ill it should also be
considered immoral to cohabit with a wife who has no sexual desire. It
is therefore my earnest advice that if Prabhavati has no craving for sex
you should give her freedom and find yourself another wife. I see no
immorality in that. After all what is to be done? How can your craving
be forcibly stifled? You consider sex necessary and beneficial for the
spirit. In such a situation I would not consider a second marriage
immoral from any point of view. In fact I feel that your doing so may
well set an example to others. Many young men use force with their
wives. Others visit prostitutes. Still others indulge in even worse
practices. Prabhavati has chosen to live the life of a virgin. You do not
wish to practise brahmacharya. Therefore I see nothing wrong in
your respecting the wishes of Prabhavati and finding yourself another
wife. If you cannot think of another woman, you should, for the sake
of Prabhavati, observe brahmacharya. If your love for prabhavati
isreally true you will find that as soon as you go near her your sexual
craving will subside. I have placed my views before you. Do as your
duty bids you. May God grant you the strength to do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
1

254

Vide “Letter to Prabhavati” 24-11-1930.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

364. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
November 22, 1930
MY DEAR ANAND,

Do not mind the length of your letters. You won’t tire me at all.
Jairamdas says you still do not feel that you are supporting yourself.
You should throw off this tenderness. What you are getting is not a
donation; it is what you earn. He who gives his best to the work he
takes up and gets what he needs for living, earns it. If you were
leading a luxurious life and getting paid for it, I would myself say that
you were not living correctly. You must therefore get rid of this
sensitiveness. I am glad you had all those precious hours with
Jairamdas. The way to cultivate faith in God is to recognize our
nothingness and thus be humble as a particle of dust. You know the
prayer to Mother Earth in our morning verses. The best of us at his
very best is a tiny thing and utterly helpless. And yet we are not so
helpless the moment we know that we are sparks `from the Divine
which is in us. Faith does not come from reason. Faith is believing.
Believe in God because those whose names we hold sacred have
believed and testified.
You will keep up a respectful correspondence with Father even
though you may scent coldness on his part at times.
Yours

BAPU

[PS.]
If you see Acharya . . . .1 well. And remember me to Dr.
Choithram2 and Malkani3 . Where is Jairamdas kept?
About Vidya in my letter to her. Does she or do you understand
that letter?
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

1
2
3

Mutilated in the source
Dr. Choithram Gidwani’s
N. R. Malkani

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

255

365. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
November 22, 1930
CHI. PURUSHOTTAM,

You should write to me in order that the burden of giving me
the news about everyone’s health and about the activities there may
not rest on Narandas. When you write, you should give me news about
Jamnadas too. Convey my respectful greetings to Grandfather and
Grandmother. I think about both of them every day and pray for their
blessings. Have you completely recovered now? Give me a sample
account of your activities on any one day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 900. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

366. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 22, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

I have your letter. If you will only realize that the verses1 are a
part of our prayers and that, therefore, we should learn them by heart,
you will be able with some effort to get absorbed in them. You should
not lose heart if you do not succeed in the effort. All those who recite
them do not become absorbed in them. If, however, you continue to
have faith and recite them, one day you will find that you can become
absorbed in them. Moreover, the verses have a deep meaning. If you
meditate over it, that, too, will help you to concentrate on them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati G.N. 1810

1

256

Of Bhagavad Gita
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

367. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI G. PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 22, 1930
CHI. SHIVABHAI,

I have your letter. I think my memory is as weak as yours, but
this is the method I followed, and still follow, for memorizing
whatever I did, or do when I get any time for that, and I have no doubt
that it is the best one. We should first try and understand the meaning
of what we wish to memorize and the relations of the different parts to
each other. After we have done this, all that remains to do is to commit
to memory the poet’s words expressing that meaning and those
relations. This is easy to do. Try this method and memorize Chapter
XII. Arjuna asks: “As between one who worships in this manner and
another who worships the Unmanifest, who is superior?” Reflect over
the reply to this question and then try to memorize the verses. This is
interesting, involves no waste of energy and, because we have faith, the
meaning sinks in our heart while we try to memorize the verses.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9502

368. LETTER TO BALBHADRA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 22, 1930
CHI. BALBHADRA,

You have written a very good letter indeed this time. For
your age, your handwriting is still poor and ill-formed. Make a patient
effort and improve it. You like Narandasbhai’s spinning-wheel
because it is respectable and is maintained in good condition. You are
doing right in mixing milk with raab. It is also good that you eat
khakhras and not rice. If you do as much physical work as you can,
your body will certainly become strong and your weight will
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

257

increase.You will be doing . . .1 service in a spirit of non-attachment if
you adopt the attitude that you will go with Raojibhai and stay with
him if he takes you. A true servant does service wherever he lives.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9214

369. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 22, 1930
CHI. MANU,

I have your letter. Kakasaheb will meet you now in a few days.
Get rid of your fever and your pain by a strong effort of will. I can
understand your being proud of the fact that Kakasaheb’s birthday
and yours fall on the same date. We should try to cultivate in ourselves
the virtues of the person of whom we feel proud. You are doing that.
May God give you a long life.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7771

370. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 22, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

If Mother lives near the Ashram, you will feel easy in mind and
will also be able to go on with the work of service.
It is not obligatory on anyone to marry a particular person
and nobody else. If, however, a Hindu woman wishes to marry a
Muslim for good and sufficient reasons, we should not believe that she
would be committing a sin if she did so. How, then, can we object to a
woman marrying a so-called untouchable? Such a person is not a
1

258

One word is illegible in the source.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

non-Hindu. There is no necessary connection between marriage and
the varna system. We should remember that marriage is a
universallyaccepted religious institution intended to put a restraint on
gratification of lust, and limit the field of choice for individuals. I
think I have fully answered your question.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5261

371. LETTER TO MATHURI KHARE
November 22, 1930
CHI. MATHURI,

There are two reasons why you do not like to spin. One, you do
not realize that it is for the sake of the poor nor do you know the
poverty of the hunger-stricken. Two, you are not good at spinning.
Therefore, know the poor and if you understand our duty to have
compassion for the poor you will be interested without any effort.
Then you will feel that you should spin as much as you can and as
well as you can because you will be spinning for them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati: C.W. 257. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn Khare

372. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
November 23, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

It was bad to have got fever again. But I suppose it is no use
fretting over it. There is undoubtedly poison in your system. It upsets
it on the slightest pretext. Whenever possible trace the cause and avoid
it in future. If it is rest that is needed and if you cannot take it at the
Ashram take it where you think you can get it. You may even go to
Vijapur where Chhaganlal is or some such quiet place. Even a week’s
change may set you up.
You will be pleased to hear that I have set the Bihar wheel going.
I followed your instructions and it went. The holders required
attention. I opened out the holes. I am not working at it because I am
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

259

making experiments with the Gandiv which still gives promise of
possibilities. I am describing the changes in my letter to Keshu.
Iwould speak to you about the Bihar wheel. The alteration you have
made doesn’t seem to me to have added to the utility of the wheel.
The original length of the platform is the ideal length. The length in
the “improved” machine is too much for drawing the thread away
from you and too little for drawing it towards you. The original
holders may admit of a change. I am trying the coir holders in the
Gandiv and they have worked exceedingly well. In the coir holders
the spindle moves in the rough and smooth convex surface of the coir
twine. Hence it moves with the minimum of friction. In the Bihar
holders the spindle moves lazily on 1/8th inch flat surface. Hence
there is avoidable friction. The coir holders undoubtedly last long,
take no time to make and hold oil better. Coir twine is available
anywhere. It can be picked from waste. These hints are for you to
note and follow out where you have leisure. Another good piece of
news. For the last three days I have been trying one of the taklis you
left here. It is giving me more satisfaction than the one I have made
and on which I was working. The mouth of mine is wretchedly made.
Yours is much better. I read today the translation of my summary of
the first chapter of the Gita. I can trace your hand in it. The sense has
been fairly preserved.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5421. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9655

373. LETTER TO VIDYA HINGORANI
November 23, 1930
CHI. VIDYA,

I have your letter. The remedy for your ill health is hipbath and
sun-bath. Ramanama is prescribed for peace of mind. If sexual desire
disturbs you, you should suppress it. There is only one way of staying
near the Divine Light, namely, to serve the children of God. That
Light cannot point any other way. Can you read my handwriting and
understand my argument??
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

260

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

374. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
November 23, 1930
CHI. NIMU,

It will be good if you keep writing to me as you are doing now.
It is as well that Sumitra knows me only by my photograph. In a way,
it is a pleasant game. If one gets annoyed with a photograph, one can
tear it up. one can even beat it up and, if one feels so inclined, one can
bow to it. Moreover, a photograph will have only as many virtues as
we imagine it to have. Who knows what the original is like? We cannot
even have an idea of his bad qualities. And if one gives vent to one’s
irritation with him, he may even . . .1 And so, on the whole, the name
has more worth than the person bearing the name.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

375. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
November 24, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have been getting your letters. You must have got the letter
which I wrote you. I sent it to the Patna address, since that is the
address you had given in your letter. I had sent a wire to Jayaprakash
asking him to send you to the Ashram. His reply was that, if your
health did not improve, he would. I am eager to know what you intend
to do now. May God give you peace of mind and health. In any case,
do write to me regularly. Don’t give up courage.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3381

1

A word here is illegible in the source.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

261

376. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
November 24, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

You had forgotten to sign your letter. I understand what you say
about Sarbhon. You did right in leaving the place only after
consulting Nath, Narandas and Mahadev. It was not then necessary to
explain things to me in detail.
I am afraid the constipation may persist. Don’t neglect to write
to me regularly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9278

377. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
November 24, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I have your letter. When we do not set out to reach a place out
of our pride but are led by God, we feel on arriving at the destination
that we have arrived not a moment too soon. Our task is a difficult
one. We trust in God for success in it.
Think over the verses in the women’s prayers. Every one of
those verses would seem to have been composed for circumstances
like the present. We should realize today the value of Draupadi’s
prayer.
I hope no one shows antipathy to, . .1 Does everyone know
about her?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G.S. Gangabehnne, pp. 47-8; also C.W. 8765. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

1

262

The name has been omitted.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

378. LETTER TO HARILAL DESAI
November 24, 1930
CHI. HARILAL (DESAI),

I have your frank letter. I understand what you say regarding
the marriage. Has the man any children? Is his mother alive? Has
Hari-ichchha gone to her husband’s house? It was certainly wrong of
you to have given up the tannery work. I see in your action a
weakness common in our society. The reasons to which you yielded
while leaving the work were before you when you took it up. Only
yesterday, while I was translating Prayer No. 127, I read the following
verse in it;
Revolve the thing in your mind carefully before you act,
Never go to fight in a battle in blind rivalry of others,
If you go, fight till you are hewn to pieces.
If you break your vow once, you will not know where to end.
You have also not properly understood your duty to your
mother. Suppose a mother belongs to a society in which drinking is
common. Her son gives it up as an evil, but the mother tries to
dissuade him from doing so, and threatens to commit suicide if the
son gives up drinking. In these circumstances, is it the duty of the son
to give up what he regards as his duty? To honour the word given by
Dasharatha, Rama left for the forest and let Dasharatha die. Though
Kaikeyi entreated Bharata with piteous tears, Bharata clung to his
decision not to accept the throne. Judging by common standards, had
Kaikeyi done anything wrong? She was one of the many queens, and
in any case she had her husband’s word. What sin had she committed
in demanding the throne for her son? But Bharata saw sin in her
action and disregarded her entreaties.
I have not written this to reproach you. I cannot feel angry with
you. I have written what I have done because I thought it my duty to
explain to you what your duty was.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6625

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

263

379. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 24, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I have your letter giving me all details. I was glad. I don’t
always remember the reasons behind my decisions. You have proved
yourself a true soldier. It is a mistake if you believe that, by remaining
there, you are not doing a soldier’s duty. All persons are not sent to
the front. Many recruits are kept in reserve. Moreover, very
responsible persons are required at the head-quarters. One must of
course give up fear of danger and face it whenever it comes. But
anyone who needlessly rushes into danger is not a soldier but a fool. I
look upon Narandas as a true soldier. Who knows what dangers are in
store for you? True soldiership lies in abiding by God’s will. That is
non-attachment. If we express that idea in common language, it means
that we should act as ordered by the general to whose discipline we
have voluntarily submitted ourselves.
The Ashram children have complained in their letter against
Dharmakumar, that he is dirty. Dhiru seems to know about it. Inquire
about this.
I understand your view about the ceremonial recitation of the
Gita. On this issue you may quarrel with Kakasaheb to your heart’s
content. Personally, I think that at the back of your opposition to the
proposal is your aversion to or lack of faith in the prayers themselves.
If you had your way, I think you would have nothing besides the
dhun. I would advise you to have faith in all the items of the prayers.
If possible, concentrate your attention on the meaning of each item. If
you cannot do that, have faith that the words you hear are noble and
that even the fact of listening to them will do you good, and attend to
them respectfully. Please do not understand from this that I wish to
convert you to the proposal for completing the recitation in seven
days. I have written this to convince you that there is some meaning
inthe prayers behind which lies fifteen years’ tapascharya, with
unswerving faith, on the part of some of us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10243; also C.W. 6691. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

380. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI MADHAVJI
THAKKAR
November 24, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

Madhavji writes and tells me that you keep worrying about the
children. Why? Reflect over the verses which we recite daily and burn
up all worries. God will look after the children. I have written a letter
to Calcutta. We may request the elders as earnestly as with propriety
we can and then, trusting them, rely on God.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6805

381. LETTER TO VANAMALA PARIKH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 24, 1930
CHI. VANAMALA,

I got your letter. I had sent a translation of a poem by Swami
Ramdas about the art of writing. Did you hear it read out? If you
don’t know about it, request Premabehn to explain it to you and then
try to write in that manner. Kakasaheb himself will go there now and
give his blessings to you all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5755

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

265

382. LETTER TO AMINA QURESHI
November 24, 1930
CHI. AMINA,

I have a letter from you after many days. I have heard about
Qureshi having gone to jail again. He has done the right thing. Have
all of you been able to keep yourselves well in Dhandhuka? Is it
colder there or less cold [than in Ahmedabad]. Do you ever go out
for a walk?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Convey my salaams to your father-in-law.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6668

383. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
November 24, 1930
CHI. MATHURADAS,

The question is this: Vithal says that it is not necessary to rub
[the string] with leaves if it has been rubbed with candle-wax. You say
it is necessary. If it is, why is it? Vithal should correct his error. We
find that rubbing with candle-wax is enough. The cotton does not
stick [to the string].
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3748

384. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

November 24, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. As far as possible avoid things containing
chillies. If there are chillies in dal and vegetables, you must not of
course eat the dal, indeed you should also avoid the vegetables. If
266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

milk or buttermilk is available, you can have either with the rotis. Or
you can have the roti just with salt. You will be able to carry on like
this for some time at least. Do you get buttermilk and milk? Live very
carefully. Write to me about all that you observe. Write to Father and
Mother from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

385. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
November 24, 1930
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

I have your letter 1 . Satis Babu’s discourse is excellent. It
expresses well his mental state. Those desirous of living as inmates of
Sodepur Ashram should scrupulously observe the Ashram regulations. If you cannot have such people, you may run it with paid
workers or close it down. Herein lies our test. To what extent it is right
to run it through paid workers is a different matter. Let us hope such
an occasion never arises. The running or the closure of the Ashram
rests with God.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1677

1

The addressee in her letter had expressed disillusionment about the sincerity
of the Ashram workers. In the absence of Satis Chandra Das Gupta, she was
attempting to run the Ashram on her own. She had expressed the possibility of
employing paid workers if the efforts of the Ashram inmates were inadequate, and had
enclosed extracts from a letter from Satis Chandra Das Gupta which was more in the
nature of a discourse upon Tarini’s death. (S.N. 16758-m)
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

267

386. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
At night, November 21/25, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter on Thursday (20th) morning. You should not
forward any letters unopened. Open every letter before forwarding it.
You may not read the letter, if the correspondent so desires, but even
that on the understanding that the correspondent should write about
no subject which is forbidden. Confidential letters, therefore, should
be about personal matters only. Adhere to the method which you have
been following.
It is certainly a painful matter that undesirable freedom was
taken in several respects at the time of Hari-ichchha’s marriage,but
you did right in tolerating everything patiently and giving all possible
help.
Sometimes dharma lies in setting aside such rules. The attitude
which you adopted was inspired by the spirit of non-violence. A
principle has no exception. When, however, the rules and regulations
framed to embody a principle are felt to kill its spirit, they may be set
aside. The occasion of Hari-ichchha’s marriage was of this kind.
At the present time I have dedicated myself heart and soul to
spinning and other related processes, and I find myself constantly
thinking about the subject. Since we do spinning as a form of yajna,
we should be very exact and regular in doing it, display the utmost
perseverance and sincerity in our work and become very proficient in
it. Most of us have no knowledge of even some elementary things
about spinning. We should acquire it now. That is, everyone should be
able to ascertain the count, strength and evenness of his or her yarn
and keep a record of these. One should also keep a record of the time
spent every day. If we do these things habitually, they will take very
little time. Everyone should pay attention to increasing his or her
speed, but without wasting yarn. People should also learn to keep the
spinning-wheel in repair. That is, they should know how to make the
belt, jotar and spindle-holder. They should know about the different
models of spinning-wheels. But you should not be burdened with the
task of thinking about all these matters and getting people to carry out
my suggestions. I have nothing else to engage my attention, but you
268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have to face new responsibilities and problems every day. These
suggestions, therefore, should not impose a burden on you. You may
carry out, and persuade others to carry out, only those suggestions
which people can easily take up and act upon. Other people, too,
should concern themselves with these things and think about them.
Everyone should do what his interest and capacity incline him or
permit him to do. You will find in the letter to Lakshmidas a
description of my experience in this regard too; please read it.
Saturday morning
You have given a pleasing description of the service you are
doing. Take care that you do not fall ill through all this labour. You
have the spirit of non-attachment in you in good measure. There is
little likelihood, therefore, of your falling ill. Krishna is bound to
protect those who dedicate their work of service to Him. Your losing
weight is a good sign indeed. You have had a good crop of fruit in
theAshram.Mathew has not described what freedom he takes. He has
merely stated that he takes freedom. If you know in what respect, let
me know. We keep him in the Ashram because he is a good man. I,
too, believe that he will come round some day.
When you have no time because of pressure of work, it will
suffice if you write only a few lines. You will find it easier if you write
down from time to time what you think you must tell me. Don’t you
see that that is what I do here, though I am not as busy as you are? I
don’t depart from my daily routine in order to write these letters. That
routine, of course, concerns the hours of meals, sleeping, answering
the call of nature and spinning. The hours which are not taken up by
these activities are practically all spent in writing letters, except on
Tuesday. I know that you can arrange properly all your work, but
even then I feel tempted to write this. It is also a test of
non-attachment to work, that a person who has cultivated it will not
feel that he is working under pressure even when he is busy with a
variety of tasks. There is an excellent thought in an English saying. It
is that a busy man can always spare time for others. The point is that
such a person, even though working hard, is always found as fresh as
if he had no work and no one is disappointed by him.
I was very happy that you could take in Dhiru and Vimu. It was
also good that those two children felt drawn to the Ashram of their
own accord. Let me know how Dhiru behaves now.
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

269

Amidas’s experiment is worth watching. From here, I see an
error in it. If he does no work and rests all the time, he can certainly
live on fruit, but his experiment will not have succeeded. That is right
food for the body which gives it the necessary strength for the
ordinary duties of service. To get such strength, he should be able to
digest almonds and such other tissue-building foods. My experience
so far tells me that a weak stomach cannot digest foods like almond,
whereas it can digest the same nutrients from milk. However, I don’t
wish to write about this to Amidas or suggest it indirectly to him. His
sincere faith will probably give him the required light. Let us hope
that he will correct his mistake, if he is making any, and that he will
learn from his experience the value of milk or discover some
vegetarian substances similar in value to foods of animal origin.
. . .’s 1 case is a sad one. I did feel something unattractive on his
face, but I believed that he was a good man and used to dismissthe
other thought from my mind. And I was right in doing that. Even
when he fell at times, he continued to struggle and it is possible that he
has succeeded in his struggle by now. If so, the expression on his face
may also have changed. It was said about Socrates that till the last his
face did not seem like a good man’s. There is, therefore, only one
path for creatures like us who are always liable to error. We should
always assume a man to be good till we come to know something
against him.
Give me the names of Chandrakanta’s father and mother. I will
then write slips for them. What you have written to them is right. They
ought to give up worrying about her. It would be best if Kanta’s
mother does not come to the Ashram. She will probably be a burden
on Gangabehn. Punjabhai’s becoming unconscious occasionally is
God’s grace. That seems to give him some rest. It would be best if
Champa’s delivery takes place in the hospital to which Amina was
admitted. She will get all facilities there and will be well looked after,
and nobody else will be put to trouble. Some woman or other who can
be spared from the Ashram may visit her from time to time and stay
with her. If this is possible, suggest it to Champa. If she agrees, she will
find the arrangement convenient.
Monday morning, November 24, 1930
Most probably I wrote to you that I had received the bark-sheet
sent by Ratubhai. I used it till this day as a covering when sleeping,
1

270

The name has been omitted.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

but it has not become soft. I do not know whether or not it can be
washed. As it remains stiff, I thought it would be more useful for
spreading on the floor and that is what I have started doing from
today. I am sitting on it just now.
Vinoba tells me in his letter that he has sent two taklis. I have
made inquiries. They do not seem to have been received here so far. I
wonder if they have been received there. If you have received them,
send them here.1
I call this chapter the key to an understanding of the Gita, and
the gist of it is that life is given us for service and not for enjoyment.
We have therefore to impart a sacrificial character to our lives.
Intellectual assent to this proposition is only the first step, but
such assent and conduct in terms of that assent are bound to rid our
heart of its impurities in course of time. But what is real service? In
order to obtain the right answer to this question, restraint of the
sensesis essential, as it gives us a clearer and clearer vision of the God
of truth. Service rendered with selfish motives ceases to be sacrifice.
Hence the urgent need for the spirit of detachment. When this is
understood, all manner of controversies lose their meaning for us.
‘Did Krishna really ask Arjuna to kill his relatives? Could such killing
ever be a part of one’s duty?’ Questions like these are set at rest for
ever. When detachment governs our actions, even the weapon raised in
order to strike an enemy down falls out of our hand. But a mere
pretence of detachment serves no useful purpose. If only we persevere
in our effort, detachment may come to us perhaps the very first day,
or maybe only after a thousand years. We must not worry over the
time this takes, for the effort carries within itself the seeds of success.
We must however be on our guard and make sure that it is a genuine
effort, and that there is no self-deception. And this is certainly
possible for us all.
I have thus been able to complete Chapter III in two parts. I
have now fifteen minutes left to me in which to finish this letter. The
title you have suggested for these discourses is rather long. It seems
you propose to publish them one by one. Kaka suggests a short title
Gitabodh2 . I like it. The intention behind the present attempt is that it
may help those who read the discourses to understand the meaning of
1

For the text of the discourse which followed, vide “Letters on the Gita” —Ch.

2

Light on the Gita’

III.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

271

the Gita as I have understood it. I don’t know whether I shall succeed
in my aim. But that is the intention behind my attempt and, therefore,
the title Gitabodh suits the discourses very well. I doubt the necessity
of an English translation of these discourses. But the final decision
can only be made there. As for the suggestion to complete the
devotional reading of the Gita in a week, Kakasaheb will now discuss
it personally. If no one likes the idea, we certainly don’t wish to act
upon it.
Blessings from

BAPU

After 8 a.m., Tuesday
[PS.]
Dudhabhai is in jail. Ascertain in which jail. If he is in Sabarmati
Jail, someone should go and visit him. Where hasSomabhai taken up
work? I wrote to Jairamdas and told him that I was not eating fresh
fruits. My reason for doing so was that there was a statement by the
‘lathi’ Department1 of the Government that it was not true that I had
given up eating fresh fruits in protest against lathi charges and that I
still ate them. I have already told you what I eat. However, I give here
the history so far, so that, if an occasion arises, you may issue an
authoritative rejoinder. I had given up fresh fruit for the most part
during the salt-march. I had resumed it after I was brought here. But I
gave it up after I heard about lathi-charges. I must have accepted it for
three or four days when I heard about the lathi-charges. That was the
position when Jairamdas met me. After that, with a view to overcoming
constipation and saving expenditure, I gave up the dry fruits which I
had been eating, namely, dates, currants and raisins and started eating
vegetables only. For some days I ate both fruit and vegetables and
then went over exclusively to vegetables, but realized that I could not
keep fit on them alone. So I again went back to dates and raisins.
Among the vegetables, I used to be supplied unripe papaiya.
Sometimes the papaiya would be ripe and I would eat that too. This
did not happen while Jairamdas was here. I must have accepted about
ten times ripe papaiya supplied from the garden here. Lemon, I of
course take every day, and Jairamdas has mentioned the fact. His
statement, therefore, is quite correct and the Government’s on the
whole incorrect. It is only recently that I have been receiving papaiya
1

272

Probably the Home Department
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and no one can say, because I eat it, that I live on fresh fruit. Probably
no official knows about this fact at all, for the papaiya is supplied to
me along with raw vegetables. It is never bought from the market.
This is the position. Kakasaheb will be released on the 29th and he
will of course state the correct position more clearly. My belief is that
the Government official [responsible for the statement] has made no
distinction between fresh and dry fruits or that he has assumed, from
my having accepted a basket of fruit which may have been brought
by a visitor and which I may have passed on to Kakasaheb, that I
myself had eaten the fruit. God alone knows how the statement came
to be issued. If no controversy follows, you need not go out of your
way to issue any statement.
BAPU

[PPS.]
There are 64 letters today.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

387. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 25, 1930
CHI. RAMABEHN,

I have a letter from you this time after many week. I hope
Chhaganlal will make good use of his enforced rest. Though late, the
cutting off of Vimala’s hair is to be welcomed. Everything has its own
appointed time. You need not feel sorry that you did not get her hair
cut off earlier. The idea was so completely new that it is not surprising
that a mother should not accept it readily. It is best that you should
accept anything I may suggest only if you are convinced about it; you
will then cling to it. It is my duty to have patience till I succeed in
convincing you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5327

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

273

388. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
November 25, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

I have your letter. If Mother definitely refuses to come and if
Kalavati does not live with her to look after her, I can see only one
alternative. Either you yourself should go and live with her or engage
a servant who would look after her. Which of the two courses it is your
dharma to adopt, your heart alone can tell you. It is not a matter on
which you may consult somebody else. It would be improper for any
person to tell you what your dharma is in this matter. The problem is
so delicate that nobody else can suggest a solution
Did you come to know anything more about that woman who
committed suicide?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5262

389. LETTER TO MATHURI KHARE
November 27, 1930
CHI. MATHURI,

I have your letter. Premabehn does not spare the rod; have you
then complained to her about this? I shall certainly plead on behalf of
you and Chandan.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 258. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn Khare

274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

390. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
November 27, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I have your letter and report. The report is excellent. You say
that you saw no cow in the places which you visited; the position is the
same in almost the whole of Kheda district. People are selfish and are
simply not interested in keeping cows. That is why we have taken up
cow-protection work.
Who cooks your meals?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G.S. Gangabehnne, p. 48; also C.W. 8766. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

391. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
November 27, 1930
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

When I think of Prabhavati I feel that the sooner she goes to the
Ashram the better it will be. That she will go to the Ashram if she does
not recover will mean that she will go when her illness has become
worse. You who have been educated in the West should understand
that illness should be tackled at its inception. I have known cases of
hysteria where recovery was effected by the transfer of the patient to a
different place. In Prabhavati’s case it is doubly necessary that she
should have a change of weather. She is ailing and she is also faced
with a moral crisis. In a freer atmosphere she will be better able to
know her heart and she will also discover her duty. The difficult
question before you is that of freedom of women. If Prabhavati has as
much freedom as you, you must concede to her the right to think for
herself.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

275

392. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
November 28, 1930
CHI. RAMDAS,

I have your letter. Many children suffer when they cut teeth.
Hence it is nothing strange that she does too. But her cold should go.
Somebody should carry her and walk in the sunshine. The head
should be kept covered. This will warm up the skin and make it less
sensitive. I believe the cold will then disappear.
Once you have formed the habit of keeping accounts, you don’t
find it a burden to do so and discover through experience the very
great value of the practice. Whether or not one’s life is peaceful
should make no difference in this matter. There are some things
which we should try hard and learn to do with a peaceful mind even in
the midst of highly distracting circumstances. Write to me regularly
once a week.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6859

393. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
November 28, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got your letter written from Arrah. I posted a letter to you
yesterday to Sitabadiyara. This too I hope you will get. If your health
improves there, I have nothing more to say about it. It will not,
however, be good sense to go to the Ashram after your health is
nearly ruined. While improvement is still possible, you will recover if
you go and stay there for some time. Then you will also have some
peace of mind to think about your problems and be able to judge
what your duty is. You should know that you are not subject to
anyone’s authority. It is we who make ourselves free or subject to
someone’s authority. If you understand this, you will be able to face
the whole world.
276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am more or less all right. Kakasaheb will be released
tomorrow—to put it more correctly, he will be imprisoned, for he is
free here.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. P RABHAVATIDEVI
C/ O BABU HARSOO DAYALJI
R EVENUE OFFICER
ARRAH, B IHAR
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3382

394. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
November 28, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I have your letter. I cannot stop wondering whether you will be
able to preserve your health in the midst of all the wanderings there. I
know I should not worry. In all things God’s will prevails. You can
write to me everything which you can send to newspapers for
publication. What you cannot send to the papers, you cannot write to
me. You should follow this rule in giving me news about the present
activities. About yourself, you may write anything. I keep all right,
more or less.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9294

395. LETTER TO ABDUL KADIR BAWAZEER
November 28, 1930
BHAI IMAM SAHEB,

I have your letter. It was a beautiful one. The more I think about
religion, the more convinced I feel that its essence lies in truth and
non-violence. In the very beginning occurs the name Rahim. Does it
not stand for non-violence? We look down with contempt on the thing
because we do not know how to employ it. Once we have learnt how
to employ it, we will never forsake it.
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

277

That you still pass sugar in urine is a bad sign. If you can
exercise sufficient control over yourself, that is, master the body, you
should live exclusively on unboiled milk. You should mix nothing
with it. Such milk is perfect food. If you live on it only, sugar is
bound to disappear. Even fruit is not good for you. Nor is there
anything else which will agree with you. You may certainly eat curds.
If you can, do this for the sake of the country at least;
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6647

396. LETTER TO AMINA QURESHI
November 28, 1930
CHI. AMINA,

I have your letter. I hear from Imam Saheb that you have
become impatient to go to jail. That is not proper, however. When
God wills that you should go to jail, you will get an opportunity
without seeking it. It is enough that you yourself are ready. Till that
time comes, look after the children. Preserve good health and do
whatever service you can from home. It is possible in this struggle to
serve even from home. It is enough that you have shed fear.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
How far have you progressed in your study of Urdu?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6659

397. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

November 28, 1930
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

Your letter. The deduction that violence prevails in Bengal due
to insufficient propagation of my ideas seems to be wrong. The
atmosphere in Bengal has always been surcharged with violence which
is the reason for the lesser dissemination of my ideas there. But if we
278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

remain true, the atmosphere in Bengal is bound to change. This does
not mean that you may give up your resolve. Do your best to
propagate it but do not expect appreciable results too soon.
Blessings to the Ashram inmates.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1678

398. DUTY OF SATYAGRAHI PRISONERS1
[Before November 29, 1930]
Our civil disobedience is fulfilled when we seek imprisonment.
Disobedience would cease to be civil if we defied legitimate jail
discipline. We may not therefore shout or create a row in the jails. We
may not refuse work when it is demanded of us according to rules. We
should rather be anxious to do as much work as we can and that too as
efficiently as we are capable of. It would be nice if even ‘simple
prisoners’ volunteered to do some useful work not necessarily
with a view to getting any remission. Prisoners undergoing simple

1

This was quoted by D. B. Kalelkar in an interview to The Bombay Chronicle.
On the basis of the discussions he had with Gandhiji before his release on November
29, 1930, he observed: “He does not think himself competent enough to guide the
political struggle today because he is removed from the field of action. To a
satyagrahi, imprisonment is a civil death. But as a prisoner he can give authoritative
instructions for prospective satyagrahi prisoners. Daring my stay with him in the
Yeravda jail I discussed with him various aspects of the jail life and elicited from him
some useful instructions. He had no objections to my sharing them with workers in
the cause of swaraj. I give them below as they occur to me.
A satyagrahi should realize that his antagonism or disobedience ceases as
soon as he is convicted by the court. He is not out to paralyse jail discipline. In war, a
prisoner lays down his arms and capitulates when he is caught. The enemy can always
rely on the words of a true ‘soldier-prisoner’. A prisoner of war would not try to
escape, would not try to deceive when he is allowed an amount of liberty on the
strength of his word of honour. We, as satyagrahis, should try to be ideal prisoners in
jails. We must always be prepared to abide by the rules of jail discipline so long as
they do not go against the ordinary canons of humanity and self-respect. I have
sometimes heard some young satyagrahis arguing against submitting to jail
discipline. They say: ‘We came to jail because we wanted to disobey the laws of
Government. How do you ask us to obey the rules inside the jail? We are pledged only
to non-violence but we will certainly defy the Government even in jails.’ “
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

279

imprisonment have helped a great deal in easing tense situations by
merely offering to do hard labour. Whatever work we turn out is so
much addition to the National Wealth.
The Bombay Chronicle, 1-1-1931

399. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
[Before November 11, 1930] 1
CHI. KANTA,

I have your letter. You can go as Premabehn did, after obtaining
permission, If there is a reason you also may go with permission as
Premabehn has done, so arranging the time that the work does not
suffer when you have a reason or feel an irresistible wish to go. You
may tell Narandas. You will not be able forcibly to restrain your
mind. Restraint should be exercised with understanding.
Brother should improve his health. The cure rests in his own
hands. If one pays attention to the right amount of exercise, regularity
in all work, hip-baths and moderation in eating, the health does
improve in a large measure. There can be no question of giving the
sewing-machine to a person who does not know how to use it. Of
course if there is somebody to teach, it may be lent. You cannot be
expected to teach sewing since all your time belongs to the Ashram.
Gangabehn or Narandas may arrange for a teacher. Have I answered
all your questions ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

1

From the reference to the addressee’s desire to leave the Ashram; which she
did before November 11, 1938; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 11-11-1930.

280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

400. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

Night, November 30, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I was very happy to read your letter. It is two days now since
you broke your fast. By the time you get this letter, you will have
forgotten all about the fast and will be enjoying new youth. If you do
not have that experience, I would not regard the fast as a complete
success. I expect that you will describe the result of your fast in detail.
Your experience should be a guide to others. You know, of course,
how to return to normal diet gradually after the fast is over. You will
feel very hungry immediately after a fast, but you should certainly not
eat as much as the stomach demands. You should gradually increase
the quantity of milk and curds, and eat nothing between the meals.
You may of course eat juicy fruits. I hope you do not count expense
in that regard. Your body should become completely healthy. I am
not surprised to hear that you could work normally during the fast. I
have observed many people doing so. And that is my own experience,
too. Those who have been harbouring many diseases in their bodies
feel stronger during a fast. At any rate there is a brighter light on their
faces.
I am satisfied with the children’s account sent by you.
Krishnavijay seems to stand first in every item. Is there no one who
can take Dudhibehn’s classes in her absence? I know that in the
present circumstances you cannot ask anyone about this. What can
you do when so many women are outside the Ashram? All the same, if
there is any person to whom you can entrust the work, do not hesitate
to ask him or her.
Dhurandhar must have been released. Tell him that I remember
the discussions I had with him. I also remember his diary. Ask him to
write to me. Let him describe his experience, too. He should also write
about his future plans.
Mathuri has a complaint against you, that you beat children.
Sometimes you even use a rod. If this is true, give up the practice.
One should never beat children. Crosby has written a book called
Tolstoy as Teacher. Probably it is in our collection. Read it. It has now
been proved that physical punishment does not reform children.
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

281

Iknow that anyone who is accustomed to use the rod while teaching
will find it difficult to give up the practice. But that is also true of an
armed soldier. He thinks that without his gun he can get nothing done
in this world. Our Ashram exists to prove that we can do without a
gun. This is true in regard to children. I will not write more than this
just now. If necessary, I will go into further argument after I get your
reply.
I hope that you had plenty of sleep during the fast, and that now
you regularly go to bed early. One ought to have sufficient sleep.
Man needs sleep more than he does food. Fasting in regard to food
benefits one, but fasting in regard to sleep wastes away one’s body. It
dulls the brain and makes one restless. Do not, therefore, be careless
about sleep. I would not complain if you sleep soundly between 9
p.m. and 4 a.m.
You will read about my experiment in the letter to Mira.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10244; also C.W. 6691. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

401. LETTER TO MOOLCHAND AGRAWAL
November 30, 1930
BHAI MOOLCHANDJI,

Your letter to hand. You must resolutely get up at 4 a.m. It does
not matter if you do not have any motions. Cleanse your mouth and
say the prayers; drink a bowlful of cold water after cleansing the
mouth. Go out for a walk after the prayers. Walk briskly. This will
induce motions. You will feel warm instead of cold. Don’t worry if
your bowels do not move. After the walk, you can occupy yourself in
whatever task you choose. Go to the lavatory when you feel the urge.
You will be cured by doing so for some days.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
R INGAS (RAJ.)
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 768

282

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

402. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
November 29/December 1, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

This is time after the morning prayer 29-11-1930. It is fairly
cold. But I do a little writing after the prayer and before walking out
on the bugle of 5.30.
I am glad you were better when you wrote your letter. We can
only learn really in everything as in the matter of health-keeping by
making repeated mistakes and profiting by them. This is an
introduction to my confession rather than a warning to you. Last
Thursday I suddenly developed a bad stomachache. I could have
avoided it but stupidly did not. As you know I have been lately living
on curds. They agreed very well though the bowels could be moved
only by the enema. But as you saw the weight was going up and I was
otherwise fit. So I continued the curds and then too the thick part.
That induced further constipation despite the enema. That was
sufficient warning to stop at least curds or better still all food for a
day. I would not and suffered for the day. I voluntarily brought out
what I had eaten and in a few hours the pain subsided. Nothing but
raisin water the next day and I was quite fit though at once I lost 3 lb.
in weight. It is ever thus with me. My weight beyond 95 is evidently
an uncertain quantity probably made up of poisonous matter. I
determined too to get rid of the constipation if it was at all possible, so
I have continued the stopping of curds. (Here is the bugle and I stop
for the time being). To resume at 8 p.m. And I am now taking cooked
leaves and tomatoes and dates or raisins. The bowels have moved
naturally, strength has been maintained and the weight has suffered no
further reduction. Yesterday I added sweet potatoes and today 12
almonds. No one need be alarmed at this change. If I feel weak or
lose weight steadily, I shall at once revert to milk and shall feel all the
better for the milk fast. If on the other hand the change agrees it will
be a source of additional joy. Therefore you should all rejoice over
the change. If it works, it is well. It is well also if it does not. I shall
take no risks.
So Kaka left and he wept as he left. We had come so close to
each other. Within two hours of his departure they sent mePyarelal
and of course he has taken possession of me. I put him on your
wheel. He spun 83 rounds. It went practically as I had set it up. We
have now concocted some improvements on the holder. He is at one
such whilst I am writing this. Somehow or other I can only think of
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

283

the wheel and all it connotes. The Gandiv too is undergoing
considerable improvement. I hope to try the improved wheel
tomorrow. I will have a movable wheel and will have a spring for
tension. If it works well, the output must increase. I am gradually
getting control over the takli. My speed on your takli went up to 87
rounds per hour. But Vinoba says I must first try the steel takli and he
has sent me two and I am trying to work at it. I haven’t yet got the
result expected. But I am daily gaining confidence and hope soon to
be able to pull 100 rounds per hour on the takli. (As it was 9 p.m. I
had to stop here. I resume at 4.30 a.m. after prayer Sunday.) I
understand about the Kumarappa differences. If Mahadev is gone
Kaka has now come. He may be of help in adjusting differences. The
golden rule is not to fret if things go contrary to one’s wishes and to
yield where resistance is useless or likely to be misunderstood, where
there is no principle at stake and where in an organization
responsibility is not solely one’s own. The virtue of charity comes
into play only when one comes in contact with a variety of opinion
and conduct. Strict and even harsh with ourselves, charitable and even
lax with regard to others. In the end, we find that we are neither strict
regarding ourselves nor lax regarding others. The fact is we do not as
readily observe our own blemishes as we are to detect those of others.
Hence the terrible truth “Pluck the beam out of thine own eyes before
you remove the mote from thy neighbour’s” or Burns’s (Is it not?)
“O that we could see ourselves as others see us.” In practice I have
found that it is best to search about ourselves and to assume the truth
of friends’ criticism of ourselves and to take them in the first instance
at their word when they disown guilt or defect. But enough of this
morning sermonizing. You will act as the spirit guides you.
Love.
BAPU

8.45 p.m. 1-12-30
[PS.]
Pyarelal began well on the Bihar wheel. But it proved a failure. I
fitted up the other Gandiv and it worked splendidly without a
hitch. Through the favour of the Superintendent I have got theGandiv
with my improvements incorporated. It promises to work well. I have
just tried it. The food experiment continues.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5422. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9656

284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

403. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
November 29/December 1, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (DESAI),

Though you had resolved to write every week, there has been no
letter from you this week. I look upon this as a serious lapse. One may
say that there is nothing as grave as violating a solemn resolution. This
is such a common weakness that we don’t realize its gravity. But you
should know that it is a grave weakness indeed and guard yourself
against it. When you have nothing to write, you may sign on a blank
sheet, as Chhotelal does. But it is not likely that a child will have
nothing to say to its father or mother.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
December 1, 1930
Pyarelal took Kakasaheb’s place on the 29th.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1811

404. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
December 1, 1930
CHI. MANU (TRIVEDI),

From what Payrelal reports after having seen you I gather that
you have recovered your strength. You must have talked with
Kakasaheb to your heart’s content. Take care and do not fall ill again.
Don’t be impatient to resume work. He whose aspiration is noble and
who is always eager to serve works even when physically not working.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7772

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 6 JANUARY, 1931

285

405. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
November 27/ December 3, 1930
Thursday morning
CHI. NARANDAS,

This time your packet was handed over to me as soon as it came
yesterday evening. I have received the copies of Vratavichar.
If Chi. Kusum is firm in her decision, I like it. Since in any case
she will not marry before swaraj is won, why should she bind herself
just now? The right thing would be to act upon her inclination at that
time. Convey this view of mine to both Devchandbhai and Jamnalalji.
Ascertain Kusum’s real wishes. She should not advance this as an
excuse if in the depth of her heart the real reason is different. She is
completely free to do what she wishes. I would tell this same thing to
the two young men too; if they are ready to wait till we get swaraj, why
should they wish to bind themselves or bind any girl now? A brave
man or bhakta would not do that, and if Kusum is a brave girl and if
she has decided to marry, she should marry a brave youth. I will write
to Ghanshyamdas.
Why does Manilal refuse to take milk? If he keeps up his
strength, however, I don’t insist that he should take it. Only, he should
not be obstinate in refusing to take it. If he is losing weight, he should
take it. Why doesn’t Devdas write?
Friday morning
Ever since I had heard about Amidas, I was filled with
admiration for him. He has achieved perfect victory. He was like one
of the ancient sages in keeping his pledge. I believe the Ashram to
have been sanctified by his having stayed there. Let all of us learn
from Amidas how to die cheerfully for the sake of our pledge. If he
had been inspired by my example in taking the vow of refraining
from milk, etc., he had acted hastily. I think that no one should copy
my example in this respect till I myself succeed in keeping such a
vow. It is, however, clear to me as daylight that, having taken the vow,
Amidas could not break it. A vow taken with open eyes, even if it
means a risk to the body, ought not to be broken. A vow which would
do harm to the soul ought not to be taken and, if sucha vow has been
taken, it is one’s moral duty to break it. For instance, no one can take
286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a vow that he will always speak untruth, for such a vow harms the
soul. A vow always to speak the truth may mean a risk to theto the
body and may cost us our life, it may even seem to harm the interests
of the country, but it must be kept. I will write a letter to his father.
Read it and send it on to him.
Saturday morning
As regards Sorabji’s insurance, inform him that it is beyond our
means to pay the premiums. He should manage somehow to pay them
and should send the receipt. Write to Jalbhai too about this. Make a
note of Budhabhai’s decision concerning Nanibehn and inform her
about it, and go on recovering the money till the amount is paid up. I
was not satisfied by . . . ’s1 letter. Read the reply which I have written
to him. So long as we entertain a suspicion about him, he cannot join
the struggle. Only those inmates of the Ashram who are pure in our
eyes may Join it.
Take the utmost care about the [spinning] yajna. Endeavour to
remove the deficiencies in such work. Everyone should learn to test
the strength and count of yarn, and should actually do so every day.
A rough and ready method of testing the strength can be easily
invented. It should be invented and everyone should test the strength
of his or her yarn with its help. If the yarn spun by each is woven
separately, we would know its strength better.
It was very good indeed that Sitala Sahay came. But how did he
escape the attention of the U.P. Government? Show Shivabhai’s letter
to Kakasaheb before you send it to me. If the facts he mentions are
such as can be given publicity, there is no objection to his writing to
me about them. On the contrary, there may be some advantage in
informing me about them. But leave the responsibility in this regard
to Kakasaheb.
. . . ’s2 case is a moving one. I cannot understand how . . .3 came
to form such a connection. I will write to him. Read the letter and pass
it on to him.
Sunday night
I have written the letter I mentioned above. It has turned out to
be a very important one. I should like it to reach him.
1

The names have been omitted.
ibid
3
ibid
2

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

287

I got the taklis sent by Vinoba. Read the letter to Mirabehn for
information about my health. They sent Pyarelal here immediately
after Kaka had left. Read the back of page 1 for the discourse.
December 2, 1930
Inform Mahadev that he should write even from the jail, if he
can get time and is permitted to write. More next week.
Blessings from

BAPU1

[PS.]
The third, the fourth and the following fifth chapter should be
read together, as they explain to us what the yoga of selfless action
(anasakti) is and what are the means of practising it. If these three
chapters are properly understood, the reader will have less difficulty in
tackling what follows. The remaining chapters deal in detail with the
ways and means of achieving anasakti. We should study the Gita from
this point of view, and if we pursue this study we shall find without
much trouble a solution of the problems which confront us from day
to day. This calls for daily practice. Let everybody try it. If for
instance he is angry, let him remember the verse dealing with anger
and subdue that enemy. Supposing we heartily dislike somebody, or
are impatient or gluttonous or in doubt as to whether we should do or
should not do something or other, all these difficulties can be solved
with the help of mother Gita if we have faith in it and give it constant
study. Our daily recitation of the Gita as well as this series of letters is
a means to this end.
The bugle for 5.30 a.m. has sounded.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PPS.]
There are 52 letter.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I

1

For the text of the discourse which followed, vide “Letters on the Gita”— Ch.

IV.

288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

406. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
December 3, 1930
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I heard from Jamnalalji that a friend or a partner of yours had
lost heavily in speculation. The message also says that this has caused
you sorrow. Speculation itself implies loss. Then why take it to heart?
A direct lesson drawn from this loss can even be a source of
happiness. Why don’t you and your friends take a vow not to indulge
in speculation any more? Earnings from speculation can never be
truly ethical.
Write about Pujya Malaviyaji’s health.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From Hindi: C.W. 6190. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

407. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
December 4, 1930
CHI, MIRA,

The Ashram post received last evening brings your disturbing
letter. It does not cause anxiety but it furnishes food for reflection.
What is the cause of this breakdown in health? In any case you must
give yourself complete rest. You must relax both mind and body.
Therefore please go gently. Read the 6th chapter [of the] Gita. Yoga
should be undertaken gently. What work we are doing is yoga. Please
drop me a card daily.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5423. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9657

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

289

408. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 4, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

I got both your letters. I was glad to learn that your mother and
others had arrived. If you take your meals with your mother with
Narandas’s consent, I should not object. However, there is certainly a
moral flaw in what you are doing. You ought to make it clear to
Mother that the life which you two live is different from normal
family life. Of course the financial aspect of the matter creates some
difficulty. But I have stated here only the ideal. Do not take my words
to mean that you ought to take your meals in the common kitchen, as
we cannot always live up to an ideal and sometimes in actual practice
we have to compromise it in order that we may not be forced to give it
up altogether. As for your relations with Father, strictness is necessary.
You should tell him in the plainest language that he should give up
hopes of your taking up a job or a profession and earning money. By
telling him this, you will serve him, for, as long as there is the slightest
hope, he will continue complaining to you, but will cease doing so or
rather the complaining will cease of itself, when he has given up the
hope. This is human nature. When hope is entirely gone, despair itself
turns into a sort of consolation. There are here several prisoners
serving life sentences, who have no hope of being released and,
therefore, live cheerfully. Those whose position is uncertain, like mine,
suffer. They keep on hoping from day to day that they would soon be
released. In other words, the cause of the pain in your relationship
with Father is in your own mind. If you have understood your dharma
clearly you should not so much as give a thought to Father’s
complaining. To borrow money from friends to help Father to pay his
debts and relieve his burden to that extent is not a good policy. It
would be better not to receive such private benefits from one’s
friends. Here again, I have merely stated the ideal. It may be advisable,
in case of necessity, to borrow money from Mahavir Prasad and others
if your relationswith them are intimate. Solve all these problems with
the master key of non-attachment.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5263

290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

409. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
December 4, 1930
CHI. RAMABEHN,

I have your letter. It was a beautiful one. Dhiru’s firmness is
wonderful. His inclination towards mischief reflects this firmness of
his. Let us hope that some of these Ashram children will excel us all in
service when they grow up. If we are pure in our hearts and become
daily purer, that is bound to be so.
I am not surprised by your description of the conditions in
Kathiawar. That lethargy shows that we have still a long way to go.
Indeed such effort is the essence of our spiritual striving. We need not,
therefore, worry.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, pp. 281-2

410. LETTER TO TARAMATI MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
December 4, 1930
I got all the information I wanted. I am not surprised to know
that Mathuradas has been making very good use of his time. This
experience will do him good. The separation is a test of your strength.
I was happy to learn that Dilip and Jyotsna keep good health. Pyarelal
is with me now. Both of us are well. Write to me from time to time.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 103

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

291

411. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
December 4, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

There is no letter from you this time. I think you must have
written the letter but it may not have reached the Ashram in time. I am
used to having your letter every week and so when it does not come I
wonder.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

412. LETTER TO KALAVATI TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 4, 1930
CHI. KALAVATI,

I had your letters. You must improve your handwriting. It can
be accomplished by writing with care. Good that Mother1 and others
have come. If you go to Kheda, be very careful and immerse yourself
in service. Follow Gangabehn’s instructions.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I understand about the mill-made slivers. No need to say
anything just now.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5264

1

292

Addressee’s mother-in-law
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

413. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
Y. M.,

December 5, 1930
MY DEAR ANAND,

Depression overtakes you because you think too much about
things other than the task before you. This is a sign of unfaithfulness;
You will cease to worry about any other thing the moment you
realizethat you are to devote yourself body, mind and soul to the duty
undertaken by you. Truth demands this.
Love.
BAPU
From a microfilm, Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand
T. Hingorani

414. LETTER TO ROHINI KANAIYALAL DESAI
December 5, 1930
CHI. ROHINI,

What you say is true. Let the Government seize all the goods
they wish and auction them for nothing. The truth is that, under an
oppressive Government, those who follow the path of right can own
no property. If any is left with them, they should know that the
Government can seize it whenever it wishes to do so. Our struggle
does not at all depend on wealth and property.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2655

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

293

415. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 5, 1930
CHI. MANUDI,

I got your letter. Since you are learning lathi exercises, I shall
have to learn them from you. A letter in a word should not be split
from the rest of the word. If there is not sufficient space at the end of
a line to complete a word, you should leave the available space blank.
The correct word is not nabadai but nabalai. When the ‘u’ sound is
short, it should be indicated by the sign q and not by w . For the
present, pay attention to correctness in handwriting and not to
flourishes. If it is correct, flourishes will follow without any effort on
your part.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1507. Courtesy: Manubehn
Mashruwala

416. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 5, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

Do you want compliments for your fast and the cheerful spirit
you kept up during the period? I have already written to you about
what to eat. Avoid uncooked vegetables for the present, and certainly
do not eat pulses. You should take milk and curds and eat khakhra
and boiled vegetables; if you can get fruits, like papaiya and
mosambi, you will not require vegetables. I, personally, see no need
for medicines. Apart from any other consideration, I am generally
averse to taking any medicine of which the ingredients are not known
to us. The fast must have completely served the purpose of medicine.
I think it is necessary to continue sun-bath. See that you have enough
sleep.
Do make some arrangements about children’s education.
294

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I liked Dhurandhar’s letter very much. I have observed that
everything he does is neat and clean.
Convey my blessings to Sushila on the occasion of her birthday.
When you went to Rajkot, you must have called on Jamnadas.
Did you meet Manu? How is Purushottam’s health?
Is any work being done in Jamnadas’s school? Did you see any
activity in Rajkot in connection with the movement? I hope to have
news from you about all such matters.
Keep a watch on Dharmakumar’s bad habits. Explain the
position to Durga. If she pays attention to the matter, she can do
much.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
In line two of the 139th bhajan in the Bhajanavali, occurs an
expression, nijanamagrahi1 . If Narandas or some other Gujarati
knows its meaning, understand it from them and explain it to me. If
you yourself know it, so much the better.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10245; also C.W. 6693. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

417. LETTER TO CHAND TYAGI
December 5, 1930
BHAI TYAGIJI,

I was very pleased to have your letter. Take milk if the weakness
does not go despite a regular diet. Try cooked cereals before you do
that. Don’t be obstinate. I was sorry to learn of the conditions in
Gurukul. Is Abhayji aware of them? What was Ramdevji’s reply?
Baldev may well learn carpentry. Write to him, he should learn to
construct charkha, loom, takli, etc. Who is the principal in Vri[ndavan]
1

One who clings to the Name, which is his very self

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

295

Gu[rukul]? Tell Premrajji to write to me how all things are. What is
going on there?
BHARATIYA P ATHSHALA
F ARRUKHABAD BAPU
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I never knew that your Urdu letters were like print, they are very
good.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3266

418. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 6, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (DESAI),

Your letter consisted of three sheets, but they seemed to have
lost the middle sheet. I did not get it. If you remember its contents,
write to me again. Pyarelal’s health has become very good. His weight
is 122 pounds. He gets three pounds of milk, one pound of bread and
vegetables.
At present, both of us have become crazy about spinning.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1812

419. LETTER TO BULAKHIDAS
December 6, 1930
BHAI BULAKHIDAS,

God will indeed test us in a thousand ways. But that will not
make us lose heart. Both of you should devotedly go on doing your
work till the last.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3139

296

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

420. LETTER TO MAHENDRA DESAI
December 6, 1930
CHI. MANU (MANSINH),

I got your letter. You should take care and write a more legible
hand. How much do you spin daily?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7411. Courtesy: V. G. Desai

421. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI PANDYA
December 6, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I have your letter. Your interpretation of the term abhyasa is
correct, as also of chittavrittinirodha. Dhyana=Upasana, i.e., ultimately it could mean faithfully observing one’s own dharma. In my
view here the word dhyana is used in a narrower sense. Dhyana refers
to our silent sittings at the time of our worship and prayers. This
brings about a [sense of] dedication to the Lord, which in its turn
gives rise to a disinterested attitude. No social service is possible
without self-purification, which again develops in the course of social
service. It is all right therefore that doubts arise in your mind but you
should not fall into their currents. If they are resolved so much the
better; if not you should have faith that they would be solved as you
go on serving.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 334. Courtesy: Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

297

422. LETTER TO SHANTA SHANKARBHAI PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 6, 1930
CHI. SHANTA,

You did well to pay a visit to Shankarbhai. I was happy to learn
about Kamala’s self-control. If you display the virtue which your
name suggests and write your letters with a calm mind, your
handwriting will improve. If a person cannot fast by dropping even
one meal, he or she should learn to do so by patient effort, especially
one who wishes to observe brahmacharya. Do you know that only
recently Premabehn fasted for seven days? During the period of the
fast, moreover, she continued the daily chores, including washing
clothes and fetching water. And you say that, after you had missedone
meal, your hands were shaking. The cause was the condition of your
mind, and not of the body. Do you see?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3990

423. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI MADHAVJI
THAKKAR
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 7, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

I have your letter. What you say is true. No one ought to give up
his or her work for any reason whatever. This is the ideal. We should
not feel unhappy if everybody cannot act up to it. We should not
criticize such a person even in our thoughts. We should be strict in
judging our own weaknesses, but generous in judging others. This is
not goodness but the correct principle to follow. We have no
knowledge of the struggle which the person whose weakness we
observe may be making. It is the effort which matters. It may be that
we are free from a particular weakness, but that may not be the result
of any effort on our part. There is no merit in our refraining from
298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

flesh-eating, since we are accustomed from birth to do without it. But
there may be great merit in the self-denial of a person who was a
habitual meateater but has given up eating it now, though he may
repeatedly break his vow. Hence the right thing is that we ourselves
should do the best we can to follow a rule perfectly, and be satisfied
with what others can do. You have been getting good experience. I am
sure that you will come out successful from the test. The diet which
you follow is the right one.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6806

424. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 7, 1930
CHI. MATHURADAS,

Hitherto I had been an admiring reader of your articles. That
admiration remains, but now there is added to it the viewpoint of a
student and a critic. I see that your book is not a self-teacher on the
subject. By reading it one cannot learn carding. Even those who know
it a little would not be able to carry out the reforms you suggest. The
book is excellent in itself, but as a self-teacher it seems to me
incomplete. As far as I have understood your book I think you have
rejected the method you had explained to me and have followed a
new one. I thought I had already adopted it. But on reading your
book again, I find that I had done nothing new at all. Now my
suggestion is that you should send me a draft lesson as if you were
teaching me the method. It is not necessary to rewrite the whole of
your book. How much cotton should I hold out to the string at a time
and in how many pulls should it get carded? With how much cotton
should I begin the carding? Should the pad be arranged anew every
day and why should it be of half-carded cotton? And should that in its
turn be carded the same day? Should all the cotton put on the mat in
the beginning be carded the same day? As we pull at the string, the
bow also swings, doesn’t it? The left hand should be used only for
raising and lowering the carding-bow and it is moved forwards and
backwards by the action of the rod; isn’t that what you mean? If you
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

299

cannot find time to explain all this, don’t pay any attention to this
letter. Your main work is to examine those who are learning there and
improve their proficiency. I am like a by-stander who is looking on. I
know that I have no right to engage your attention on such matters
just now. This letter has two aims, one to point out the deficiencies in
the book and the other to seek help for myself. Treat the second as of
less importance. I have put briefly to Vithal the questions I have asked
above. Let him give me his time. He will learn something while doing
so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3749

425. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
December 7, 1930
DEAR DAUGHTER RAIHANA,

Now there are two teachers in place of one, a girl and a grey
beard. So the pupil is now done away with. Let us see what happens.
This exercise is enough, isn’t it.1 Anyway, am I not making progress?
Moreover, I have Pyarelal for companion now, and he is well-versed in
Urdu. However, I would not take up much of his time for this, as he
devotes all his time to spinning. You should, therefore, point out
mistakes in my spelling. You should not, in your present state of
health, spend much time for me. As I have plenty of leisure, I will read
your letters slowly and carefully. Mother is partial to Father. His
handwriting is an old man’s and yours that of a youngster. But let that
be. Though a person may own a white beard, he may be young in
mind and may play a thousand games—teach French to someone,
translate from other languages and revolve all manner of plans in his
mind. Others may be young in years, but old in mind. Of course I
would not say that you are quite that, but you will cease being so if
your septum trouble is cured. The news of that operation did not
frighten me. In fact, I am never frightened by an operation. But I am

1

300

These four sentences are in Urdu.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

certainly eager to have news about your health. Convey to Dahyabhai
my blessings or Vandemataram—whichever he desires. I was glad to
have that news about him.
Khuda Hafiz1 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9624

426. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
December 7, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I got both your letters. You have not been arrested so far,
though of course it would be good if you were. You should remain
unconcerned whether or not you are arrested. Go on patiently doing
all your work. I see that you have been having very useful experiences
there. I have Pyarelal with me now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9295

427. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 7, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),

I got your letter. By not attending prayers in order that they
might help in putting out the fire, the women offered real prayers.
This is an example of non-action in action. You fulfilled the real
purpose of prayers. Moreover, one can go on repeating Ramanama to
oneself even while running to the place where fire has started in order
to help put it out.
Finally, the person whose life is dedicated to service and who has
burnt his or her egotism lives his life in the spirit of prayer. We pray
morning and evening in order that we may be able to live thus, and,
1

This is in Urdu.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

301

therefore, when a fire breaks out, or in similar circumstances, one may
even drop prayers. But such occasions are rare.
Pour out amrita against the poison which you describe. Violence is conquered by non-violence, untruth by truth, lust by selfcontrol, anger by forbearance and avarice by generosity.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—6: G.S. Gangabehnne, p. 48; also C.W. 8767. Courtesy:
Gangabehn Vaidya

428. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 7, 1930
CHI. SUSHILA,

I knew two or three persons of the name ‘Stuart’. One was a
magistrate and afterwards became an officer in the army at the time of
the Zulu rebellion. Another was a lawyer. I had become fairly intimate
with the former. Is it that same Stuart who is there? Do you also wish
to follow Manilal? Will you carry with you or leave behind Sita alias
Dhairyabala alias whatever other names you have given her?
How many women work there?
To all of you,
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4778

429. LETTER TO PADMA
December 7, 1930
CHI. PADMA,

I got your letter. Because Gujarati is not your mother tongue,
why should your handwriting be bad? What connection has one’s
handwriting with the language in which one is writing? You may write
in the Devnagari script and show me that you can write neatly. A letter
302

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in a word is like a drawing. A person who knows drawing can write a
beautiful handwriting in any language.
If anyone presses us to eat food which we never eat, we should
politely but firmly refuse—in the end that will please the other person.
We should not be rude to any British officer whom we may
meet.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6116

430. LETTER TO TOTARAM SANADHYA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 7, 1930
BHAI TOTARAMJI,

Clay may be applied on the head. A mud-cap can be placed on
the head while working in the sun. I used it on many occasions during
the march.1 A towel spread over with clay and tied on the head forms
a cap and provides protection. How is Gangadevi’s health? Does
Dhiru behave well? Is he very boisterous?
Blessings from

BAPU
P ANDIT TOTARAMJI
HARIJAN ASHRAM
S ABARMATI JN.
B. B. & C. I. R LY .
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2540

1

The reference is to the Dandi March.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

303

431. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
December 7, 1930
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

Though I do not write to you frequently, you are always in my
thoughts. How is Mridula? Did you meet her? How is her health ?
Khurshedbehn will be well. Did you meet Mani? Do they all stay
together or separately?
God is kind. Is Bharati getting along all right?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G. N. 11556

432. LETTER TO BABALBHAI MEHTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 8, 1930
BHAI BABALBHAI,

I got your letter. There is no need to do prayashchitta for
having eaten in the company of all classes of persons in jail.
Prayashchitta has no reference to cleanliness or lack of it. It is
enjoined for eating food served by a person belonging to a
community other than one’s own. One who does not believe in this
restriction should never perform prayashchitta on that account. About
other matters, Kakasaheb will guide you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9455

433. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
December 8, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

I have reserved your letter to the last deliberately in the hope of
hearing from you before or on Monday in reply to my postcard
which I wrote to you on Thursday and which I hope you duly
received. It contained an inquiry about your health. This obstinate
304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

constipation is disturbing. I hope when this reaches you all the effect
of the attack would have worn out. I have got rid of mine by simply
dropping proteid food for a while. I am now taking proteid through
almonds. I should love not to go back to milk. Save now for a visible
weakness, the result has been excellent. Almonds I am taking very
cautiously and I cannot sustain the strength on green vegetables
merely and about an ounce of almonds. I have gone to the ounce
only for the last two days. I must take a cereal. I have not decided
what to take. I want to try bajri or juwari—whatever the jail chapati
for the day. If it agrees, the problem may be solved to my entire
satisfaction. But there will be no haste, certainly no obstinacy.
Immediately I feel the need, I shall go back to milk.
In another ten days I shall have finished the translation of the
Bhajanavali. It has given me such a joy. I am not satisfied with the
performance. Save for the fact that it is an act of love, it has no
othermerit—certainly no literary merit. But it will help you to know
the meaning of the bhajans and that was all I aimed at. And when this
is finished I hope to begin the other, viz., translation of preface to the
Gujarati Gita. I do not think I shall translate the verses, but I shall go
through one of the existing translations and where it is different from
mine, I shall note it and translate all the marginal notes. This will
simplify my work and save a great deal of labour. Please share this
with Kaka. He will feel interested in the proposal.
The improvements in the Gandiv have exceeded all
expectations. It now runs smoothly. It has the tension which was
absent. But I am not going to weary you with a description of the
improvements. I am describing them in a letter to Keshu. I am
sure that for speed it cannot now be excelled by any other wheel. But
that has still to be tested. My assurance won’t create more yarn, I
know.
You must give yourself ample rest and must not work under
tension. It is good for the wheel but not for human beings.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5424. Courtesy: Mirabehn; also G.N. 9658

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

305

434. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Thursday morning, December 4/9, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter yesterday evening. They pass on the packets to
me and post them to you with great care. It seems that the packets are
delayed in posting by a day.
The doctor wishes to come during Diwali. Does that mean after
nine months? Or does he mean the Christian Diwali? If he means the
Hindu Diwali, a great many things will have happened by then.
Mahalakshmi and Madhavji are very conscious of the deep
significance of a pledge. Hence both of them should be pained by a
violation of even the letter of a pledge. But we should be satisfied if
everyone keeps a pledge as he or she understands it and to the best of
his or her ability, and it seems that most people do so. You should
keep them vigilant.
Do what you think best about Giriraj. Since you will have to
bear the burden, I will accept your decision as the only proper one. I
know that Krishna will always have his own way. If he keeps good
health, I think he is likely to do great service in future.
I believe the same about Purushottam. Let him write to me from
time to time.
Pyarelal is improving quite well in health. I hope it will not go
down while he is with me. His being with me is like a goat being near
a wolf. A goat tied in front of a wolf will grow thinner every day even
if you feed it on the finest grass. Something of that sort used to
happen to Pyarelal. I hope that is not so now. I blame myself a good
deal for what used to be. Let us see what God wills. He will get what he
wants by way of food. At present, he takes milk and curds and eats
bread, vegetables and papaiya.
I had not imagined that Parnerkar would mismanage things as
badly as he has done. He is a worker with pure motives, but it seems
that he cannot cope with work. You did very well in being strict with
him and getting the accounts in order. I hope he will take rest now
and improve his health. Should we assume that the business at Bidaj is
running at a loss? If you think it necessary to reduce the scale or wind
up any of our activities, do so. Anyone who works in the spirit of
306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

non-attachment soon discovers the measure of his ability. He will
never be too eager to do things and never undertake anything beyond
his capacity. Really speaking, he does not have to seek work. Work
comes to him unsought, and he does his best to do full justice to it. To
the world he seems a man who has no work, for his face betrays no
anxiety and he never complains about the burden of work. In fact he
carries no burden. He entrusts his burdens to Lord Krishna and
dances as He wills.
Jethalal had written to me saying that he would send a report of
the work done. I have not received the report. I understand what you
say about Kamalabehn Lundi. That is what marriage is. The desire for
it has its source in lust and attachment. Marriage is called a sacrament
because it is a means of controlling lust. That is how it was conceived,
at any rate. But this intention is now forgotten, and so for most people
marriage has become a means of self-indulgence. I will write to
Gangabehn and Nanibehn.
I have been watching your experiment in diet. Give me detailed
information from time to time. It will certainly benefit you if you eat
only a small quantity of groundnuts. You may not even need them
when you have milk and curds. There is certainly some truth in the
advice which research-workers now give against eating many articles
at a time. All the foods are not simultaneously digested in the same
manner and to the same degree and, therefore, a mixture of too many
of them disturbs the stomach. The description of compassion was very
good indeed. You say that you have sent the printed copies of the
discourses; that may also mean that they are being dispatched now. I
have not received them.
Friday morning
I have given all details about my health and my diet in the letter
to Kakasaheb, and so I do not repeat them here. I had assumed that
you would send for Keshu and hear his complaint, and that was why I
did not write about it in my letter. But I give a summary now as far as
I remember what it was.
1. You get angry with him without any reason.
2. Once he tried to explain matters to you, but you did not
listen to him and shouted at him so loudly that all could
hear you and you said many improper things.
3. You are very partial to Kusum, Navin and Dhiru and do
not even listen to any complaints against them.
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

307

4. You have taken away from him the management of the
factory without any reason.
5. Damodardas left the Ashram out of disgust at your
partiality.
I have written to Keshu and told him that just as I used to be
under Maganlal’s spell and saw no faults in him, so am I under yours
and see no fault in you, and will not, therefore, be ready to believe
anything about you which I have not myself observed. I, however,
advised him to open his heart to you and tell you everything. He
merely said in reply that he was not satisfied by my letter. After that I
have kept quiet since he was to have a talk with Mahadev. Now you
should, yourself, call him and show to him his complaints which I
have described. If I have misunderstood him, he will correct my
mistake. If I have left out anything, he should add that. You may then
try to satisfy him if you can. I have written to him and advised him to
take up some work, no matter what it is. I have told Kakasaheb about
him. I have advised him, too, that he should see Kakasaheb. I have no
doubt that it will do him no good whatever to remain without work.
If Harilal Desai wants to take up service in the Ashram and if
you think there will be no harm in giving him a job do give him one.
He is unmethodical in work but he is a young man of transparent
sincerity of purpose. I think it will be worth while having him as one
of our workers. Did you read the long letter which . . .1 wrote to me?
He will produce no effect on me unless he tells me something
concrete observed by himself. I believe . . .2 to be a pure-hearted girl.
. . . 3 has also produced on me the impression of being pure in heart
and one who would speak the truth. I had a happy experience of him
also during the march. He had spread the fragrance of his character in
the Kashi Vidyapith too. It is true that he has been guiding . . . 4 and
trying to raise her level, but I have seen in him nothing but the attitude
of a brother and teacher.
Silence Day afternoon
Try to find soon a piece of leather to repair the soles of the
sandals. I find that the soles of the new pair, too, are none too strong.
Signs of its wearing out could be seen today. About my health and
1

The names have been omitted.
ibid
3
ibid
4
ibid
2

308

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

diet, you will find something in the letter to Mirabehn and a little in
the letter to Kakasaheb too. Hence I say nothing here.
These days I seem to be able to observe small things with greater
attention, and so I cannot help noticing the character of the
handwriting in the different letters received in the packets sent by you.
I am trying to improve my bad handwriting. You must have observed
this in every letter of mine. Bad handwriting is of course a form of
discourtesy. Discourtesy in every form is violence, but bad
handwriting is direct violence too. Anything which causes unnecessary
pain to our neighbour or to any living creature is nothing but
violence. I have twice as much experience as others of what pain and
inconvenience are caused to the reader by bad handwriting. I have, in
the first place, the experience of having to read letters written in bad
writing by others and also the experience of the pain caused to others
by my handwriting. My aim in saying this is to advise all inmates of
the Ashram, men and women, boys and girls, to take great care to
write a good hand. This requires no time but only some thought. One
must have love for the other party. Let all of them observe the
following rules:
1. They should leave enough space between the words.
2. They should avoid flourishes in the letters.
3. They should never leave a letter half-written.
4. They should not let the letters flow into one another.
5. As far as possible, they should write to no one in pencil.
If they follow these rules, they will certainly be able to make
their handwriting legible. Haste signifies attachment. Let no one write
in haste. Everyone should be content with what he or she can write
slowly and patiently.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There are 83 letters today, but No. 36 seems to have been
omitted and so, really speaking, there are 80 only. The 81st is for the
brother of the late Mangaldas Sheth. Have it delivered to him
immediately.
The separate sheets of the discourses are included in the total
number. 1
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I
1

For the text of the discourse which followed, vide “Letters on the Gita”—

Ch. IV.
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

309

435. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 9, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have had no letters from you for some time. I do feel worried.
But I believe that everything must be all right. God will look after
you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3383

436. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
December 11, 1930
MY DEAR KUMARAPPA,

I note what you say about Kamalabehn. May she prosper in the
right sense!! ‘This correspondence’ need not cease. I would gladly
continue it if you will further cross-question me. Many things I have
noticed become clear through sheer lapse of time and consequent,
unconscious observation.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10083

310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

437. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
December 11, 1930
MY DEAR ANAND,

I have left not one single letter of yours unanswered. I hardly
think they have been intercepted. I have answered all your questions. I
do hope you will get them all.
For avoiding constipation try green leafy vegetables and
tomatoes only without any protein food for two or three days. This
plan has worked well with me. Alternatively try stewed French plums
without anything else.
Love to you both.
BAPU

[PS.]
I am well but am not taking fresh fruit.
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

438. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
December 11, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR) ,

I got your letter. I observe no harmful effect on my health. I see
that the changes have done me nothing but good. Do not worry on
my account at all.
Pyarelal’s time is taken up as under: 375 rounds on the
spinning-wheel, 100 rounds on the takli and making the required
number of slivers. This work leaves him very little free time. The takli
takes up two hours of his time. I, too, do almost the same work. I spin
100 rounds on the takli, but am satisfied with 275 on the wheel. The
total comes to 375.
What you say about the girls is correct. Write to me more
plainly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1813

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

311

439 LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
December 11, 1930
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

I have your beautiful letter. What you have thought about Father
is only right. I shall say nothing more about it. I hope you were
successful with Ghanshyamdas.
As regards the motherland being considered as your mother
there is a flaw in your thought. Just as loving one’s mother does not
mean that one should not love another’s mother, so also loving one’s
motherland does not mean hating other countries. Where there is no
love for the motherland love of the world is an illusion. And since the
motherland has a greater right over us, being proud of the motherland
without any ill will for other countries is only proper. I cannot directly
care for the children of the whole world. But if I care lovingly for the
children who are in my keeping I shall to that extent be doing service
to the children of the world. The case of the motherland is exactly
similar. After all it does matter in which land and in which atmosphere
we are born. Ahimsa has its origin in this thought. In so far as ahimsa
means universal love it can have direct application in our serving the
creatures who are nearest us.
I hope you will now take Prabhavati to the Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

440. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
December 12, 1930
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

If one does not like a particular name, he should himself suggest
a better one. If Dhiru suggests a better one, we will keep it. As far as I
am concerned, I like the name ‘Magan’ for your spinning-wheel. The
three reasons given by you are even more appropriate.
Do not at all think about how long you will have to stay in
Almora. You know of my desire of setting up an ashram there. Just
take it that you are running an ashram on a rented place. A person
312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

who runs an ashram is not different from others. Any place where the
rules of an ashram are followed, is like an ashram. You are a society
of eight persons. You have with you there the Gita, the Ramayana
and the spinning-wheel. What more do you want? For running the
ashram, it is necessary to have some persons. Just take it that you three
are the ones sent there for the purpose.
Devotion of Tulsidas was the devotion of the future generation.
Rama in a human form did not exist in Tulsidas’s time. His utterances
are imaginary . . .1 even if Rama in a human form did exist in his time,
his origin as God in human form took place in a later period.
Compare the seventh chapter of the Gita, to the grief of Rama. “I am
the Creator of all the three qualities.” Wherever we find deceit and
fault in God, we need not accept Tulsidas’s saying that God has no
faults and that we should not do as He does. We have to observe the
rules of proper conduct. We cannot abide by the text of the inimitable
book of Tulsidas, but have to abide by its inner meaning. What does
not appeal to us should be set aside. One experiences the mind’s
quality of forgetfulness every minute. Think over it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32944

441. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 12, 1930
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

Your letter. I gave up fresh fruit on learning of the sufferings
outside. Now Pyarelal is with me. Eating, drinking, [spinning] yajna
are all karma or actions. An action that does not deserve to be
undertaken is vikarma or perverse action. Akarma is absence of action,
i.e., action undertaken by man without attachment or desire for the
fruit. A perverse action cannot be undertaken without attachment. Do
write if you have any doubts. Your health must be good when you
come out [of jail].
We both are well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2385

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

313

442. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
December 13, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

Your p.c. was duly received. The absence of any further news
from you, I take to mean perfect restoration. After each illness you
are soon well, because the treatment followed is natural, but every
sickness leaves behind it a legacy of weakness unless the system is
allowed full rest and the mind relieved of tension. I suppose the
mental control is the most difficult. For this the sovereign remedy is
the application of the Gita. Each time mind suffers a shock, there is
failure in application. Let good news as well as bad pass over you like
water over a duck’s back. When we hear any, our duty is merely to
find out whether any action is necessary and if it is, to do it as an
instrument in the hands of Nature without being affected by or
attached to the result. This detachment appears a scientific necessity
when we remember that in bringing about a result more than one
instrument is employed. Who shall dare say ‘I have done it’[?] I know
you know all this. Nevertheless, I drive the truth home, so that from
the brain it may percolate to the heart. So long as it remains in the
brain only, it is a dead weight on it. Any truth received by the brain
must immediately be sent down to the heart. When it is not, it suffers
abortion and then it lies on the brain as so much poisonous matter.
What poisons the brain poisons the whole system. Hence the necessity
of using the brain as it should be merely as a transmitting station.
Whatever is there received is either transmitted to the heart for
immediate action or it is rejected there and then as being unfit for
transmission. Failure of the brain to perform this function properly is
the cause of almost all the ills that flesh is heir to as also for mental
exhaustion. If the brain simply performed its function, there need
never be any brain-fag. So whenever we suffer from illness generally
there is not only a dietetic error but there is also failure on the part of
the brain to function properly. The author of the Gita evidently saw
this and gave the world the sovereign remedy in the clearest possible
language. Whenever therefore anything preys upon your mind, you
should meditate on the central teaching of the Gita and throw off the
burden. Let us hope there never will be a recurrence of the terrible
constipation.
314

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As to Kumarappa if you have enough charity and goodwill
forward to him all the criticism you receive leaving the result to take
care of itself. It is a duty you owe to him to let him have the criticisms.
You may now use Kaka too for the purpose of sending your
messages.
For me the milkless experiment continues as yet without any
bad result. The weight has suffered a further decrease of 3 Ib. but the
vitality remains. One cause of the decrease in weight is that I am most
cautious about increasing the quantity of cereals and almonds I take.
Almonds remain at 3 tolas and bajri and juwari bhakhari a quarter,
i.e., about 2 tolas each time, i.e., at 11 and 5. I may soon increase the
weight. Anyway the condition of the bowels is extraordinarily good. I
quite agree with you that the enema as a habit is a bad thing and
should be got rid of, if at all possible. It has been possible with the
dropping of milk as it had become when, on going to Wardha, you
will recall, I had dropped milk. Indeed but for my folly in hastily
following Gopalrao I might still have been flourishing on the diet I
had then adopted. The present diet is a slight modification of the
Wardha one.
Whenever you are ill, you will not hesitate to write to me at once
without waiting for the weekly letter day.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 9283. Courtesy: Mirabehn

443. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
December 13, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

I got all your letters together. It is good that the women have
been arrested. I give all the news about myself in the common letter
and, therefore, say nothing in letters to individual persons. My health
is all right. I have given up milk at present and eat a rotla of jowar or
bajra, vegetables and three tolas of almonds. And in addition, lemons
of course, and sometimes dates. This diet has helped me to get rid of
the need for enemas. But I must wait and see whether I can keep it up.
The weight has gone down, but I do not worry about that at all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9296
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

315

444. LETTER TO NIRMALA DESAI
December 13, 1930
CHI. NIRMALA,

I got your letter. I do not remember any letter of yours to which
I did not reply. Why did Mother go back? Did she not feel happy
there? Or had she come only for a few days? How is your leg now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9457

445. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA TRIVEDI
December 13, 1930
CHI. RAMACHANDRA,

I have your letter. Write in ink and shape the letters well. Good
that all have arrived at the Ashram. Tell Jiji1 to give up the practice of
untouchability and live in peace. There is no dharma in untouchability.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5265

446. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 14, 1930
CHI. SHARDA,

I am not aware that I have not replied to your letter. It would not
be surprising if I had forgotten in my hurry. You are constantly
harassed by asthma. Why don’t you drive it out? There must be
something wrong with your diet or you may be getting excited. One
does get asthma when one’s feelings are excited.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9895. Courtesy: Shardabehn G. Chokhawa1a
1

Literally, ‘elder sister’, here addressee’s mother who was then at the

Ashram.

316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

447. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
December 14, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I have your letter. I understand what you say about punishing
children. Your argument is an old one. It is a vicious circle.
Punishment did you good and so you think you should punish the
children. When the children grow up, they will do the same. This is
exactly the argument by which people justify their faith in violence. It
is our aim to rise above this misleading experience. I admit that that
requires patience. We have come together in the Ashram to cultivate
that patience. Our aim is not just to impart education to children or
teach them discipline, but to build character in them. Education,
discipline, etc., are means to that end. If the result of building
character in them is that education and discipline .are neglected, let
that be so. I understand your argument, though. I also see that there is
no ill will behind your use of the rod. But there are certainly anger
and impatience behind them. May I make a suggestion? Call a
meeting of the children. If any of them say, ‘You may punish us, and
in this manner, if we play mischief or disobey you’, you may punish
them in the manner which they suggest. You should not punish those
who do not want youto punish them. If you try this method, you will
see that you do not need to punish them. You should keep up this
discussion. Do not give up arguing out of impatience or despair. Till
your reason is convinced of what I say, you should follow your own
path. I know that you are dedicated to truth and, therefore, I am sure
that you will realize the truth ultimately.
Your diet seems to be all right.
You did not describe your visit to Rajkot.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10246; also C.W. 6694. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

317

448. LETTER TO PADMA
December 14, 1930
CHI. PADMA,

I have your letter. This time the handwriting was better. Improve
it still further. I was happy to learn that there was nothing serious
about the tumour. All the same, take care of your health. I am glad
that you write every detail in the diary. To what term has Sarojinidevi
been sentenced?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6117

449. LETTER TO VANAMALA PARIKH
December 14, 1930
CHI. VANAMALA,

As you used quite a big slip of paper for me, I have preserved it.
If Dhiru uses bad language, you should lovingly persuade him not to
do so. You should also inform Premabehn.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5756

450. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 14, 1930
BHAI NANABHAI (AKOLA),

I have your letter. You have got a worthy son-in-law indeed. He
has gone away to live in a rest-house. And now Sushila will follow.
And then Tara. Surendra also has been pressing his name as a
candidate. I feel happy. This is true dharma. Till now, we used to
enjoy pleasures in the name of religion. If Tara can stand it, let her
318

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

take sun-baths. You also will benefit considerably from them. Along
with them, you should take hip-baths in the prescribed manner. And
the food should be simple.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4779

451. LETTER TO KUNVARJI MEHTA
December 14, 1930
BHAI KUNVARJI,

I got your letter full of information. Ask Jugatram too to write. I
am all right wherever I am, whether in or out of jail. God holds the
string and I dance as He pulls it.
Kanjibhai’s self-sacrifice is great, and his courage greater still.
Convey my compliments to him.
I have written to Napoleon.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2689

452. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 14, 1930
CHI. MANI (SARDARIJI),

Now that you are out of prison, I expect to get from you a letter
filled with details of your experience. How do you do?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 75

1

Chhotabhai Kalyanji Mehta

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

319

453. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 14, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

I got your letter. I have already replied to Kalavati. The
treatment being given to Mother seems to be all right. There is no
doubt that constipation is the root cause of many diseases. I will
describe for your information the experiment I am making at present,
which has succeeded in curing my constipation at least. For two or
three days I took boiled leafy vegetables, together with which I had
also boiled unripe tomatoes. That by itself cured the constipation.
Then I started adding crushed almonds, gradually increasing the
quantity to three tolas and now I have been taking a few bhakharis
made of jowar and bajra flour. This seems to keep up my strength.
Of course I can say nothing definitely. I can do that if I can go on
like this for two or three months. Anyone who wishes to follow my
example should do so with great care. Both Santok and Radha know
about the two types of bath described in Kuhne’s book. They should
prove very beneficial for Kalavati. We do not have a copy of the
book 1 on mouth hygiene.
Convey my compliments to Dr. Sarjuprasadji. I wish him
success in his work.
How do I deserve any blessing for the low prices of grain?
Wouldn’t the cultivators, for their part, curse me? There are several
reasons for the prevailing low prices. As far as I am concerned, I see
no objection to making extracts from my letters provided they are
taken with Narandas’s consent.
Pyarelal is happy and cheerful. He has two editions of the
Ramayana with him, and he is not therefore, anxious to have other
books now. After coming here, he had perforce to stop his reading.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5266

1

320

Entitled Mukhacharyavijnana
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

454. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
YERAVDA MANDIR ,

December 14, 1930
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

Your letter. That 1,000 copies of the Bengali edition of
Anasaktiyoga have been sold augurs well. In winter mornings it is
good to expose as much of the body as possible to the sun rays
between 9 and 10. It is also beneficial to take some raw onion with roti
by way of medicine during winter. Onion has many qualities, though
some drawbacks too. The main drawback is that of smell, but that can
be avoided by taking a small quantity.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1679

455. LETTER TO SHANTA
December 14, 1930
CHI. SHANTA,

Your letter. Looking after Jiji is also a kind of national service.
It should be performed without attachment. Jiji needs to be served and
there is nobody else who can do it. We have no self-interest in this
service.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5268

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

321

456. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA TRIVEDI
Sunday [On or after December 14, 1930] 1
CHI. RAMACHANDRA,

The letter bears no signature, but it is certainly from you. Your
effort in improving your writing is good. Keep it up. Tell Jiji that, in
regard to observance of dharma the question of Father’s pleasure or
displeasure does not arise. Ultimately everyone is reconciled if we
observe dharma. We have the example of Mirabai before us. Jiji
should not practise untouchability if she regards it a sin, as she ought
to.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5291

457. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
December 15, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

From Jayaprakash’s letter, it seems you must be in the
Ashram now. It has been arranged now that letters from you should
be handed over to me as soon as they are received. But I got no
postcard or letter either today or yesterday. If you have still not gone
over to the Ashram, do so immediately. Even after you have gone
there, you should write to me daily for some time. Your fainting fits
must stop, and I think they will in the Ashram. If you require fruit,
etc., don’t hesitate to ask for it. And don’t plunge into work
immediately. You have done enough work in the Ashram in the past,
and hence you should take complete rest now. Don’t burden your
mind with worries. Everything will happen as God wills it. Meditate
over the hymn Premal Jyoti 2 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3384
1

From the contents it appears this letter was written after the letter to the
addressee dated December 13, 1930. The Sunday following it was December 14.
2
A Gujarati rendering, by Narasinhrao Divetia, of Newman’s Lead, Kindly
Light

322

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

458. “ASHRAM BHAJANAVALI” 1
1

¬˝ÊÃ— S◊⁄UÊÁ◊ UqÔUÁŒ ‚¢S»§È⁄UŒÊà◊Ãûfl◊˜Ô˜
Early in the morning I call to mind that Being which is felt in
the heart, which is sat (the eternal), chit (knowledge) and sukham
(bliss), which is the state reached by perfect men and which is the
super-state. I am that immaculate Brahma which ever notes the states
of dream, wakefulness and deep sleep, not this body, the compound
made of the elements—earth, water, space, light and air.
20-12-1930 2
2

¬˝ÊÃèÊ¸¡ÊÁ◊ ◊Ÿ‚Êflø‚Ê◊ªêÿ◊˜Ô
In the early morning I worship Him who is beyond the reach of
thought and speech and yet by whose grace all speech is possible. I
worship Him whom the Vedas describe as neti neti (not this, not this).
Him they, the sages, have called God of gods, the unborn, the unfallen,
the source of all.
7-5-1930

1

Ashram Bhajanavali is a collection of devotional songs which formed part of
the morning and evening prayers at Gandhiji’s ashrams. They were in various
languages and taken from various sources, some of them obscure, but all fairly
popular in Hindu religious tradition. Gandhiji rendered these into English for
Mirabehn’s benefit, in the first place, during his imprisonment in Yeravda Central
Prison. The work of translation was begun on May 6, 1930 and the last hymn was
translated on December 15.
In 1934 George Allen & Unwin Ltd. brought out an adaptation of the work by
John S. Hoyland. (For Gandhiji’s permission for its publication, vide “Letter to J. S.
Hoyland”, 15-12-1933.) But in order to make the poems acceptable to English
readers, Hoyland omitted a great deal, “chiefly Indian names and symbolism” but also
much else so that at places it is difficult to recognize the original in the adaptation.
See for instance Gandhiji’s translation of verse 8 and Hoyland’s adaptation of it (p.
388).
The version reproduced here is taken from a photostat of the original work in
Gandhiji’s hand (C. W. 4903).
2
Note by Gandhiji: “1st verse rewritten on 20-12-1930.” Gandhiji first wrote
it on May 6, again on November 20 and then finally on this date.
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

323

3

¬˝ÊÃŸ¸◊ÊÁ◊ Ã◊‚— ¬⁄U◊∑§¸flÁÊ¸◊˜Ô
In the early morning I bow to Him who is beyond darkness, who
is like the sun, who is perfect, ancient, called Purushottama, (the best
among men) and in whom (through the veil of darkness) we fancy the
whole universe as appearing even as (in darkness) we imagine a rope
to be a snake.
8-5-1930
4

‚◊Èº˝fl‚Ÿ ŒÁfl ¬fl¸ÃSÃŸ◊Á«U‹ –
O! Goddess Earth with the ocean for thy garment, mountains for
thy breasts, thou consort of Vishnu (the Preserver), I bow to thee;
forgive the touch of my feet.
NOTE. Bowing to the earth, we learn to be humble as the earth
which supports the beings that tread upon it. Earth therefore is rightly
the consort of the Preserver.
9-5-1930
5

ÿÊ ∑ ãŒãŒÈÃÈcÊ⁄U„UÊ⁄UäÊfl‹Ê ÿÊ ‡ÊÈèÊ˝flSòÊÊflÎÃÊ
May the Goddess Saraswati (of learning), the destroyer completely of black ignorance, protect me. She who is white as the mogra
flower or the moon and a garland of snow, who has worn white robes,
whose hands are adorned with the beautiful bamboo of her veena (a
kind of violin), who is seated on a white lotus and who is always
adored by Brahma, Vishnu, Siva and the other gods.
10-5-1930
6

flRÃÈá«U ◊„UÊ∑§Êÿ ‚Íÿ¸∑§ÊÁ≈U‚◊¬˝èÊ –
O God with a curved mouth, big body, refulgent like ten million
suns, keep me ever free from harm whilst doing beneficent acts.
NOTE. This is addressed to God represented by the mystic letter
‘ ˙’ pronounced ‘Om’. Mark its curved mouth and big body. Its
mystic splendour has been sung by the Upanishads.
11-5-1930
324

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

7

ªÈLU ’¸sÔÊ ªÈLU ÁflcáÊÈªÈ¸LU Œ¸flÊ ◊„U‡fl⁄U—
Guru (teacher) is Brahma, he is Vishnu, he is Mahadev, he is
the geat Brahman itself. I bow to that guru.
NOTE. This refers of course to the spiritual teacher. This is not a
mechanical or artificial relationship. The teacher is not all these in
reality but he is all that to the disciple who finds his full satisfaction in
him and imputes perfection to him who gave him a living faith in a
living God. Such a guru is a rarity, at least nowadays. The best thing is
to think of God Himself as one’s Guru or await the Light in faith.
12-5-1930
8

[≥ÊÊãÃÊ∑§Ê⁄¢U èÊÈ¡ª≥ÊÿŸ¢ ¬kŸÊèÊ¢ ‚È⁄≥Ê◊˜]
I bow to Vishnu, who is peace incarnate, who lies on a snaky
bed, from whose navel grows the lotus, who is the supreme lord of the
gods, who sustains the universe, who is like unto the sky, who has the
colour of clouds, whose body is blissful, who is the lord of Lakshmi
(goddess of good fortune), who has lotus-like eyes, who is knowable
by the yogis through meditation, who dispels the fear of the wheel of
birth and death and who is the sole Ruler of all the worlds.1
13-5-1930
9

[∑§⁄Uø⁄UáÊ∑§ÎÃ¢ flÊÄ∑§Êÿ¡¢ ∑§◊¸¡¢ flÊ]
Forgive, O merciful and blessed Mahadev, all those sins of mine,
of commission or omission, mental or actual and whether done

1

Hoyland’s adaptation of this reads:
I bow to Thee, O Saviour-God:
The universe is stayed in place by Thee;
To those who seek Thee Thou dost show Thyself;
Known in the heart’s most secret meditation:
Thou drivest far the fear of death, the fear of life:
And Thou, Thou only,
Commandest by Thy sovereign sway all worlds;
To Thee I bow, O Saviour-God.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

325

through the hands or the feet, the speech, the ears or the eyes. Let Thy
will be done.
14-5-1930
10

[Ÿàfl„¢U ∑§Ê◊ÿ ⁄UÊÖÿ¢ Ÿ Sflª¸ ŸÊ¬ÈŸèÊ¸fl◊˜]Ô
I desire neither earthly kingdom nor paradise, no, not even
release from birth and death. I desire only the release of afflicted life
from misery.
15-5-1930
11

[SflÁSÃ ¬˝¡ÊÈŸ— ¬Á⁄U¬Ê‹ŸÃÃÊ◊˜Ô]
Blessed be the people; may the rulers protect their kingdoms
by just means, may it be always well with the cow1 and the Brahmin 2 ;
may all the peoples be happy.
16-5-1930
12

[Ÿ◊SÃ ‚Ã Ã ¡ªà∑§Ê⁄UáÊÊÿ]
I bow to Thee the sat (see first verse), the cause of the universe, I
bow to Thee the chit (1st verse), the refuge of the world, I bow to Thee
the one without a second, the giver of salvation, I bow to Thee the
Brahman, the all-pervading, the eternal.
17-5-1935
13

[àfl◊∑¢§ ≥Ê⁄Uáÿ¢ àfl◊∑¢§ fl⁄Uáÿ◊˜Ô]
Thou art the only refuge, Thou art the only one to be desired,
Thou art the sole protector of the universe, Thou art self-revealed,
Thou art the sole creator, preserver and destroyer of the universe,
Thou alone art supreme, immovable, unchangeable.
18-5-1930
1
2

326

Note by Gandhiji: “Cow=agriculture”
Note by Gandhiji: “Brahmin=education”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

14

[èÊÿÊŸÊ¢ èÊÿ¢ èÊËcÊáÊ¢ èÊËcÊáÊÊŸÊ◊˜Ô]
Of all the fears, Thou art the chief, of all that is terrible Thou art
the most terrible, Thou art the motion of all life, Thou art the holy of
holies, Thou art the sole regulator of the mightiest places, Thou art the
greatest among the great. Thou art the chief among all protections.
19-5-1930
15

[flÿ¢ àflÊ¢ S◊⁄UÊ◊Ê flÿ¢ àflÊ¢ èÊ¡Ê◊Ê]
We think of Thee, we worship Thee, we bow to Thee as the
witness of this universe, we seek refuge in Thee the sat, our only
support, yet Thyself needing none, the ruler, the barque in the midst
of this ocean of endless birth and death.
20-5-1930
16

[Áfl¬ŒÊ ŸÒfl Áfl¬Œ— ‚¢¬ŒÊ ŸÒfl ‚¢¬Œ—]
That which goes by the name of adversity is not such; nor is that
prosperity which goes by that name. To forget God is adversity; ever
to think of Him is prosperity.
21-5-1930
17

[ÁflcáÊÈflÊ¸ ÁòÊ¬È⁄UÊãÃ∑§Ê èÊflÃÈ flÊ ’˝sÔÊ ‚È⁄Uãº˝Ê˘âÊflÊ]
Let him be whosoever he may be whether Vishnu or Mahadev,
Brahma or Indra, Sun or Moon, Lord Buddha or Mahavir, obeisance
be ever only to him who is free from the poisonous effect of desire
and anger, who is filled with compassion for all life and who is
purified by a perfectly virtuous life.
22-5-1930
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

327

18

[Á„U⁄Uá◊ÿŸ ¬ÊòÊáÊ ‚àÿSÿÊÁ¬Á„UÃ¢ ◊Èπ◊˜Ô]

1

The face of truth is overlaid with a golden lid, O God, remove it
so that I may see the true light.
23-5-1930
19

[•ÇŸ Ÿÿ ‚È¬âÊÊ ⁄Êÿ •S◊ÊŸ˜Ô]

2

O God, the Knower of all the ways, lead us along the right path
so as to enable us to reach the goal; wrestle with our dark sins; we
make obeisance to Thee again and again.
24-5-1930
20

[üÊÿ≥ø ¬˝ÿ≥ø ◊ŸÈcÿ◊Ã—]

3

Both that which is good and that which is pleasing face man. A
wise man will discriminate and will certainly prefer the good to the
pleasing whereas the foolish one will prefer the pleasing thinking it to
be profitable.
25-5-1930
21

[‚fl¢¸ flŒÊ ÿà¬Œ¢ •Ê◊ŸÁãÃ]

4

I shall tell thee in one word that state which all the Vedas
establish, to which all the austerities are dedicated and desiring which
devotees observe brahmacharya. It is Om.5
26-5-1930
1

Ishopanishad, 15
Ishopanishad, 18
3
Kathopanishad, I. ii. 2
4
Ibid
5
Note by Gandhiji: “4, page 24, 6th ed.”
2

328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

22

[Ÿ ÃòÊ ‚ÍÿÊ¸ èÊÊÁÃ Ÿ øãº˝ÃÊ⁄U∑§◊˜Ô]

1

The sun does not carry its light there, nor the moon, nor the
stars, not even lightning can penetrate there, how then can this fire?
All of them derive their light from It and all this (universe) is lighted
by Its splendour.2
27-5-1930
23

[Ã¬—üÊf ÿ sÔÈ¬fl‚ãàÿ⁄Uáÿ]

3

Those knowing ones who with austerities and faith live the forest
life in peace begging for their food becoming sinless enter through
the sunny gate that abode where dwells that well-known immortal
changeless Being.4
28-5-1930
24

[•Êà◊ÊŸ¢ ⁄UÁâÊŸ¢ ÁflÁf ‡Ê⁄UË⁄¢U ⁄UâÊ◊fl ÃÈ]

5

Regard the soul as the warrior, body as his chariot, reason as the
charioteer, mind as the reins; they call senses horses, sense-objects
meadows; wise men have said that the soul acts through the mind and
the senses. 6
29-5-1930

1

Kathopanishadm II. ii. 15
Note by Gandhiji: “This should have been later. It is the translation of verse
14, p. 28, 6th edition.”
3
Mundakopanishad, I. ii. 11
4
Note by Gandhiji: “Verse 15, p. 28, 6th ed.”
5
Kathopanishad, I. iii. 3-4
6
Note by Gandhiji: “5-6, p. 24”
2

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

329

25

[ÁflôÊÊŸ‚Ê⁄UÁâÊÿ¸SÃÈ ◊Ÿ—¬˝ª˝„UflÊãŸ⁄U—]

1

He whose reason is like an experienced charioteer and whose
mind is under control like the reins crosses over safely and safely
comes to the journey’s end, the excellent abode of Vishnu.
30-5-1930
26

[©UÁûÊc∆UÃ ¡Êª˝Ã ¬˝Êåÿ fl⁄UÊÁãŸ’ÊäÊÃ]

2

Awake, arise, and learn wisdom from the wise. The sages say to
traverse this way (through life) is as difficult as it is to walk along the
edge of a razor.
31-5-1930
27

[•ÁÇŸÿ¸âÊÒ∑§Ê èÊÈflŸ¢ ¬˝Áflc≈UÊ]

3

Even as fire though always the same assumes different forms as
it passes through different media, so does the indwelling spritt, though
essentially always the same, appear different passing through different
media
1-5-1930
28

[flÊÿÈÿ¸âÊÒ∑§Ê èÊÈflŸ¢ ¬˝Áflc≈UÊ ]

4

Even as the air though always the same assumes different forms
as it passes through different media so does the indwelling spirit,
though essentially always the same, appear different passing through
different media.
2-6-1930

1

Kathopanishad, I. iii. 9
Ibid.
3
Kathopanishad, II. ii. 9
4
Ibid.
2

330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

29

[‚ÍÿÊ¸ ÿâÊÊ ‚fl¸‹Ê∑§Sÿ øˇÊÈ⁄U˜]

1

Even as the sun which gives light to all the eyes remains unaffected by the external defects of these eyes so is the oversoul
dwelling in all that lives not affected by the, external woes of
mankind.
3-6-1930
30

[∞∑§Ê fl‡ÊË ‚fl¸èÊÍÃÊãÃ⁄UÊà◊Ê]

2

Those wise men alone, not others, attain eternal happiness who
feel dwelling in themselves that one all-controlling power which3
pervades all life and though one appears as many.
4-6-1930
31

[ÁŸàÿÊ˘ÁŸàÿÊŸÊ¢ øÃŸ‡øÃŸÊŸÊ◊˜] Ô
4

Those wise men alone, not others, attain eternal peace who feel
dwelling in themselves that God who is the permanent essence among
the impermanent, who is the life in all that lives and who though one
fulfils the desires of many.5
5-6-1930
32

[¬⁄UËˇÿÔ ‹Ê∑§ÊŸ˜Ô ∑§◊¸ÁøÃÊŸ˜] Ô
6

Having realized (the impermanence of) the status to be obtained
by works, a Brahmin should cultivate detachment. Stability cannot
come from activity. To know that he should reverently approach a
teacher who knows the Vedas and is intent on God.
6-6-1930
1

Kathopanishad, II. ii. 9.
Ibid.
3
The source has “who”.
4
Kathopanishad, II. ii. 13
5
Note by Gandhiji: “For 14 & 15 verses see leaf 8.”
6
Mundakopanishad, I. ii. 12
2

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

331

33

[ÃS◊Ò ‚ ÁflmÊŸ˜Ô ©U¬‚ãŸÊÿ ‚êÿ∑§˜Ô] Ô
1

To him thus come with due reverence, calm of mind brought
under control, the wise teacher imparts divine knowledge whereby one
really knows that permanent Being who is truth incarnate.
7-6-1930
34

Ô [¬˝áÊflÊ äÊŸÈ— ‡Ê⁄UÊsÔÊà◊Ê ’˝sÃÀ‹ˇÿ◊ÈëÿÃ] Ô
2

Pranav (Om) is the bow, the spirit is the arrow and Brahm[an] is
the target; therefore one must shoot unerringly so that the spirit
becomes one with Brahm[an] like the arrow (with the target).
8-6-1930
35

[ÁèÊlÃ qŒÿª˝ÁãâÊ Á¿ÔlãÃ ‚fl¸‚¢‡ÊÿÊ—ÔUÔ]

3

When one realizes Godhead one’s 4 heart is rid of difficulties,
doubts vanish and works do not bind.
9-6-1930
36

[’˝rÊÔÒflŒ¢ •◊ÎÃ¢ ¬È⁄USÃÊÃ˜Ô]

5

This eternal Brahm[an] is before and behind, is in the right and
the left, is below and above, pervades everywhere, is the universe, is
above all.
10-6-1930
1

Mundakopanishad, I. ii. 12
Ibid
3
Ibid
4
The source has ‘‘his”.
5
Mundakopanishad, II. ii. II
2

332

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

37

[‚àÿŸ ‹èÿSÃ¬‚Ê sÔcÊ •Êà◊Ê]

1

Self-realization comes always through truth, tapas (austerity),
true knowledge and brahmacharya. Seekers who have become free
from sins realize the immaculate refulgent spirit within themselves.
11-6-1930
38

[‚àÿ◊fl ¡ÿÃ ŸÊŸÎÃ◊˜Ô]

2

Truth alone triumphs, never untruth. That way which the sages
whose purpose is fulfilled traverse, which is the way of the gods and
where is the great abode of truth opens (for us) through truth.
12-6-1930
39

[ŸÊÿ◊Êà◊Ê ¬˝fløŸŸ ‹èÿÊ]

3

This spirit is not attainable by the Vedic study or by feats of
intellect or by attending discourses. It is attainable only by him who
woos it. It reveals itself to such a one.
13-6-1930
40

[ŸÊÿ◊Êà◊Ê fl‹„UËŸŸ ‹èÿÊ]

4

This realization is not possible for the weak or the indolent or
those who resort to unmeaning austerities. But the soul of the wise
man who remedies these defects enters the abode of Brahm[an].
13-6-1930

1

Mundakopanishad, II. ii. II
Ibid
3
Ibid
4
lbid
2

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

333

41

[‚ê¬˝ÊåÿÒŸ¢ ´§cÊÿÊ ôÊÊŸÃÎåÃÊ—]

1

All those who have well understood the meaning of life through
Vedant and science, whose hearts are purified through sannyasa, being
intent on the immortal, on death enter Brahmaloka and become free.
15-6-1930
42

[flŒÊãÃÁflôÊÊŸ‚ÈÁŸÁ‡øÃÊâÊÊ¸—]

2

All those who have well understood the meaning of life through
Vedant and science, whose hearts are purified through sannyasa, being
intent on the immortal, on death enter Brahmaloka and become free.
15-6-1930
43

[ÿâÊÊ Ÿl— SÿãŒ◊ÊŸÊ— ‚◊Èº˝]

3

Just as rivers rushing towards the sea leave their names and
forms and merge in the sea, even so do wise men leave their names
and forms and merge in the paramount divine Being.
16-6-1930
44

[‚ ÿÊ „U flÒ ÃÃ˜Ô. ¬⁄U◊¢ ’˝sÔ flŒ, ’˝sÔÒfl èÊflÁÃ]

4

He who knows that great Brahm[an] I becomes It. In his family
no one ignorant of Brahm[an] is possible. He passes grief and sin. He
becomes free from the bonds of the heart and becomes immortal.
17-6-1930

1

Mundakopanishad, III. ii. 5
Ibid
3
Ibid.
4
Ibid.
2

334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

45

[ÿÃÊ flÊøÊ ÁŸflÃ¸ãÃ •¬˝Êåÿ ◊ÊŸ‚Ê ‚„]

1

He who knows that Brahm[an] which not reaching both speech
and mind return, fears nothing. He does not burn thinking, ‘Why have
I not done this good thing? Why have I committed that sin?
18-6-1930
46

[ÿÈflÊ SÿÊÃ˜Ô ‚ÊäÊÈ ÿÈflÊäÿÊÿ∑§— •ÊÁ‡Êc∆UÊ º˝Á…UcÉ∆UÊ ’Á‹c∆U—]

2

A young man should have character, should be studious, full of
hope, determination and strength. For him all this earth should be full
of riches.
19-6-1930
47
He may not witness dances, he may not attend meetings,
gatherings and revel, he may not gossip, he should cultivate a love for
solitude, he may not resent incorrect conduct by the teacher and his
family, he may not engage in talks with women except as may be
necessary, he should be gentle, calm, modest and determined, he
should shun idleness, anger, envy; he should fetch a pitcherful of
water for the teacher both morning and evening and fetch wood from
the forest.
20-6-1930
48

[’‹¢ flÊfl ÁflôÊÊŸÊjÿÊ˘Á¬ „U]

3

Soul-force is superior even to science, for one man having
soul-force will shake one hundred learned men. When one has that
force he is ready to go to a teacher, he serves him, then he becomes fit
to sit near him, he ponders over what he has heard; he becomes wise,
he does his duty, he has experience. The earth keeps its place through
1

Taittiriyopanishad, II. 9.
Taittiriyopanishad, VIII. 2
3
Chhandogyopanishad, VII. viii. 1
2

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

335

that force, the heavens retain their place through it, the mountains, the
gods, mankind, the brute creation, birds, grass, plants, game, insects,
moths, ants, etc., all life are sustained by that force. Therefore cultivate
that force.
21-6-1930
49

[◊äÊÈflÊÃÊ ´§ÃÊÿÃ]

1

May the winds, the waters, the plant life, the evening and the
dawn, the dust of the earth, the heavenly vault which is like father, the
trees, the sun and the cows be a blessing to us.
22-6-1930
50

[¡ ¡ÊÃÈ ∑§Ê◊ÊÃ˜Ô Ÿ èÊÿÊÃ˜Ô Ÿ ‹ÊèÊÊÃ˜Ô]
One may not abandon one’s faith for the satisfaction of a desire,
or from fear or ambition, not even for saving one’s life. Faith is
permanent, happiness and unhappiness are fleeting things. The spirit
is immortal, the result of its actions—the body—is evanescent.
23-6-1930
51

[ÿŒfl ÁfllÿÊ ∑§⁄UÊÁÃ üÊfÿÊ¬Á⁄UcÊŒÊ ÃŒŒ flËÿ¸flûÊ⁄U èÊflÁÃ]

2

Work done with knowledge and faith and in a prayerful spirit
becomes most effective strength.
24-6-1930
52

[ÿ¢ ’˝sÔÊL§º˝◊L§Ã— SÃÈãflÁãÃ ÁŒ√ÿÒ— SÃflÒ —]
I bow to that God whom Brahma, Varuna, Indra and the Maruts
adore with divine hymns, of whom the Vedic singers sing in the Vedas
with the angas, the padas, the kramas and the Upanishads, whom the
yogis see in their meditations with minds fixed on Him and whose end
the devas and the asuras do not see.
25-6-1930
1
2

336

Brihadaranyakopanishad, VI. iii. 6
Chhandogyopanishad, I. i. 10
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

53
KUMAR MANDIR PRAYER

[ ˙ ‚„U ŸÊflflÃÈ – ‚„U ŸÊÒ èÊÈŸÄÃÈ]

1

Om! may God protect us, may He support us, may we make
joint progress, may our studies be fruitful, may we never harbour ill
will against one another. Om shanti, shanti, shanti.
26-6-1930
54

[˙ •‚ÃÊ ◊Ê ‚ŒU˜Ôª◊ÿ – ‚◊‚Ê ◊Ê ÖÿÊÁÃª¸◊ÿ–]

2

Om! From untruth lead me unto truth, from darkness lead me
unto light, from death lead me unto life everlasting.
27-6-1930
55

[ÿÊ˘ãÃ— ¬˝Áfl‡ÿ ◊◊ flÊøÁ◊◊Ê¢ ¬˝‚ÈåÃÊ◊˜Ô ]
I bow to thee, O God, who being almighty and having entered
my heart, gives by His power life to the silent tongue, the hands, feet,
ears, skin and other members of the body.
28-6-1930
56
WOMEN’S PRAYER

[ªÊÁflãŒ mÊÁ⁄U∑§ÊflÊÁ‚Ÿ˜Ô . . . ∑È§L§◊äÿ˘fl‚ËŒÃË◊˜Ô ]
O Govind, dweller of Dwarika, Krishna, Thou beloved of the
Gopis, O Keshav, dost Thou not know that the Kauravas have
surrounded me?
O Lord, Thou Lord of Lakshmi, protector of Vraja, deliverer
from affliction, O Janardana, save me [from] the ocean of misery in
the shape of the Kauravas.
O Krishna, Thou great Yogi, soul and protector of the universe,
O Govind, deliver me lying hopeless in the midst of the Kauravas and
seeking thy support.
29-6-1930
1
2

Taittiriyopanishad, II (Shantipath)
Brihadaranyakopanishad, III. 28

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

337

57

[œ◊¸ ø⁄UÃ ◊Ê˘äÊ◊¸◊˜Ô v ‚àÿ¢ flŒÃ ŸÊŸÎÃ◊˜Ô ]
Act righteously, never unrighteously; speak truth, never untruth;
look far ahead, never shortsightedly; look above; never below.
30-6-1930
58

[•Á„¢U‚Ê‚àÿ◊SÃÿ¢ ‡ÊÊÒøÁ◊Áãº˝ÿÁŸª˝„U—]
Ahimsa, truth, non-stealing, purity and self-control, these, said
Manu, are the common duty of all the four divisions.
1-7-1930
59

[•Á„¢U‚Ê ‚àÿ◊SÃÿ¢ •∑§Ê◊∑§Êœ‹ÊèÊÃÊ]
Ahimsa, truth, non-stealing, freedom from passion, anger and
greed, wishing the well-being and good of all that lives is the duty
common to all the divisions.
2-7-1930
60

[ÁflmÊÁj— ‚ÁflÃ— ‚ÁjÁ¸Ÿàÿ◊mcÊ⁄UÁªÁèÊ—]
Understand that to be religion which the wise, the good and
those that are free from likes and dislikes follow and which is I felt in
the heart.
3-7-1930
61

[üÊÍÿÃÊ¢ äÊ◊¸‚fl¸¸Sfl . . . ¬Ê¬Êÿ ¬⁄U¬Ë«UŸ◊˜Ô ]
Listen to the essence of religion and assimilate it through the
heart: one should never do to others which one would not wish done
to oneself.
That which has been said in countless books I shall say in half a
verse: service of others is virtue, injury to others is sin.
4-7-1930
62

[•ÊÁŒàÿøãº˝ÊflÁŸ‹Ê˘Ÿ‹‡ø]
The sun, the moon, the wind, the fire, the sky, the earth, the
waters, the heart, the god of judgment, the day, the night, the evening,
338

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the morning and dharma itself are witnesses to man’s actions, i.e., he
can conceal nothing.
5-7-1930
63
FROM “DWADASHAPANJARIKA [ -STOTRA”]

[◊Í…U ¡„UËÁ„U œŸÊª◊ÃÎcáÊÊ◊˜Ô]
O foolish one, give up the desire for amassing wealth, make thy
mind pure and free from desire, .satisfy thy mind with what thou
may’st obtain through thy own labour.
6-7-1930
64

[•âÊ¸◊ŸâÊ¸ èÊflÿ ÁŸàÿ◊˜Ô]
Always believe that wealth is illth. It is simple truth to say that
there is no happiness coming from its possession. It is known to all
that rich people fear even their own children.
7-7-1930
65

[∑§Ê◊¢ ¢R ÊäÊ¢ ‹ÊèÊ¢ ◊Ê„U◊˜Ô]
Shun desire, anger, greed, possession and ask thyself ‘who am
I’. Those foolish ones who don’t strive for self-realization go to
perdition.
8-7-1930
66

[àflÁÿ ◊Áÿ øÊãÿòÊÒ∑§Ê ÁflcáÊÈ—]
In thee, me and others there is but one God who suffers us all;
thou art angered for nothing. See thyself in all and everywhere, give
up thy ignorance in the shape of differentiation.
9-7-1930

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

339

67

[ŸÁ‹ŸËŒ‹ªÃ‚Á‹‹¢ Ã⁄U‹◊˜Ô]
Like the precarious drops on a lotus leaf this life is fleeting.
Know this world to be full of disease, egotism and affliction.
10-7-1930
68
FROM “PANDAVAGITA”

[¬˝tÔU⁄ÊŒŸÊ⁄UŒ⁄UÊ‡Ê⁄U¬Èá«U⁄UË∑§]
PANDAV: I think reverently of the holy ones: Prahlad, Narad,
Parashar Pundarika, Vyasa, Ambarisha, Shuka, Shaunaka, Bhima,
Dalbhya, Rukmangada, Arjuna, Vasishtha, Bibhishana and other great
saints.
11-7-1930
69

[Sfl∑§◊¸»§‹ÁŸÁŒ¸c≈UÊ¢ ÿÊ¢ ÿÊ¢ ÿÊÁŸ¢ ’˝¡Êèÿ„U◊˜Ô]
KUNTI: O Krishna, no matter in what species I am born due o
my actions, may my devotion to you grow in strength.
12-7-1930

70

[ÿ ÿ „UÃÊ‡øòÊäÊ⁄UáÊ ⁄UÊ¡Ÿ˜Ô]
DRONA: O King, those who were killed by the Wielder of the
Discus, the Lord of the three worlds, Janardana, have gone to the
abode of Vishnu. For even the wrath of God is like his boon.
13-7-1930
71

[ àfl◊fl ◊ÊÃÊ ø Á¬ÃÊ àfl◊fl]
GANDHARI: O Thou God of gods, Thou alone art my all, mother,

father, brother, friend, knowledge, wealth.
14-7-1930
72

[Ÿ◊Ê ’˝sÔáÿŒflÊÿ . . . ∑§‡Êfl¢ ¬˝ÁÃªë«¿UÁÃ]
VIRATA: Ten thousand ten obeisances to the great God Krishna,
Govind the benefactor of the cow, the Brahmin, the whole universe.
PRAHLAD: O Lord ! O Changeless One ! may my devotion unto
Thee remain for ever constant, no matter where among the thousands

340

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of species I may take birth. May my love for Thee be pure and even
as intense as the love of the worldly man for his sensepursuits and
may it never fade from my heart ever intent upon Thee.
BHARADWAJA: Good fortune and victory, never defeat, attend
upon those whose hearts are ruled by lotus-like Janardana.
MARKANDEYA: That moment or occasion when one does not
think of Vasudeva means as much waste, loss, ignorance, folly,
stupidity.
SHAUNAKA: Devotees of Vishnu needlessly worry over food
and clothing. Surely He who sustains the whole universe is not going
to neglect His devotees.
SANATKUMAR: Even as the waters dropping from the heavens
are received into the ocean, so is the worship of the different gods
received unto Keshav.
15-7-1930
73
SELECTIONS FROM “MUKUNDAMALA”

[üÊËflÀ‹èÊÁÃ fl⁄UŒÁÃ ŒÿÊ¬⁄UÁÃ]
O Mukunda, grant that I may always say: O Vallabh, O Giver of
boons, O Fount of Mercy, O Lover of devotees, O Destroyerof the
wheel of birth and death, O Lord, O Thou with a serpentine bed, O
Thou Refuge of the Universe.
15-7-1930
74

[◊È∑È§ãŒ ◊ÍÉŸÊ¸ . . . ◊⁄UáÊ˘Á¬ ÁøãÃÿÊÁ◊]
O Mukunda! With head bowed down I ask of Thee only this that
by Thy grace I may never from birth to birth lose sight of Thy lotus
feet.
O God! I have no relish for dharma, nor for wealth nor yet for
worldly enjoyments; let whatever is to happen happen as a result of
my past actions; only this prayer I regard as of utmost importance:
may my attachment to Thy lotus feet be unshakable.
O Thou Destroyer of hell! I do not care where my lot is to be
cast, whether in heaven or on earth or in hell; only grant that I may
ever think of Thy feet more beautiful than the lotus during the rains.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

341

[èÊfl¡‹ÁœªÃÊŸÊ¢ mÀmflÊÃÊ„UÃÊŸÊ◊˜Ô]
Vishnu becomes like a ship protecting men sailing on the ocean
of birth and death, tossed to and fro as by the wind, by the pairs of
opposites such as happiness and misery, borne down by the weight of
guarding sons, daughters, wives and the like and sinking in the storms
of violent passions.
16-7-1930
75

[èÊfl¡‹ÁäÊ◊ªÊœ¢ . . . ∑Î§cáÊ⁄U‚ÊÿŸ¢ Á¬’]
O, my heart, you need not be afraid that you cannot cross this
unfathomable and difficult ocean of birth and death; thy
single-minded devotion to the lotus-eyed, hell-destroying God will
surely save thee.
O Lotus-eyed One! with hands folded, head bowed, body
moved, throat choked, eyes bathed in hot tears, may our life close ever
drinking in the nectar in the form of the meditation of Thy lotus-like
feet. O Cupid! Get thee gone from my heart which is the seat of the
lotus-like feet of Mukunda; thou art already scorched by the fire from
Siva’s eyes; why will you not remember the might of Vishnu’s
discus?
O thou wrong-headed fool ! Why dost thou afflict with drugs
this body which has hundreds of weak joints, which is liable to certain
decay and which is subject to constant change? Drink in the one
life-giving potion—the name of Krishna.
17-7-1930
76

[Ÿ◊ÊÁ◊ ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊ¬ÊŒ¬æU˜Ô∑§¡◊˜Ô . . . ¡ŸÊŸÊ¢ √ÿ‚ŸÊÁèÊ◊ÈÅÿ◊˜]Ô
I touch the lotus feet of Narayana, I worship Narayana always; I
take the holy name of Narayana, I remember the changeless essence
called Narayana.
O how passion deadens man’s senses; for though he can take, he
never does take any of the many names of God such as Ananta,
Vaikuntha, Mukunda, Krishna, Govind, Damodar, Madhav.
18-7-1930
342

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

77
BHAJANS

[¡Á„U ‚ÈÁ◊⁄UÃ Á‚ÁäÊ „UÊß, ªáÊŸÊÿ∑§ ∑§Á⁄Ufl⁄UflŒŸ]Ô
O elephant-mouthed one, the chief of ganas by thinking on
whom one attains salvation and who is a storehouse of knowledge and
virtues, may Thy grace descend upon me; O merciful one by whose
mercy the dumb speak, the lame ascend steep hills and who washes off
all the scorching dirt of Kali—shower thy blessings upon me.
19-7-1930
78

[ŒËŸ ∑§Ê ŒÿÊ‹È ŒÊÁŸ, ŒÍ‚⁄UÊ Ÿ ∑§Ê™§]Ô
For those in want there is no other than Thou so merciful, so
generous! What is the use of my carrying my wants to others? They
appear to me as much in want as myself. Gods, men, sages, demons,
serpents and others exercise sway only during Thy pleasure. The
world, eternity, the four Vedas proclaim that Rama is the beginning,
the end and the middle; Thine is the Kingdom. To ask of Thee is not
begging. Thy devotee comes to Thee for Thy well-known nature; for
hast Thou not taken under Thy protection stone, beast, trees, bird? O
Thou, son of Lord Dasharatha, Thou hast turned beggars into kings,
Thou art the refuge of the distressed. I am Thy slave. O merciful God,
say if only once: “Tulsidas is Mine.”
20-7-1930
79

[ÃÍ ŒÿÊ‹È, ŒËŸ „UÊÒ¢, ÃÍ ŒÊÁŸ, „UÊÒ¢ ÁèÊπÊ⁄UË]
Thou art merciful, I am in distress; Thou art the giver, I am a
beggar; I am a known sinner, Thou art the forgiver of mountains of
sins; Thou art the help of the helpless and who can be so helpless as I?
There is none so afflicted like me, there is no deliverer like unto Thee;
Thou art the creator, I am a little creature; Thou art the lord, I am a
slave; Thou art father, brother, teacher, friend, all in all to me; if I have
only faith, I know that there is much between Thee and me; may Tulsi
somehow feel the protecting power of Thy holy feet.
21-7-1930
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

343

80

∑§’„ÈU∑§ „UÊÒ¢
When shall I conduct myself thus by the grace of the merciful
Rama that I shall cultivate the nature of good and true men; that I
shall be satisfied with whatever accrues to me in the ordinary course
and shall expect nothing from anybody; that I shall carry out the
resolution to serve others in thought, deed and word; that I shall not
burn with the scorching fire of the unbearably harsh language of
others when I chance to hear it; that I shall be free from pride and
have a mind equipoised and not delight in narrating the defects of
others and that I shall give up all anxiety about the body and will not
be elated by happiness and downcast by misery?
Tulsidas declares: being steadfast along the foregoing path I
shall attain the boon of unchangeable devotion.
22- 7-1930
81

∞‚Ë ◊Í…UÃÊ ÿÊ ◊Ÿ∑§Ë
O my soul! How foolish art thou, thou leavest the celestial waters
of Ramabhakti and runnest after the mirage even as the chatak bird
being thirsty mistakes a volume of smoke for a cloud but finds neither
coolness nor water and damages its eyes into the bargain;
or even as the hungry hawk seeing its own reflection through a
glass floor falls upoh it forgetting the injury done to its own face.
O merciful God, how long need I relate my misdeeds? Thou
knowest the minds of Thy devotees. Tulsidas says: Lord, think of Thy
promise and deliver Thy servant from the insufferable misery.
23-7-1930
82

ÿ„U ÁflŸÃË ⁄UÉÊÈflË⁄U ªÈ‚Êß¸
O Lord! Hear this my prayer. Remove my ignorance which
makes [me] cherish expectations of and faith in others rather than
Thee. I want neither heaven nor good intellect, nor riches nor
possessions nor greatness. I want an ever-growing devotion to Thee
without expectation of reward. May Thy grace save me even as the
tortoise its eggs from succumbing to the weakness of my irresistible
344

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

evil nature; Tulsidas prays for deliverance from all egotism and
attachments of the body.
24-7-1930
83

◊Êœfl ◊Ê„U-¬Ê‚ ÄÿÊ¥ ≈UÍ≈UÒ ?
O Madhav, how can this bondage of infatuation be broken? Not
even a million external remedies will remove the internal malady. No
amount of fire underneath a cauldron will destroy the moon reflected
in a cauldron filled with ghee. The bird living in the hollow of a tree
will not be killed by cutting the tree (from above). Even so a mind
devoid of disciplined thinking will never be purified by any external
means. When the heart within is impure and full of evil passions, no
amount of external cleansing of the body will purify it. Can the snake
inside its mound be killed by destroying the mound? Tulsidas says
that without the grace of God there is no clear discrimination and
without it no one may hope to cross the deep ocean named the
universe.
25-7-1930
84

◊Ò¢ ∑§Á„U ∑§„UÊÒ¢ Áfl¬ÁÃ •ÁÃ èÊÊ⁄UË –
O Raghuvir, help of the distressed, to whom shall I take the tale
of my great misery? My heart, O my God, is Thy abode, but many
thieves have entered therein and although I am beseeching
and imploring them to leave it, they are using unbearable
force; ignorance, delusion, greed, pride, arrogance, anger, passion—all
enemies of free knowledge are causing much trouble, O Lord, and
thinking me to be helpless are crushing me, I am alone, the thievesare
many, no one hears my cries; Lord, there is no escape from this either;
O Lord of the Raghus, protect me. Tulsidas says: Listen, O Rama,
thieves are looting Thy house; my great anxiety is lest they should
bring discredit on Thee !
26-7-1930
85

∞‚Ë ∑§Ê ©UŒÊ⁄U ¡ª ◊Ê„UË¥
None is so generous in this world as Rama who is merciful to the
distressed without requiring any service in return. There is no one like
him. That state which even sages fail to attain after devotion and
self-denial he bestowed upon the Vulture and Sabari and then thought
he had not given much. The kingdom that Ravana got from Sivji after
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

345

having offered his head Rama gave to Bibhishana as if it was nothing.
Tulsidas says: O my mind, if thou wouldst have the real good then
worship Rama who out of the abundance of his grace will answer thy
prayer.
27-7-1930
86

¡Ê∑§ Á¬˝ÿ Ÿ ⁄UÊ◊ flÒŒ„UË
Shun those people as enemies who are not devoted to Rama and
Sita, be they ever so good friends. (For Him), Prahlad left his father,
Bibhishana his brother, Bharata his mother, Bali his teacher, the
women of Vraj their husbands and they all rejoiced (in their sacrifice).
A friend is desirable only so long as he is attached and devoted to
Rama. What more need I say, what is the use of the eye-powder that
destroys the eyes? Tulsi says: In my opinion, he who is devoted to the
feet of Rama is in every respect my friend worthy of love and dear as
life itself.
28-7-1930
87

∑§ÊÒŸ ¡ÃŸ ÁflŸÃË ∑§Á⁄Uÿ
What should I do to be able to pray? I am afraid, for looking at
my conduct I realize my defeat; I obstinately refrain from doing the
things which make God merciful towards His devotees and I follow
the path that leads me into the trap of misfortune and daily misery. I
know that I should be safe if I gave myself in thought, word and deed
to the service of fellow creatures but on the contraryI am vainly
jealous when I see others happy. The Vedas, the Puranas and other
scriptures proclaim the necessity of cultivating firmly the
companionship of the good but my pride, passion and jealousy turn
me away from them. I always delight in that which will lead me unto
misery. Now tell me, O Lord! how may I be delivered from this
misery? I can only be saved if Thou according to Thy nature will have
mercy on me; Tulsidas has no other hope; how long shall he remain
in this mire?
29-7-1930
88

¡ÊŸÃ ¬˝ËÃ⁄UËÃ ⁄UÉÊÈ⁄UÊß¸
Raghunath knows what love is. He sets aside all other bonds and
accepts only real love. Dasharatha expressed paternal affection by
giving up life and made his fame immortal. But look at the greatness
of Rama—he held the Vulture as superior to such a father. He even
346

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

forgot his beloved Sita when he saw his friend Sugriva grief-stricken
over the separation of his wife. Here was his brother lying senseless in
the battle-field but he was thinking, at the time, of Bibhishana.
Whether at home, or the teacher’s house, or the home of friends or the
father-in-law’s, wherever he was treated, he never experienced the
richness of those feasts as that of the wild berries provided by Sabari.
When the sages begin to narrate His original nature they humbly
acknowledge their inability to do justice to the theme and are happy
to call themselves friends of the Bhil or take pride in calling
themselves companions of monkeys. Tulsidas says: If thou, having
known this nature and this love of Rama, hast not devotion in thine
heart, then, O fool, thy mother in giving thee birth uselessly threw
away her youth.
89

⁄UÉÊÈfl⁄U ! ÃÈ◊∑§Ê ◊⁄UË ‹Ê¡ –
O Raghuvir, my shame is Thy shame. I am ever seeking Thy
protection and Thou art noted as protector of the weak. I have heard it
said of Thee that it is Thy promise that Thou wouldst save sinners.
And I am an old sinner; take my ship ashore. To destroy the sin of
Thy devotees and to remove their distress is Thy only task. Be
merciful, O Lord, to Tulsidas, and give him the boon of Thy worship.
90

¡ÊÁªÿ ⁄UäÊÈŸÊâÊ ∑È§Ú¢fl⁄U
O Prince of the Raghus, wake up; the birds are singing in the
grove. The moon will disappear presently, the chakravaka bird is off
to meet her lord. The threefold breeze is gently blowing, the leaves are
rustling. The morning sun is on the horizon, darkness of the night is
gone. The bees are humming, the lotus has opened its leaf. Brahma
and others are in meditation; the gods, common people and sages are
singing hymns of praise. Thus when it was rising time Rama opened
his eyes. Tulsidas is overjoyed to see the lotus face of Rama who gives
valuables as gifts to the poor.
30-7-1930

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

347

91

◊⁄UË ◊Ÿ „UÁ⁄U¡Í „U∆U Ÿ Ã¡Ò
O Lord, my mind will not give up its waywardness. I try every
day to control it but it will not change its nature. As a woman,
although she recognizes the pains of labour, foolishly forgets them
and goes to her foolish husband or as a greedy dog, even though it
gets knocks on the head, meanly continues to visit the same haunts
and is not ashamed, even so is this mind of mine wilful and
unconquerable, I own defeat in spite of various efforts. Tulsidas says:
It will come under subjection only when God the inspirer of all takes
it up in hand.
31-7-1930
92

∑È§≈UÈ¢’ ÃÁ¡ ‡Ê⁄UáÊ ⁄UÊ◊ ! Ã⁄UË •ÊÿÊ
O Rama, he (Bibhishana) left family, fort Lanka, palaces and
temples and hearing Thy name rushed to Thee for protection. Seated
in his full court Ravana kicked him and the foolish one would not
listen though he was warned again and again. Thou embracedst this
Bibhishana as soon as he came to Thee and crowned him King of
Lanka. As soon as he met Thee the insults of ages were wiped out. O
Raghunath, friend of the friendless, Thou owned him knowing him to
be helpless. Tulsidas says: He received the boon of the protection
from and devotion to the Lord of the Raghus.
1-8-1930
93

èÊ¡ ◊Ÿ ⁄UÊ◊ø⁄UŸ ‚ÈπŒÊß¸
O my mind, worship the beneficent feet of Rama. From these
feet issued forth the Ganga and was caught by Siva in his ample lock
of hair. It was therefore named Jatashankari; it came for the good of
the three worlds. Bharata treasured as a token of love the sandals
bearing the imprints of these feet. The Bhil chief would not steer
Rama’s boat without being allowed to wash those feet. Saintly persons
always worship these beneficent feet. The wife of the sage Gautama
obtained salvation by the touch of those feet. Rama hallowed (with his
feet) the Dandak forest and removed the distress of the rishis. (Yet
strange to relate) this very Rama the lord of the three worlds ran after
the golden deer. He gave the palm of victory to the monkey Sugriva,
348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

who was afflicted by the fear of his brother. Bibhishana, the brother of
the enemy (Ravana), got the crown of Lanka through the touch of
those feet. Siva, Sanak, Brahma, etc., also the thousand-mouthed
serpent sing his praises but, says Tulsidas, his lips utter the praise of
Hanuman the monkey.
2-8-1930
94

•’ ‹ÊÒ¢ Ÿ‚ÊŸË •’ Ÿ Ÿ‚Ò„UÊÒ¢
I have spoiled everything hitherto but will do so no longer. By
the grace of God the night is past, I am awake and shall no more go to
sleep. I have the talisman in the shape of God’s name; it shall not
vanish from my heart. The beautiful and holy face of God is the
testing stone. The gold of my heart shall be tested on it. My sense
organs finding me without control have mocked me. I have now
acquired self-control, they shall no more deride me. Tulsi says: My
mind like the bee on the lotus shall lean on the lotus feet of Rama.
3-8-1930
95

◊Ÿ ¬Á¿UÃÒ „Ò •fl‚⁄U ’ËÃ –
O my mind, what is the use of repentance after the occasion is
gone? Having attained the difficult human status, devote thyself body,
speech and heart to the feet of Hari. Sahasrarjuna, Ravana and others
could not save themselves from the claws of all-powerful death.Thou
triest to protect wealth and possessions saying this is mine, this is mine,
but at last thou hast to go empty-handed. Know that wife, children,
etc., constitute bonds of the flesh; do not be entrapped by them. O
miser, they will all leave thee when thou diest, why not then be
detached now? Be devoted to the Lord, O foolish one, and give up all
false hope with all thy heart. Tulsi says: The fire of passion will never
be quenched by the oil of indulgence.
4-8-1930
96

◊Êœfl ! ◊Ê ‚◊ÊŸ ¡ª ◊Ê„UË –
O Madhav! there is none on this earth in every way so low,
corrupt, beggarly and steeped in vice like me and I am in distress
having left Thee, God, so merciful without cause, so friendly to the
afflicted; why dost Thou not show mercy to me? It is not Thy fault, I
know it is all of my doing. O Lord, thou gavest me a body through
which I could know Thee but notwithstanding that I did not know
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

349

Thee, The bamboo and the karil vainly blame the sandal and the
spring (the one for want of scent and the other for want of leaves),
being unworthy and unfortunate how could the one have scent and
the other leaves? I am convinced that I am hard of heart in every way
and Thou, O Lord, art tender. Tulsidas says: God! my bondage can be
broken only by Thy mercy.
97

∑§Á‹ ŸÊ◊ ∑§Ê◊ÃL§ ⁄UÊ◊ ∑§Ê
In the Kaliyuga Ramanama is the all-yielding tree. It is the
destroyer of scorching miseries caused by bad times, pauperism, etc.
Repeating the name purifies the mind and banishes misfortune.
Valmiki and Shanker sing the virtues of taking the name whether
correctly or with the letters transposed. It is well here and hereafter
with those who are armed with the beautiful power (of the name).
Tulsi says: I am able to live in the world peacefully by the power of
the name, I have no anxiety whether I live or die.
5-8-1930
98

¡ÿ ⁄UÊ◊ ⁄U◊Ê⁄U◊áÊ¢ ‚◊Ÿ◊˜Ô
Hail to Thee, O Rama, the Lord of Sita and deliverer from the
feverish wheel of birth and death, protect Thy servant who is
strickenwith fear. O Ruler of Avadh, God of gods, Lord of Sita, O
God, Thy ward seeks Thy protection; Thou destroyer of Ravana with
his ten heads and twenty arms, hast ridden this big earth of its great
maladies. The crowd of devils who stalk abroad during the night are
like so many fire-flies. The scorching splendour of the fire of Thy
arrows has burnt them to ashes. Thou art the excellent ornament of
this earthly system. Thou art the shining sun to dispel the deep
darkness of the night of arrogance, infatuation and immense egotism.
Cupid is hunting down the helpless people who will not give up greed
and lust and who have lost the true path in the midst of
self-gratification. O Lord, save them. People are afflicted with diseases
and bereavement. This is the result of want of devotion to Thy blessed
feet. Those who are not attached to Thy lotus feet have to go through
the eternal wheel of life and death. Those who are not so devoted are
ever helpless, sorrowful and miserable. Those who delight in Thy
praise and who always like the company of wise and holy men have
neither passion nor greed nor pride nor arrogance; prosperity or
adversity are the same to them. It is for this reason that sages leaving
aside dependence on yoga rejoice in becoming Thy servants. The
350

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

holy people take vows, offer eternal devotion to Thee, with true hearts
serve Thy lotus feet, regard alike insults or honours and thus
contented roam about the earth. Thou art like the bee to the lotus
hearts of the sages. O Thou steadfast and unconquerable warrior, I
take Thy name, I bow to Thee Lord. Thou art the enemy of the
misery of death and life cycle, infatuation and arrogance. Thou art the
treasure house of virtues, Thou art the great seat of mercy; I always
bow to Thee O Lord of Sita. O Son of Raghu remove this darkness of
the pairs of opposites. O Lord of the earth, look at Thy helpless
servants. O Lord of Lakshmi, I repeatedly ask of thee this boon: grant
me everlasting devotion to Thy lotus feet and the company of holy
men always.
6-8-1930
99

ÃÈ‹‚Ë ’ÊäÊ-◊ÊÒÁÄÃ∑§
There is no religion like the service of others, and O brother,
there is no sin like doing evil to others. Since the Puranas and the
Vedas proclaim that good and evil are to be found in our hearts, there
is happiness where there is good and misery for certain where there is
evil. Blessed is the king who walks along the right path, blessed is the
Brahmin who will not swerve from the faith, blessed is the moment
when one is in the company of the holy ones, blessed is the life that is
devoted to the unbroken worship of God.
Lives of holy men are beautiful like cotton; though tasteless the
fruit is white and durable. Those who bear the hardships of others and
relieve them attain fame on this earth and are adorable.
There is no doubt that one gets what one’s heart is truly set
upon. Nothing on this earth is difficult for him whose mind is
saturated with the thought of serving others.
It is the tradition of the Raghu clan handed down from time
immemorial that they would stake their life rather than break the
plighted word. Sins mountain-high cannot be heavier than untruth,
can crores of øáÊÊ∆UË1 outweigh a mountain?
The sages proclaim and the Vedas and the Puranas witness that
all good deeds depend for their merit on truth.

1

Coral bead

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

351

There is no one so helpless as I and there is none so merciful to
them as Thou; therefore Thou jewel of the Raghu race, deliver me
from this intolerable cycle of birth and death.
7-8- 1930
100

ø⁄UŸ-∑§◊‹ ’ãŒÊÒ „UÁ⁄U ⁄Êß¸ –
I bow to the lotus feet of the great Hari. Surdas says: I bow
again and again to the feet of that merciful God whose mercy enables
the lame to ascend mountains, the blind to see everything, the deaf to
hear, the dumb to speak and the pauper to have people holding
umbrella over him.
8-8-1930
101

¡Ò‚ ⁄UÊπ„ÈU flÒ‚ Á„U ⁄U„UÊÒ¢
O Lord, keep me as Thou wilt. Thou knowest the happiness and
the sorrows of the people; what need can there be for me to relate
them. O God of mercy, sometimes I get enough to eat, other times I
have to suffer pangs of hunger; sometimes I ride horses or stately
elephants, other times I myself carry loads; Surdas says: O Lotus-eyed
one, Ghanashyam, lovable God, may I be ever Thy servant, devoted to
Thy feet.
9-8-1930
102

ŒËŸŸ ŒÈπ-„U⁄UŸ Œfl ‚¢ÃŸ Á„UÃ∑§Ê⁄UË –
O God, Thou removest the woes of the afflicted and comforteth
the holy ones. Take Ajamil, the Vulture, the Hunter, which of them
was a sadhu? Simply because the Prostitute taught a parrot Thy name
Thou savedst her. Thou gavest a kingdom to Dhruva, Thou savedst
Prahlad, for the sake of Thy devotees Thou built a bridge and reduced
Lanka to ashes. A handful of raw rice pleased Thee, Thou wast
satisfied with mere vegetable leaves. Thou thoughtst nothing of berries
if they were half bitten or unripe or sour. When the alligator seized the
elephant and Dushasana began to strip Draupadi naked and [she]
called out Krishna, Krishna, Thou respondedst and (savedst the
elephant) and multiplied Draupadi’s clothing. Surdas the blind
beggar knocks at the door, O Lord.
10-8-1930
352

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

103

‚ÈŸ ⁄UË ◊Ò¢Ÿ ÁŸ’¸‹ ∑§ ’‹ ⁄UÊ◊ –
I have heard that Rama is the help of the helpless. I can produce
the evidence of those saintly people who were helped by him in their
adversity. So long as the elephant relied upon his own strength, his
case was hopeless, but when in his helplessness he invoked the
assistance of Rama, he responded when hardly his name was half
pronounced. When Draupadi felt helpless, He felt the call in his seat
and God having multiplied her clothing Dushasana grew tired of
hopelessly trying to strip her naked. Man relies on his own strength or
his austerities or the strength of his arms or fourthly his wealth. Surdas
says that when a man has exhausted all his resources and invokes the
name of God, His grace descends upon him.
11-8-1930
104

„U◊ èÊÄÃŸ ∑§ èÊÄÃ „U◊Ê⁄U
I belong to my devotees—and they to me. O Arjuna, hear my
promise, it can never be recalled; taking heed of my devotees’
necessities, I rush to their assistance barefoot. I deliver my devotees
whenever they are in difflculty. He who is against my devotees is
against me. Having well considered your welfare, I am driving your
chariot. My devotees’ victory is my victory, their defeat ismy defeat.
Surdas says: God destroys with his Sudarshana those who come in the
way of devotees.
105

•’∑§Ë ≈U∑§ „U◊Ê⁄UË – ‹Ê¡ ⁄UÊπ ÁªÁ⁄äÊÊ⁄UË –
Now it is my fixed resolve; keep Thou my honour, O Lord!
Even as during the Bharat war Thou keptst Arjuna’s honour by
wearing Thy Sudarshana Chakra and driving Arjuna’s chariot, Thou
didst not let Thy devotee’s honour be sullied or even as Thou keptst
Draupadi’s honour and didst not let her be stripped naked though
Dushasana made repeated attempts till he was tired out, Thou didst
multiply her saris; keep Thou Surdas’s honour, he has no other
protector; O Thou Lord of Lakshmi and Radha the daughter [of]
Brikhbhan, he seeks Thy protection.
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

353

106

◊Ê ‚◊ ∑§ÊÒŸ ∑È§Á∆≈U‹ π‹ ∑§Ê◊Ë –
Who can be so crooked, bad or dissolute as I? I am so faithless
that I have forgotten the very God who gave me this body. Even like
the village dog I have been fattening myself and running after
pleasures. I have given up the company of God’s people and day and
night slave for those who revile Him. Who can be a greater sinner than
I, I am the chief among them. Surdas says: O God, listen, where is the
resting place for a sinner like me?
12-8-1930
107

¬˝èÊÈ ◊Ê⁄U •flªÈŸ ÁøÃ Ÿ äÊ⁄UÊ –
O God, do not lay to heart my faults. Thou art called
equi-minded towards all. Thou canst save me if Thou wilt. One
volume of water is called a river, another which contains dirt is called a
drain but when they meet and become one they are called the Ganga.
One piece of iron is used for worship, another in the hands of a thief
for stealing, the paras 1 makes no distinction and turns by its touch
either to gold. Surdas says: this is all called the maya of Brahm[an].
Now,
O Lord, save me and let not Thy promise go in vain.
13-8-1930

108

•ÁπÿÊÚ¢ „UÁ⁄UŒ⁄U‚Ÿ∑§Ë åÿÊ‚Ë
I am pining to see God as the divine child (Krishna). I would
love to see the lotus-eyed One and not being able to do so I feel
miserable day and night. O Uddhav ! This child of Brindaban with the
1

354

Philosopher’s stone
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

saffron mark on his forehead and a pearl necklace round his neck—
he conquered our love and then forsook us. What do the people
understand of the pangs of the forsaken ones, they will only laugh.
Surdas says: O God, without seeing Thy face there is nothing left for
me but to go to Kashi and seek deliverance by death.
14-8-1930
109

‚’‚ ™§Ú¢øË ¬˝◊ ‚ªÊß¸ –
The best tie is the tie of love. God partook of Vidura’s leaves
and left Duryodhana’s dainties. He ate with relish the berries tasted by
Sabari. His love prompted [Him] to serve the king for when
Yudhishthira performed the royal sacrifice He served as a menial. Not
minding His high status, He drove Arjuna’s chariot. His love was so
great for Brindaban that He danced with the Gopis. Surdas says: I am
a wretch unworthy of such love; how much shall I praise Thee, O
Lord?
15-8-1930
110

‚’ ◊Ò¢ ŸÊëÿÊ ’„ÈUÃ ªÊ¬Ê‹
O Gopal, I have danced away my life in self-indulgence. Desire
and anger were my garment, passions were my garland, infatuation
was my ankle-bells, backbiting was the sweet sounding tune, poisoned
mind was the tabor, evil company was the step, insatiableness was1 the
accompanying measure of various kind, maya was the waist-band,
ambition was the mark on my forehead and I showed much cunning.
So much so that I forgot all about time or place. Surdas says: O
Nandalal, remove all this ignorance of mine.
16-8-1930
1

The source has “is”.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

355

111

•’ Ã⁄U ¬˝ª≈U èÊß¸ ¡ª ¡ÊŸË –
Now is the thing known all over. Eternal devotion to God
cannot be kept secret from anyone. That beautiful face is ever before
my eyes. Try what I will that face is unforgettable. I am filled with
that love. It is inseparable even as milk and water are. Surdas says:
God who knows the hearts of us all knew those of the gopis.
17-8-1930
112

‹Ö¡Ê ◊Ê⁄UË ⁄UÊπÊ ‡ÿÊ◊ „U⁄UË –
O God, guard me against insult. Dushasana has held me by my
hair and is molesting me and in the presence of the assembly wicked
Duryodhana is intent upon stripping me naked. The five Pandavas are
powerless to help me. Bhishma, Drona and Vidura are dumbfounded
and silent. Now I have neither mother nor father nor son nor brother,
Thou art my all. Merciful God then made her sari endless and the
whole host of Duryodhana was defeated. Surdas says: When God
appears as protector what need for his lambs to fear?
18-8-1930
113

Œ ¬ÍÃŸÊ ÁflcÊ ⁄U •◊˜ÔÃ ¬ÊÿÊ
Although Putna administered poison (to Krishna) she attained
salvation; the Vedas have sung in vain that man reaps as he sows. King
Bali performed a hundred sacrifices and yet was tied up and sent to
the nether world. King Nriga donated one lac cows and yet he was
turned into a serpent. Friend Sudama was born a pauper and suddenly
found himself in a golden palace. Surdas says: O God, strange are
Thy ways, well have the Vedas said, ‘not this, not this’.
19-8-1930
114

•’∑§ ŸÊâÊ ◊ÊÁ„U ©UäÊÊÁ⁄U –
O Lord, save me now. O Fount of mercy, there is no pathway in
this ocean of the universe. Maya is its deep waters, ambition are the
waves. Passion like the alligator is dragging me in deeper waters. The
senses bite like fishes and there is a load of sin on the head. In my
356

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

infatuation the feet are unsteady and get entangled in the seaweed.
Animal passion, anger, desire like the winds toss me to and fro. Wife
and children do not let me think of Thy name as my sheet-anchor. O
Thou seat of Mercy, I am fatigued, powerless and distressed in this
mid-ocean. O Lord, take me by the arm and pull me up to the shore.
20-8-1930
115

⁄U ◊Ÿ ! ◊Í⁄Uπ ¡Ÿ◊ ªÚ¢flÊÿÊ –
O my foolish soul, thy life has been wasted; in thy pride thou
hast dissipated thy life and forgotten the Giver of life. Having thought
this earthly life beautiful like the semar flower thou hast forgotten thy
true self. But as thou wast about to taste it, it was not, thou foundest
nothing. What is the use now of thinking of the lost past? Thou didst
not do thy duty whilst there was time. Surdas says: Thou didst not
serve God and hadst to repent.
21-8-1930
116

Ô ŸÊâÊ ◊ÊÁ„¢U •’∑§Ë ’⁄U ©U’Ê⁄UÊ
O Lord, save me this once; Thou art Lord of lords, Thou art
named the Giver, and I am without luck, blind from birth, who can be
more unworthy than I? Thou art the protector of the three worlds, I
am Thy slave; Thou hast saved people both worthy and unworthy; be
Thou gracious unto me. I am the chief among the fallen, sardar
among the sinners, thousands of sinners put together hardly equal me,
Ajamil is nothing compared to me. God Yama, having heard of me
had the gates of hell even locked. There is now no room for me
anywhere; remember Thou Thy promise (to such like me). O Lord of
Lakshmi, Thou hast saved many a sinner, do not withhold Thy grace.
Surdas will count Thee true when Thou hast saved him.
22-8-1930
117

ÉÊÚ¢ÍÉÊ≈U∑§Ê ¬≈U πÊ‹ ⁄U ÃÊ∑§Ê ¬Ëfl Á◊‹¥ª –
Open thy face, thou wilt see thy beloved. He is in everyone;
therefore say nothing bitter of anyone. Do not brag about thy riches
or youth; this case made of five elements will play false to thee (one
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

357

day). Light up thy dark heart and do not move from thy purpose.
Wake up in this temple for thou hast got the priceless treasure thy
Lord. Kabir says: Let there be rejoicing for the Lord’s voice is heard
within.
23-8-1930
118

‚ÊŒÊ ‚¡„U ‚◊ÊÁäÊ ÷‹Ë –
O good man, natural meditation (lekf/k) is best. Ever since its
hanifestation by the grace of God, it has waxed. Wherever I rander, it
is a circuit (round a temple), whatever I do is for service, whenever I
lie down, it is my prostration (before God). I worship to other god but
God. Whatever I utter, it is God’s name, whatever I hear is a
remembrance of God. My eating and drinking re puja (worship),
whether a home is established or it is destroyed is the same thing to
me; I do not allow any other feeling to possess me. I do not shut my
eyes nor stuff my ears, I do not porture the body. I open my eyes and
delight to see God and contemplate His beauty. My mind is ever
intent on Him; all corupt thought has left me. I am so much engrossed
in the thought of Him that I think of Him whatever I am doing. Kabir
says: This is the excellent life and I have sung of it; there is a state
beyond misery and happiness, my mind is fixed on it.
24-8-1930
119

◊Ÿ ◊SÃ „ÈU•Ê Ã’ ÄÿÊ¥ ’Ê‹ –
When the soul is saturated with the Holy Spirit there is no need
for speech. When a man finds a diamond he puts it in a safe and does
not open it now and again to look at it. When here is doubt about the
weight of a thing it is weighed but how should a thing in itself weighty
need weighing? One who is intoxicated with love drinks it not in drops
weighed in scales. When the swan reaches the divine lake, he does not
wander about in search of lakelets. Thy Lord is within thee, why strain
thy eyes to see Him outside? Kabir says: Hear O good people, I have
found the Lord for the search.
25-8-1930

358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

120

⁄U„UŸÊ ŸÁ„¢U Œ‚ Á’⁄UÊŸÊ „UÒ –
We are not to stay here long, it is a foreign land (for us). The
world is like a paper parcel which is reduced to pulp on a little water
being poured on it or it is like a hedge of thorns in which we get
entangled and die or it is like a meadow full of shrubs and grass which
a fire destroys (in no time). Kabir says: Listen all ye good people, the
only safety lies in seeking the protection of God.
26-8-1930
121

◊Ÿ ‹ÊªÊ ◊⁄UË ÿÊ⁄U »§∑§Ë⁄UË ◊¥ –
O friend, my mind is fixed on a fakir’s life. The happiness
which one derives from meditation on God is not to be found in
indulgence. Bear whatever befalls thee—good and evil; live in
poverty. Let us live a life of loving service. It will be well to cultivate
patience. When one goes about with a mere begging bowl and a staff,
one has the whole world as one’s kingdom. What is the use of pride
when one realizes that the body is soon to be reduced to ashes? Kabir
says: Listen O ye all good men, contentment is the pathway to
self-realization.
122

‚Í◊¤Ê Œπ ◊Ÿ ◊ËÃ Á¬ÿÊ⁄U •ÊÁ‡Ê∑§ „UÊ∑§⁄U ‚ÊŸÊ ÄÿÊ ⁄U –
O my soul, my dear friend, knowest thou not that one who is in
love has no sleep; when thy bread of sorrow is butterless and dry, what
need to judge whether it is tasty or tasteless? If thou hast tasted love,
give it, O friend, having received thou canst not lose it. He for whom
sleep has become irresistible does not think of a pillow or a mattress.
Kabir says: Listen O good men, there is no wailing after complete
self-surrender.
27-8-1930
123

ÃÍ ÃÊ ⁄UÊ◊ ‚È◊⁄U ¡ª ‹«∏UflÊ Œ
Be thou absorbed in God, let the world go its way. There is
paper and there is black ink, let those who wish write or read. The
elephant does not abandon its gait despite the barkings of dogs. Kabir
says: Listen O ye good men, those who are intent upon evil will go
their way.
28-8-1930
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

359

124

◊Ã ∑§⁄U ◊Ê„U ÃÍ „UÁ⁄U-èÊ¡Ÿ ∑§Ê ◊ÊŸ ⁄U –
Do not give way to self-deception but sing the praises of God;
for eyes are given to see God, ears to hear words of wisdom, the
mouth to sing His praises, hands to give in His name. Kabir says: Hear
O ye good one, gold is (also) produced in mines (not merely dust and
pebble)
28-8-1930
125

ªÈL§ Á’Ÿ ∑§ÊÒŸ ’ÃÊfl ’Ê≈U?
Without the master, who can show the path? The way is terribly
difficult. Doubt crosses the path like rivers gliding through
mountainous regions and there is egotism like big boulders in the
rivers. There are too passion and anger like two huge mountains on
either side; ambition dogs the footsteps like a thief. And pride and
vanity descend like rain from overhanging clouds; self-deception
violently tosses one like the winds. Kabir says: Listen O ye good men,
how can one traverse the path (without a master as guide)?
29-8-1930
126

ŸÁ„¢U ¿UÊ«Ú¢Í ⁄U ’Ê’Ê [⁄UÊ◊] ŸÊ◊
O Father, I will not give up Ramanama. I have nothing to do
with the other lessons. The King sent Prahlad to school and he had
many companions. He said: “Why do you teach me nonsense? Write
on my slate Shri Gopal.” This Shandamara duly reported and the
King immediately sent for Prahlad to whom he said, “Leave thou the
name of Rama. If thou wilt do what I tell thee I will set thee free.”
Prahlad replied, “Why vex me again and again. God made the ocean,
the earth, the sky and the mountain. I swear by my guru that I will not
give up Ramanama, you may burn me, you may bury me alive, you
may kill me anyway you choose.” On this the King was enraged,
drew his sword and challenged Prahlad to show his deliverer. God in
His might rose from the pillar of fire and with His paws killed the
King. O Great One, God of gods, Thou becamest Narasinha for the
sake of Thy devotee. Kabir says: I can fill pages with the stories of
how He delivered Prahlad from many a danger.
30-8-1930
360

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

127

¤ÊËŸË ¤ÊËŸË Á’ŸË øŒÁ⁄UÿÊ

|

This sheet (called body) is finely woven. What is its warp and
woof? Of what is the thread made? Ida and Pingala (nerves invisible
recognized by Hinduism) are respectively warp and woof. The sheet is
woven with the Sushumna thread (one of the invisible nerves)—The
eight-petaled lotus (at the navel) is the wheel. The sheet contains the
five elements (earth, etc.,) and the three qualities (sattva, rajas, tamas).
The Maker takes ten months to weave this sheet and the thread is well
packed. Gods, men, even sages have to wear this sheet and it becomes
dirty as soon as it is worn. The servant Kabir says: Although we wear
this sheet with ever so much care, it has to be given up even as it is.1
31-8-1930
128

ß‚ ÃŸ äÊŸ∑§Ë ∑§ÊÒŸ ’«∏Êß¸
What is the use of taking pride either in this body or wealth?
They vanish in the twinkling of an eye. A man builds a palace for
himself and is often obliged to take refuge in the woods. On death, the
bones will burn like faggots and hair like grass. Kabir says: O virtuous
people, listen, when man dies, all his airy castles crumble to pieces.
1-9-1930
129

èÊ¡Ê ⁄U èÊÒÿÊ ⁄UÊ◊ ªÊÁflãŒ „U⁄UË–
O Brother, sing the praises of Rama, Govind, Hari. The effort
requires no jap, tap or the like, nor does it involve any expense.
Children, wealth, etc., promoting as they do a feeling of satiety, often
lead one astray. Kabir says: He on whose lips is not the name of God
has lived in vain.
2-9-1930

1
Note by Gandhiji: Kaka says the only possible meaning is: “Kabir says that
he on the other hand wore it with such care that he was able to discard it without
defiling it.”

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

361

130

◊Ÿ! ÃÊ„U ∑§Á„U Áflœ ∑§⁄U ‚◊¤ÊÊ™§Ú –
O my soul, how shall I reason with thee? If thou wert gold I
would melt thee to a liquid. If thou wert a horse I would bridle thee,
put a saddle on thy back, ride thee and whip thee to action. If thou
wert an elephant I would chain thy feet, ride thee and goad thee with
the hook. If thou wert iron, I should secure an anvil and hammer thee
and turn thee into wire. Kabir says: If thou wert wise I should give
thee wisdom and lead thee onto the straight path and send thee to the
abode of the immortals.
3-9-1930
131

¬ÊÿÊ ‚ÃŸÊ◊ ª⁄U∑§ „U⁄UflÊ
I have obtained the name of God as garland for my neck. My
abode is in a little cot and there are five weak cot-bearers. The guru
has given me the lock and key so as to enable me to open the door
when I choose. Love is the garment which I wear and dance when I
like in the city Kabir says: Listen O good men, there will be no return
to this city again.
4-9-1930
132

‡ÊÍ⁄U ‚¢ª˝Ê◊ ∑§Ê Œπ ÷ÊªÒ Ÿ„UË¥
With fight in front a brave person will never flee and he will not
be considered brave who flees in the face of danger. In the field of
battle the fight has begun in right earnest and passion, anger, pride
and ambition are the foes to be fought. Restraint, piety and
contentment are one’s companions and the sword in the shape of
Ramanama is flourishing freely. Kabir says: True warriors will fight
bravely, cowards will be conspicuous by their absence.
5-9-1930
362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

133

∆UÊ∑È§⁄U ÃÈ◊ ‡Ê⁄áÊÊß¸ •ÊÿÊ–
O God, I seek refuge in Thee. On seeing Thee, all my
doubts have disappeared. Without my mentioning it Thou hast known
my trouble. Thou hast made me remember Thee. My misery is gone
and I am all happiness. Joyfully do I sing Thy praise. Thou hast taken
me by the arm and pulled me safe out of the dark well ofmaya. Nanak
says: The Lord has removed my bondage and brought me back
though I had strayed away.
6-9-1930
134

‚ÊäÊÊ ◊Ÿ∑§Ê ◊ÊŸ àÿÊªÊ–
O good man, give up thy pride. Flee away from passion, anger,
evil company. He to whom happiness and unhappiness, praise and
blame are the same thing, who is neither elated nor depressed, knows
the secret of life. Nanak says: O man, it is a difficult thing to be
unaffected by praise or blame and to be intent only upon the true
path; a few only know this through a true teacher.
7-9-1930
135

Á’‚⁄U ªß¸ ‚’ ÃÊÃ ¬⁄ÊUß¸ –
O God, ever since I have had the companionship of the good,
the distinction between mine and thine has disappeared. I deem no
one as enemy or stranger. I am on friendly terms with everyone. From
the good I have learnt to consider as good whatever comes from God.
Nanak takes delight in finding that one God resides in all.
8-9-1930
136

⁄U ◊ŸÊ ⁄UÊ◊ ‚Ê¥ ∑§⁄U ¬˝ËÃ
O my soul, dedicate thyself to God. Listen to His praises and
sing them. Cultivate the company of the good and ever think of God;
thus wilt thou be purified of sin. Remember, O friend, that time is
biding its opportunity like a serpent with its mouth wide open to
swallow thee. Nanak says: Time is fleeting, remember therefore thy
God.
9-9-1930
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

363

137

∑§Ê„U ⁄U ’Ÿ πÊ¡Ÿ ¡Êß¸ –
Why dost thou search for Him in the jungle? He is in thee
always though unaffected by thee. Even as the fragrance abides in the
flower or the likeness in the mirror so is God everywhere, always.O
brother, look for Him within thyself. The guru teaches us that He is
both within and without. Nanak says: O man, without knowing thyself
the darkness of illusion cannot be dispelled.
10-9-1930
138

‚È◊⁄UŸ ∑§⁄U ‹ ◊⁄U ◊ŸÊ –
O my soul, remember thy God, thy years are rolling by without
His sacred name—man without Harinama is even like a well without
water or a cow without milk or a temple without light or a fruit tree
without fruit or body without eyes or night without the moon, or the
earth without rain or a pundit without a knowledge of the Vedas. O
good man watch thy desire, anger, pride and ambition and give them
up. Nanakshah says: O God there is no one to befriend save Thee.
11-9-1930
139

ŸÊ◊ ¡¬Ÿ ÄÿÊ¥ ¿UÊ«U∏ ÁŒÿÊ ?
Why hast thou given up Ramanama? Thou hast not given up
anger nor falsehood, why hast thou given up truthful speech? Being
immersed in this false show why hast thou abandoned the original
home? Thou hast treasured a cowrie, why hast thou neglected the
ruby? Why hast thou given up remembering that which is the source
of all happiness? Khalus says: Why wilt thou not trust God and leave
body, mind and wealth?
12-9-1930
140
All intentions came to naught. Neither was God worshipped nor
more holy places visited. Time has thee in his grip. Wife, friends,
children, chariot, wealth, kingdom of earth filled with riches and ryots
and the like are useless; the one thing needful is the worship of God.
Thou wanderedst much and wast defeated although thou reachedst
man’s estate. Nanak says: Why wilt thou not remember thy Maker
even though it is time to appear in His presence?
13-9-1930
364

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

141

¬ÊÿÊ ¡Ë ◊Ò¢Ÿ ⁄UÊ◊⁄UÃŸ äÊŸ ¬ÊÿÊ –
I have obtained a jewel in the shape of Ramanama. The true
guru gave me this priceless jewel and showed his great favour to me. I
have obtained wealth for eternity, what though I have lost everything
of this earth? This jewel cannot be used up by use nor can it be stolen
by thieves. It increases greatly from day to day. In the vessel called
truth with the true guru as the captain I have been able to cross the
ocean of birth and death. Mira says: I have sung the praise of the
Lord in great glee.
14-9-1930
142

ŸÁ„¢U ∞‚Ê ¡ã◊ ’Ê⁄U¢’Ê⁄U –
Such a birth does not come often. What do I know of the merit
that has given me the human state ! This body appears to be growing
moment by moment but it is also at the same time waning, and it takes
no time to perish altogether even as the leaves of a tree do which once
they are torn from their branch cannot be reattached. This ocean of
birth and death is mighty and has strong terrible currents. But if a
man would take meditation on God for a raft he can cross the ocean.
The sages and great men have loudly proclaimed as they have gone,
says Mira the servant of God, that man has but a few days on earth.
15-9-1930
143

◊Ÿ ⁄U ¬⁄U‚ „UÁ⁄U∑§ ø⁄UŸ
O my soul, touch the feet of Hari; they bring fortune, they are
cool to the touch, soft as lotus and the touch removes the threefold
affliction. The touch of these feet enabled Prahlad to attain Indra’s
status, gave Dhruva permanent stability, enabled Vishnu to rule the
whole universe, gave the wife of Gautama her salvation, enabled
Krishna to show his powers among the shepherd lads and to capture
the Kali snake and to lift the mount Govardhana and thus humble the
pride of Indra. The servant Mira says that the touch of those feet
enables a man to cross the great ocean.
16-9-1930
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

365

144

◊⁄U ÃÊ Áª⁄Uœ⁄U ªÊ¬Ê‹
For me there is none else but Giridhar Gopal, let the whole
world be witness. I have given up brothers, friends, and other relatives.
In disregard of popular talk I sit in the midst of sadhus. I rejoice to
see God’s devotees and weep to see worldly people. I have reared the
creeper of love with my tears. I have churned the curds, extracted
from them the butter and thrown away the rest. The King sent me a
poison cup which I drank with pleasure. Now does everybody know
the story about me. Mira says: Come what may, I am intent upon God
and God alone.
17-9-1930
145

◊Êß¸ ◊Ò¢Ÿ ªÊÁfl¢Œ ‹ËŸÊ ◊Ê‹ –
O mother, I have bought Govind. Some say He is cheap, some
say He is dear. I have weighed Him. Some say He is to be found in the
house, some say in the jungle, and some others say He is sporting with
Radha. Mira’s Lord is to be found in the cradle of love.
146

◊⁄U ⁄UÊáÊÊ¡Ë, ◊Ò¢ ªÊÁfl¢Œ ªÈáÊ ªÊŸÊ –
O my Ranaji, I must sing the praises of Govind. If the King is
angry he is welcome to his capital but if God is angry where is one to
flee? Rana sent a poison cup, I drank it as if it was nectar ; he sent a
black snake in a box, I took it for God Saligram. Mirabai the
love-stricken says: I want Krishna as my Lord and Master.
147

◊Ê⁄UË ‹ÊªË ‹≈U∑§ ªÈL§ ø⁄UŸŸ∑§Ë
My mind is fixed on the guru’s feet. I am ill at ease without
those feet. Everything else is like a mirage, a dream. The ocean of
birth and death has dried down and I have no anxiety about crossing
it. Mira says: O my God, now is my inner sight opened.
366

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

148

„UÁ⁄U! ÃÈ◊ „U⁄UÊ  ¡Ÿ∑§Ë èÊË⁄ –
O God, Thou deliverest. Thay servants from difficulties. Thou
savedst. Draupadi’s honour by extending her garment infinitely For
They devotee Thou becamest man. Thou destroyedst Hiranyakashipu;
didst not tolerate him. Thou savedst the sinking elephant and pulled
him out of the water. Says Mira the servant and beloved of Giridhar:
Where there is grief there is the cry of distress (sent to heaven).
149

ê„UÊÚ¢Ÿ øÊ∑§⁄U ⁄UÊπÊ ¡Ë
O God, make me Thy slave. I shall be Thy gardener and every
day feast my eyes with the sight of Thee, I shall sing about the deeds
of Govind in the groves and lanes of Brindaban. For service I shall
have daily darshan and shall have as pocket money the memory of
Thee; I shall get as estate intense devotion to Thee; thus will I have the
three excellent things. My Lord has worn a peacock feather crown
and a yellow dhoti; He has worn a garland of vaijanti flowers. He
grazes cows in Brindaban and plays upon his pipe. I shall build me a
lofty palace and have windows in it; through them I shall look at my
Lord with my kusumbi (red) sari on. Among the inhabitants of
Brindaban are to be found yogis doing yoga, sannyasis doing tapas,
sadhus singing bhajans. Mira’s Lord is deep and mysterious; keep
thou thy patience—He appears to His devotees even at midnight on
the banks of the Jamuna.
17-9-1930
150

ÁŸãŒ∑§ ’Ê’Ê flË⁄U „U◊Ê⁄UÊ
One who speaks ill of me is a hero for me. He works without
pay. He is instrumental in enabling me to wash off my old sins. He
renders me service without reward. He sinks and saves others. He is
such a beloved fellow. O Rama, I pray for his long life. Dadu says:
The vilifier is a benefactor in disguise.
18-9-1930
151

•¡„ÈUÚ¢ Ÿ ÁŸ∑§‚Ò ¬˝ÊáÊ ∑§∆UÊ⁄U –
Still does cruel life cling obstinately to the body. O my
beloved God, I have been long separated from Thee. Four periods are
like four cycles, the night is gone, the day has broken. O Thou Thief
of my heart, where art Thou, though the promised time is past?
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

367

O Thief I am looking out for Thee on the way but do not see Thee.
Dadu says: Pangs of separation from one’s beloved are like the pangs
of the fabled chakor bird separated from the moon.
19-9-1930
152

¬˝èÊÈ¡Ë! ÃÈ◊ ø¢ŒŸ, „U◊ ¬ÊŸË –
O God, Thou art sandal, I am as water, Thy sweet scent pervades
everything; Thou art the cloud, I am the peacock of the forest looking
for rain like the chakor bird for the moon; Thou art the lamp burning
day and night, I am the wick; Thou art the pearl, I am the string, and

U

we unite as does gold with ‚È⁄UÊ⁄UflÊ⁄ 1.
Raidas the devotee says: Thou art the Lord, I am the slave.
20-9-1930
153

Ÿ⁄U„UÁ⁄U, ø¢ø‹ „UÒ ◊ÁÃ ◊⁄UË, ∑§Ò‚ èÊªÁÃ ∑§M§Ú¢ ◊Ò¢ Ã⁄UË ?
O God, my mind is distracted, how shall I worship Thee? Thou
seest me, I should see Thee, that were a sign of mutual love. Thou
seest me but I do not see Thee, this is a state of a lost mind. Though
Thou art in all always, yet have I not learnt to know Thee ! Thou art
full of virtue, I am full of vice, I have not even acknowledged the debt
owing to Thee. I am floundering between I and Thou, Thine and
mine, how can I be saved? Raidas says: O God of mercy, hail to Thee,
the only stay of the universe.
21-9-1930
154

ÄŸÊ¥ ‚ÊŸÊ ª»§‹Ã∑§Ê ◊Ê⁄UÊ, ¡Êª ⁄U Ÿ ¡Êª ⁄U –
O dullard, why dost thou carelessly sleep away thy time, awake
O man, awake. The yogis or voluptuaries or thieves keep vigil;
likewise do beloved saints who are intent upon God. O brother, keep
vigil like Prahlad and Dhruva and Dhruva got a permanent seat of
honour, Prahlad got a kingdom. The soul is the traveller, the body is
the hotel. How long shalt thou be attached to it? Thou hast but a
night’s stay in the hotel, on the day breaking thou hast to go, seek the
company of the good, serve thy Master and thou shalt be

1

The original Hindi bhajan has “suhaga” meaning ‘borax’, a substance used to
purify gold. Gandhiji has used the Gujarati word ‘surokhar’.

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

happy.Nitanand says: O proud man, worship Rama; only those who
are fortunate know how to keep vigil.
22-9-1930
155

•∑§‹ ∑§‹Ê π‹Ã Ÿ⁄U ôÊÊŸË !
A knowing man uses his knowledge at will. Just as a vessel
moving in all directions is always guided by the polar star, even so
does the knowing one although moving about on earth has his gaze
fixed on the heavens; and just as the ice melts in water so does he
attain his independence by merging himself in the divine. The
condition is indescribable of him whose abode is where the beginning
is unknown and the end never is and where neither the mind nor the
speech can reach. This divine play is wonderful and incomparable. He
who has known it from ancient times speaks as it were from the
heavens. Akha says: Only a rare knowing one recognizes it.
23-9-1930
156

¡ª ¡Ëfl ‚È◊⁄UáÊ ∑§⁄U „UÁ⁄U∑§Ê
O brother, the morning has broken. Wake up and remember thy
Maker. What the true guru says comes after full deliberation;
therefore beware, O brother. There is no one to befriend thee. There is
no sister, no brother; for who will deliver thee when the god of death
pronounces thy doom? Father, mother and others are relatives only
for self. Apart from the remembrance of God there will be no
company, thou wilt be alone. I seek refuge in the feet of Murari the
cleanser from sin and deliverer from bondage. Sahajram says:
Worship Rama, he will remove evil and grant happiness.
24-9-1930
157

Ÿ¢Œ èÊflŸ∑§Ê èÊÍπŸ ◊Êß¸
That ornament of Nanda’s home, Yashoda’s darling, Haladhar’s
brother, Radha’s beloved is the giver of supreme happiness. He is all
in all to the good people, He is the wealth of Siva and the Vedas and
Puranas have sung of His greatness, He is greater than Indra, He is
God of gods, He is Brahm[an] to Brahma, greaterthan the greatest. He
is death to death, Lord among lords. He is beyond measure. Giridhari
is the life of Nandadas and the darling prince to the villagers of
Gokul.
25-9-1930
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

369

158

•’ „UÊÒ¢ ∑§Ê‚ÊÒ¢ ’Ò⁄U ∑§⁄UÊÒ¢ ?
To whom shall I bear ill will? God himself proclaims: “I am in
everything and everyone and regard all equally, only I fear most my
devotees”. Shri Haridas says: By the grace of God I wander about
daily fearlessly.
26-9-1930
159

∑§Êß¸ ’ãŒÊ ∑§Êß¸ ÁŸãŒÊ ∑§Êß¸ ∑§Ò‚ ∑§„UÊ ⁄U
Let those who will, praise and those who will, blame, let them say
what they like; I love Rama, come what may.
. . . 1 had a bundle and the water was deep. But Ramachandra
became a tortoise and carried her on his shell. Even as He endows the
sun and the moon with light, sustains the sky without pillars, makes
stones to float on the sea, why will He not save His servants? Siva,
Sanak, sages like Narad and others worship Him. Jasvant is the servant
of Rama—his Lord from birth to birth.
27-9-1930
160

‚¢Ã ¬⁄U◊ Á„UÃ∑§Ê⁄UË, ¡ªÃ ◊ÊÚ¢„UË¥ –
In the world the saints do the greatest good. They lead us
manifestly towards God and dispel our ignorance. They are kind to all
and like God Himself assist us in our troubles. They are above the
three moods and have no thought of physical comforts. They are
different from the worldly men. Brahmanand says: The company of
saintly people enables us to know God.
28-9-1930

1

Gandhiji has left the words “∑§◊‹ êÿÊŸ ◊Ê≈U ’ÊÚ¢œË” untranslated. Vide also”Letter
to Premabehn Kantak”, 28-9-1930.

370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

161

¬˝ÊÊÁáÊ! ÃÍ „UÁ⁄U‚Ê¥ „U⁄U ⁄¢ – ÃÍ ∑§ÿÊ¥ ⁄U„UÊ ÁŸ«U⁄U ⁄U ?
O man, fear God, how canst thou be indifferent? Do not be
careless, be on thy guard whilst there is yet time and have the fear of
God in thee—Do thy allotted task quickly, know that death is
hovering about thee, do not pride thyself on thy beauty, for thy body
will be reduced to ashes. Messengers of Yama will catch thee by the
throat and make thee smart there. O man, worship thy Maker. Braj
Kishore says: Cling to the feet of Hari and save thyself.
29-9-1930
162

„U ¡ªòÊÊÃÊ, Áfl‡fl-ÁfläÊÊÃÊ
O Thou Protector of the universe, Ruler of its destiny, Abode of
happiness and peace, Ocean of mercy, Friend of the poor, Destroyer
of the pangs of pauperism, Everlasting, Whole, Unending, Beginningless, Perfect Brahma, Ancient of days, Refuge of the people, their
Lord, Adored of then, Matchless, Indescribable, Beloved of the heart,
Guardian of the three worlds, Mainstay of life.
30-9-1930
163

fláÊ¸◊ÁáÊ ◊ËŸ ◊ÿÊ¸Œ◊ÁáÊ ⁄UÊ◊øãº˝
Among fishes the Fish incarnation is the best; among
self-restrained persons Ramachandra is the best; among lovers Krishna
is the best; among the powerful Narahari; in hardness the Tortoise
incarnation; in strength Varaha, the Boar; in elusiveness Vamana who
put on a big body; among mountains the Golden Mount (Meru);
among waters the Ocean; among lakes the Mansarovar; among rivers
the Ganges; among birds the Garuda; among trees the Tree of
fulfilment of desires; among monkeys Hanuman; among cities
Ayodhya; among warriors Parashurama; among instruments the
discus Sudarshana; among feminine strength Parvati the beloved of
Shankara; among devotees prahlad; in love Radhika is the best. Thus
has Kanhar made a garland of jewels for his neck.
1-10-1930
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

371

164

Á’‚⁄U Ÿ ¡Ê•Ê ◊⁄U ◊ËÃ, ÿ„U fl⁄U ◊ÊÚªÍÚ¢ ◊Ò¢ ŸËÃ
O God, my friend, I ask of Thee this boon: do not forget me. I
am dull-witted, know nothing, nor do I show any love for Thee. Thou
never forsakest those whom Thou hast taken under Thy shelter; Thou
wilt give me victory over Thee. I know that I have no merit to
commend itself to Thee, on the contrary, I have terrifying
shortcomings and O my Life, if Thou, knowing my shortcomings,
wouldst give me up, I shall be undone. But I have a certain faith in me
that Thou wouldst not forsake me. It is Thy habit of old that Thou
ignorest Thy devotee’s blemishes. Thou art the friend of the poor,
Thou art gentle of nature. I adore Thee. Premsakhi says: I do not
know Thy mysteries, only I believe in Thee.
2-10-1930
165

„UÊ ⁄UÁ‚ÿÊ ◊Ò¢ ÃÊ ‡Ê⁄UáÊ ÁÃ„UÊ⁄UË
O Beloved, I seek refuge in Thee. I have neither means nor
strength, nor wisdom. My sole faith is in the touch of Thy feet, O
Lord. I am like the bitter fruit of low-lying ground, but Thou, Ocean
of mercy, hast raised me high. I am but a poor child seeking Thy
protection. O Lord do not forget me who am so helpless. O Beloved,
keep Thou me believing me to be Thy slave. Premsakhi says: I ever
stake my all on Thee.
3-10-1930
166

Œ⁄U‚Ÿ ŒŸÊ ¬˝ÊãÃ Á¬ÿÊ⁄U
O Star of my eyes, darling of Nanda, show Thy dear self to me.
O Thou Friend of the distressed, Fount of mercy, Representative of all
virtue, full of youth and of handsome appearance, I can no longer
restrain myself. I am intent on seeing Thee face to face. Rasik says: In
the hope of that happy meeting day and night I meditate on Thee
alone.
4-10-1930
372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

167

øÃŸ! •’ ◊ÊÁ„¢U Œ‡Ê¸Ÿ ŒË¡–
O Divine Spirit, let me have a sight of Thee. By it I shall attain
supreme bliss; by it shall the endless chain of birth and deathbe
broken. For Thee I have resorted to austerities, penance and many
ceremonies; how long am I to continue? Without Thee all these are
useless, for the heart does not melt; some foolish ones hug action,
others knowledge. The joy and the value of union with Thee neither
of them knows. Thou art above them. Thou art and art not in all. In
Thy perfection Thou art unique. Thy action is a mystery; Thou art
both master and disciple. Though formless and indescribable, yet
Thou art all forms. Thou alone knowest Thyself. The Vedas declare
Thee to be unknowable. Thy servants sing Thy praises.
5-10-1930
168

•’ „U◊ •◊⁄U èÊÿ Ÿ ◊⁄¥Uª
I have now become immortal, I shall not die. Why should I have
to put on a new body when I have given up self-deception which is its
cause. Desire and anger bind one in the world. These I shall destroy.
From time immemorial, man has died, now I shall destroy time itself.
Body is mortal; soul is immortal, it would revert to its original state. I
shall do away with the mortal and become an inmate of the abode of
the immortal. I shall cleanse myself and be pure. I have died many
times because of my ignorance; now I shall be [free] from the pair of
happiness and unhappiness. Anandghan says: Those who will not take
shelter under the two-lettered name that is so near everyone will surely
die.
6-10-1930
169

⁄UÊ◊ ∑§„UÊ ⁄U„U◊ÊŸ ∑§„UÊ ∑§Ê™§, ∑§Êã„U ∑§„UÊ ◊„UÊŒfl ⁄UË –
All is Brahm[an]. Call it Rama or Rahman, Kanha or Mahadev,
Parasnath or Brahma; pots are different but as earth they are one.
Even so do we make imaginary differentiations; in essence Truth is
one and indivisible. He who is restraint incarnate is Rama, he who is
mercy incarnate is Rahim, he who puts an end to all work (by
renouncing fruits) is Kanha, he who attains Nirvana is Mahadev, he
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

373

who touches reality is Parasnath, he who knows himself is Brahm[an].
Thus, says Anandghan, I am spirit (not body) and am still.
7-10-1930
170

’¢œŸ ∑§Ê≈U ◊È⁄UÊ⁄UË „U◊⁄U ’¢œŸ ∑§Ê≈U ◊È⁄UÊ⁄UË
O God, break my bondage. The alligator and the elephant
fought in the lake, the latter was dragged deep down and when the
elephant’s cry of distress reached Thee, Thou left Thy pleasures to
help him. For the sake of Draupadi Thou madest haste to reach her
Thy help when the tyrant was pulling her garment in the midst of the
assembly. The wife of Gautama Rishi attained salvation by the touch
of Thy feet. The prostitute and Sabari too reached the same state (by
the same devotion to Thee). O people, listen to the acts of the saints
and praise God. Vidhuband who is pining for the sight of Thee says:
O God accept me.
8-10-1930
171

◊Ò¢ ÃÊ Á’⁄UŒ èÊ⁄UÊ‚ ’„ÈUŸÊ◊Ê
My reliance is on the celebrated promise of God. O God, my
Master, I know nothing of service or Ramanama. Thou hast saved the
elephant, the [vulture]1 , the prostitute and the sinner Ajamil. I have
sought Thy protection on the strength of this evidence of Thy mercy.
Premanand says: O all-powerful and all-knowing Lord, save me or kill
me.
9-10-1930
172

•ª⁄U „UÒ ‡ÊÊÒ∑§ Á◊‹Ÿ∑§Ê, ÃÊ „U⁄UŒ◊ ‹ÊÒ ‹ªÊÃÊ ¡Ê –
If Thou wouldst see Him with each breath think of Him. Burn
thy pride and smear thy body with its ashes; take up the broom of
love and with it wipe out the distinctions of me and thee; reduce the
notion of duality to dust and sprinkle it on thy prayer carpet; leave the
carpet, break up the rosary, throw the sacred books in the river, seek
the help of angels and be their servant; do not fast nor keep ramzan,
do not go to the mosque nor make obeisances; break to pieces the
water jar for prayer cleansing and drink the wine of the joy of union;
eat and drink but never be off thy guard; enjoy thy intoxication
1

374

The source here is indistinct.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

continuously; burn thy egotism. Be neither Mulla nor Brahmin; leave
duality and worship Him alone. Shah Kalandar has proclaimed: say, ‘I
am He’. Mad Mansur says: My heart has known truth, that is the wine
shop of the intoxicated, make that the object of thy visit.
10-10-1930
173

„UÒ ’„UÊ⁄U ’Êª ŒÈÁŸÿÊ ø¢Œ ⁄UÊ¡ !
Life in this world called beautiful garden is only for a short
while; you will enjoy the spectacle for a few days only. O traveller,
prepare for the march; residence on earth is short. When the great
hakim Lukman was asked, “How long will you live?”—rubbing his
hands in despair he replied: “Only a few days.,’ After burial the angel
of death said in the grave: you will sleep here only for a few days. O
friends, you and I will have to separate in a few days. O tyrants, why
do you oppress innocent people, your days are numbered. Nazir says:
Remember the day of death; you cannot rely upon life but for a short
while.
11-10-1930
174

’‚ •’ ◊⁄U ÁŒ‹◊¥ ’‚Ê ∞∑§ ÃÍ „UÒ
Yes, now Thou art the only King of my heart, Thou art my only
Beloved. O Creator, now my meditation is solely upon Thy sacred feet
day and night. My heart receives consolation only from Thee, Thy
love possesses me. People generally consider me to be mad;
everywhere Thy name is on my tongue. I have nothing to do with the
pleasures of the world, Thy love is the only thing to please me, my
heart’s case I shall paint with Thy love; knowledge has united me to
Thee; the prayer of Thy servant is that I may have nothing to do with
Satan.
12-10-1930
175

•¡’ Ã⁄UÊ ∑§ÊŸÍŸ ŒπÊ, πÈŒÊ ÿÊ!
O God, Thy law is mysterious. Wherever the heart is set,
there Thou art to be seen; with Thee there is neither temple
nor mosque. Thou lookest only for a true heart in Thy seeker.
Thou exhibitest the splendour of Thy love to him who has
surrendered himself heart and soul to Thee. He who becomes
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

375

enamoured of Thy divine qualities, takes all his colouring from Thee.
He in whom there is still egotism left is like one who has lost his way
and he is united to Thee who has lost his egotism. He who believes
in Thee sees Thee face to face. It is like a beggar finiding a priceless
pearl.
13-10-1930
176

ŸÒÿÊ ◊⁄UË ÃŸ∑§‚Ë ’Ê¤ÊË ¬ÊâÊ⁄U èÊÊ⁄U
My boat is tiny and is laden with stones; eddies are tossing it
from all sides and the helmsman is drunk and the boat is in
midstream; there is whirlwind and on the top of it all rain is pouring in
torrents. Giridhar poet says: O Lord be Thou the helmsman; let Thy
mercy be the oar and let the boat reach the shore safe.
14-10-1930
177

∑§⁄U ‹ Á‚¢ªÊ⁄U øÃÈ⁄U •‹’‹Ë
O good woman, put on thy best garments. Thou art to go to thy
Lord. There the shroud will be of earth, the bed will be of earth and
thou wilt be united to earth. . . . Wash, bathe, dress thy hair; there is no
returning from there.
14-10-1930
178

flÒcáÊfl ¡Ÿ ÃÊ ÃŸ ∑§„Ë∞ ¡ ¬Ë«U ¬⁄Êß¸ ¡ÊáÊ ⁄U
He is a Vaishnava who identifies himself with others’ sorrows
and in so doing has no pride about him. Such a one respects every
one and speaks ill of none. He controls his speech, his passions and
his thoughts. May his mother be blessed. He is equidisposed towards
all, has no desires, regards another’s wife as his mother, always speaks
the truth and does not touch other people’s property. He labours
neither under infatuation nor delusion and withdraws his mind from
worldly things; he is intent on Ramanama; his body is his sacred
shrine for pilgrimage; he is no miser and is free from cunning and he
has conquered passions and anger. Narasaiyo says: His presence
purifies his surroundings.
15-10-1930
376

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

179
MARATHI

¡ ∑§Ê ⁄¢U¡‹ ªÊ¢¡‹, ÀŸÊ¢Á‚ Ê„UÁÊ ¡Ê •Ê¬È‹ –
Know him to be a true man who takes to his bosom those who
are in distress. Know that God resides in the heart of such a one. His
heart is saturated with gentleness through and through. He receives as
his only those who are forsaken. He bestows on his man servants and
maid servants the same affection he shows to his children. Tukaram
says: What need is there to describe him further? He is the very
incarnation of divinity.
180

Œfl ¡fl›UË •¢Ã⁄UË, èÊ≈UË ŸÊ„UË¥ ¡ã◊ fl⁄UÊ –
God is near indeed. He is within us. Yet we did not see Him in
our lifetime. He pervades the three worlds, yet the world knew Him
not. Fortunately saintly men appeared and we saw God. Ramdas says:
Through that happy event we began to see God within ourselves.
181

Ã¥ ◊Ÿ ÁŸc∆UÈ⁄U ∑§Ê¢ ∑§‹¥
O God, Thou Who art known to be an ocean of mercy, why hast
Thou hardened Thy heart? For on the elephant’s scream of prayer
Thou ranst to his assistance; for the devotion of Prahlad Thou roaredst
in the fiery pillar; for the piteous appeal of Draupadi Thy heart
melted. Eknath says: By the grace of guru Janardana my mind is
intent upon the feet of God.
15-10-1930
182

¬Ê¬ÊøË flÊ‚ŸÊ Ÿ∑§Ê ŒÊflÍ¢ «UÊ›UÊ¢
O God, let me not be witness to desire for sin, better make me
blind; let me not hear ill of anyone, better make me deaf; let not a
sinful word escape my lips, better make me dumb; let me not lust after
another’s wife, better that I disappear from this earth. Tuka says: I am
tired of everything worldly, Thee alone I like, O Gopal.
16-10-1930
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

377

183

S◊⁄UÃÊ¢ ÁŸàÿ „UÁ⁄U, ◊ª ÃË ◊ÊÿÊ ∑§Êÿ ∑§⁄Ë?
What can maya do to one who always remembers God? By
listening to God’s word, by laying it to heart and by meditating on
man’s oneness with God, death ceases to frighten one. The great God
Who is a fount of mercy and giver of boons blesses such a one. Amrit
says: I therefore drink in nectar by always contemplating Oddhav’s1
feet.
17-10-1930
184

‚¢Ã¬ŒÊøË ¡Ê«U, Œ ⁄U „UÁ⁄U –
O God, grant me love of companionship of the good. It brings
forth lovely sprouts of internal bliss. O God by fully granting man’s
lawful desires Thou satisfiest his heart’s craving. Amrit says: O God,
Thou sweetenst the end of Thy devotees.
17-10-1930
185

èÊÊfl œ⁄UÊ ⁄U, •¬È‹Ê‚Ê Œfl ∑§⁄UÊ ⁄U –
Give thyself to devotion and merge thyself in God. Let people
say what they like for this, thou shouldst store up overwhelming love.
Be indifferent to praise or blame, leave off ‘me and thee’ give up all
desire and devote thyself to desireless worship, abandon all vain
imaginings and doubts; old age has crept over thee. Man’s estate is
difficult to reach, it will not come again for ages. Having understood
this, seek out a teacher. Shivdini has no other determination; he has
given himself body and soul to his teacher Kesarinath; for him the
world has ceased to exist. Worship now God the friend of his devotees.
18-10-1930
1

378

Note by Gandhiji:“ Oddhav was Amrit’s teacher”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

186

•‡ÊÊ‡flÃ ‚¢ª˝„U ∑§ÊáÊ ∑§⁄UË?
Who will lay by stores that are bound to perish? Why should one
build houses, verandahs and storeys? The humble cottage is good
enough; covering made of tattered rags is also good enough. I should
eat with relish whatever it pleases God to give me from day to day.
Amrit says: What is filled in the beggar’s bowl gives all the relish one
wants; it is such a joy.
19-10-1930
187

„UÁ⁄UèÊ¡ŸÊflËáÊ ∑§Ê›U œÊ‹flÍ¢ Ÿ∑§Ê ⁄U –
Do not let thy time pass without the praise of God. Thou fearest
the wheel of life as one fears a rope for a snake and thus preventest
union between soul and the Maker. Do not put out the lamp of
knowledge within. Weigh thy word so that it will be evidence of steady
balanced judgment. Do not plough the sand and waste time by
parading thy opinion. Having informed thy mind properly know the
reality through the companionship of the good. Never commit thyself
to anything till thou hast had experience. Sohira says: There is no
alternation of night and day where there is the lamp of knowledge;
without it thou maystn’t even move the eyelid.
20-10-1930
188

¬ÁflòÊ Ã¥ ∑È§‹ ¬ÊflŸ ÃÊ Œ‡Ê
Blessed is that family and that country where servants of God
take birth. God becomes their work and their religion. The three
worlds become holy through them. Tell me who have become
purified through pride of birth? The Puranas have testified like bards
without reserve that those called untouchables have attained salvation
through devotion to God. Tuladhar, the Vaishya, Gora, the potter,
Rohidas, a tanner, Kabir, a Momin, Latif, a Muslim, Sena, a barber, and
Vishnudas, Kanhopatra, Dadu, a carder, all become one at the feet of
God in the company of hymn singers. Chokhamela and Banka, both
Mahars by birth, became one with God. Oh, how great was the
devotion of Jani the servant girl of Namdev! Pandharinath (God)
dined with her. Meral Janak’s family no one knows, yet who can do
justice to his greatness? For the servant of God there is no caste, no
varna, so say the Vedic sages. Tuka says: I cannot count the degraded
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

379

and the forsaken saved through God’s grace. You may consult the
sacred books if you would know them all.
21-10-1930
189

ÁŸÿ◊ ¬UÊ›UÊfl, ¡Á⁄U ê„UáÊÁ‡Ê‹ ÿÊªË √„Êfl¥ –
If thou wouldst be a yogi, thou must attend to the necessary
observances. Know that he who is slave to his tongue and sold himself
to the goddess of sleep will never practise yoga. The candidate for
yoga should be moderate in sleep and food and must not indulge in
vain disputations. Make up thy mind thus to regulate thy food and all
thy movements; practise internal concentration and then thou wouldst
have internal peace. When thy mind is taken off external objects it will
easily turn inward and be fixed even as a light protected from winds
becomes steady and fixed.
190

¡âÊ¥ ¡ÊÃÊ Ã¢âÊ¥ ÃÍ¢ ◊Ê¤ÊÊ ‚Ê¢ªÊÃË
Wherever I go, Thou art my companion. Having taken me by
the hand Thou movest me. I go alone depending solely on Thee.
Thou bearest too my burdens. If I am likely to say anything foolish,
Thou makest it right. Thou hast removed my bashfulness and madest
me self-confident, O Lord. All the people have become my guards,
relatives and bosom friends. Tuka says: I now conduct myself without
any care. I have attained divine peace within and without.
22-10-1930
191

Ÿ ∑§›UÃÊ¢ ∑§Êÿ ∑§⁄UÊflÊ ©U¬Êÿ
When one does not know, what is one to do so as to have
devotion to Thy sacred feet? When will it so happen that Thou wilt
come and settle in my heart? O God, when wilt Thou so ordain that I
may meditate on Thee with a true heart? Remove Thou my untruth
and, O Truth, come and dwell Thou in my heart. Tuka says: O
Panduranga, do Thou protect by Thy power sinners like me.
380

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

192

◊ÈÁÄÃ-¬Ê¢ª ŸÊ„UË¥ ÁflcáÊÍÁøÿÊ ŒÊ‚Ê¢
To the servants of Vishnu there is no yearning even for
salvation; they do not want to know what the wheel of birth and death
is like.; Govind sits steadily settled in their hearts; for them the
beginning and the end are the same. They make over happiness and
misery to God and themselves remain untouched by them, the
auspicious songs sing of them; their strength and their intellect are
dedicated to benevolent uses; their hearts contain gentleness; they are
full of mercy even like God; they know no distinction between theirs
and others’. Tuka says: They are even like unto God and Vaikuntha is
where they live.
23-10-1930
193

∑§Êÿ flÊáÊÍÚ¢ •ÊÃÊ¢ Ÿ ¬È⁄U „U flÊáÊË
How now shall I describe (the praises of the good); my speech is
not enough (for the purpose). I therefore put my head at their feet.
The magnet leaves its greatness and does not know that it may not
touch iron. Even so good men’s powers are for the benefit of the
world. They afflict the body for the service of others. Mercy towards
all is the stock-in-trade of the good. They have no attachment for
their own bodies. Tuka says: Others’ happiness is their happiness;
nectar drops from their lips.
194

ŸÊ„UË¥ ‚¢Ã¬áÊ Á◊›UÃ Ã¢ „UÊ≈UË¢
Saintliness is not to be purchased in shops nor is it to be had for
wandering nor in cupboards nor in deserts nor in forests. It is not
obtainable for a heap of riches. It is not in the heavens above nor in
the entrails of the earth below. Tuka says: It is a life’s bargain and if
you will not give your life to possess it better be silent.
24-10-1930
195

èÊÄÃ ∞‚ ¡ÊáÊ ¡ Œ„UË¥ ©UŒÊ‚
He is a devotee who is indifferent about body, who has killed all
desire, whose one object in life is (to find) Narayana, whom wealth or
company or even parents will not distract, for whom whether in front
or behind there is only God in difficulty, who will not allow any
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

381

difficulty to cross his purpose. Tuka says: Truth guides such men in
all their doings.
196

flŒ •Ÿ¢Ã ’ÊÁ‹‹Ê
The essence of the endless Vedas is this: Seek the shelter of God
and repeat His name with all thy heart. The result of the cogitations of
all the Shastras is also the same; Tuka says: The burden of the
eighteen Puranas is also identical.
25-10-1930
197

•ÊáÊË∑§ ŒÈ‚⁄¥U ◊¡ ŸÊ„UË¥ •ÊÃÊ¢
This heart of mine is determined that for me now there is
nothing else; I meditate on Panduranga, I think of Panduranga, I see
Panduranga whether awake or dreaming. All the organs are so attuned
that I have no other desire left. Tuka says: My eyes have recognized
that image standing on that brick transfixed in meditation unmoved
by anything.
198

Ÿ Á◊›UÊ πÊflÿÊ, Ÿ flÊ…UÊ ‚¢ÃÊŸ
What though I get nothing to eat and have no progeny? It is
enough for me that Narayana’s grace descends upon me. My speech
gives me that advice and says likewise to the other people —Let the
body suffer, let adversity befall one, enough that Narayana is
enthroned in my heart. Tuka says: All the above things are fleeting;
my welfare consists in always remembering Gopal.
26-10-1930
199

◊„UÊ⁄UÊ‚Ë Á‡Êfl, ∑§Ê¬ ’˝ÊrÊÔáÊ ÃÊ Ÿ√„U –
He who becomes enraged at the touch of a Mahar is no
Brahmin. There is no penance for him even by giving his life. There
is the taint of untouchability in him who will not touch a Chandal.
Tuka says: A man becomes what he is continually thinking of.
382

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

200

Œ„ ¡ÊflÊ •âÊflÊ ⁄UÊ„UÊ
Let the body persist or perish, my heart must be fixed on
Panduranga. I swear by Thee O Pandharinath that I shall never let go
the hold of Thy feet. On my lips must be Thy name, in my heart
everlasting devotion to Thee. Namdev says: O Keshav such is my vow
but it is for Thee to make it good.
27-10-1930
201

¬Èáÿ ¬⁄U-©U¬∑§Ê⁄U ¬Ê¬ Ã ¬⁄U¬Ë«U∏Ê
Merit consists in doing good to others, sin in doing harm to
others. There is no other pair comparable to this. Truth is the only
religion (or freedom); untruth is bondage, there is no secret like this.
God’s name on one’s lips is itself salvation, disregard (of the name)
know to be perdition. Companionship of the good is the only heaven,
studious indifference is hell. Tuka says: It is thus clear what is good
and what is injurious, let people choose what they will.
202

‡Êfl≈UË¥øË ÁflŸfláÊË
This is my last prayer, O saintly people listen to it: O God, do
not forget me; now what more need I say, Your holy feet know
everything. Tuka says: I prostrate myself before Your feet, let the
shadow of Your grace descend upon me.
203

„¥UÁø ŒÊŸ Œ ªÊ ŒflÊ
O God, grant only this boon. I may never forget Thee; and I
shall prize it dearly. I desire neither salvation nor riches nor
prosperity; give me always company of the good. Tuka says: On that
condition Thou mayest send me to the earth again and again.
28-10-1930
204
BENGALI

•¢Ã⁄U ◊◊ Áfl∑§Á‚Ã ∑§⁄UÊ •ãÃ⁄UÃ⁄U „U!
O Thou Dweller in my heart, open it out, purify it, make it
bright and beautiful, awaken it, prepare it, make it fearless, make it a
blessing to others, rid it of laziness, free it from doubt, unite it with all,
destroy its bondage, let Thy peaceful music pervade all its works;
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

383

make my heart fixed on Thy holy lotus feet and make it full of joy,
full of joy, full of joy.
205

fl„U ÁŸ⁄UãÃ⁄U •ŸãÃ •ÊŸãŒœÊ⁄UÊ –
Endless stream of joy flows eternally, ancient music sounds in
the boundless sky, innumerable suns, moons and stars rise. That
matchless King of kings shines in all his glory in the whole universe.
A crore hearts of devotees astonished, motionless, speechless bow their
heads before the feet of the Almighty.
29-10-1930
206

ÃÈÁ◊ ’¢œÈ, ÃÈÁ◊U ŸÊâÊ
Thou art Brother, Thou art Lord, day and night Thou art mine,
Thou art my happiness, Thou my peace, Thou the way immortal,
Thou art the Abode of joy, unite me to Thee, remove sorrow, the
touch of Thy feet quenches all agony, O Thou boundless shelter of
the distressed!
[30-10-1930] 1
207

∞∑§Á≈U Ÿ◊S∑§Ê⁄U ¬˝èÊÈ ∞∑§Á≈U Ÿ◊S∑§Ê⁄U
In one prostration O Lord, Thou givest rest to all Thy creatures
in Thy world.2
[30-10-1930]
208
GUJARATI CONTINUED

èÊÍÃ›U èÊÁÄÃ ¬ŒÊ⁄UâÊ ◊Ê≈UÈ¢, ’˝sÔ‹Ê∑§◊Ê¢ ŸÊÁ„U ⁄U
On this globe worship of God is the greatest thing, there is
nothing like it even in the heavenly world. By acquiring merit one
reaches only paradise from there to come again to earth in the end.
But men of God ask not for salvation; they desire to be born again for
everlasting service, praise and singing and to meet God face to face.
Blessed are the parents of him who being born on India’s earth has

1

The source does not bear any date, but presumably this and the following
bhajan belong to this date.
2
Note by Gandhiji: “These Bengali verses of the Poet have been
authoritatively translated and so the renderings so far made here should be corrected
and replaced by the authoritative versions.”

384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

praised God for he has fulfilled the purpose of his birth. Blessed be
Brindaban and the deeds performed therein, blessed be the inhabitants
of Vraj for all the eight great siddhis are at their disposal and they can
have salvation for the asking. The relish of that joy isknown to
Shankar or to the Yogi Shukadevji as also somewhat to the maids of
Vraj, says Narsaiyo, who enjoys himself in the sunshine of His
presence.
31-10-1930
209

ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊŸÈ¢ ŸÊ◊ ¡ ‹ÃÊ¢, flÊ⁄U ÃŸ Ã¡Ë∞ ⁄U
We should forsake him who dissuades us from taking God’s
name; we should worship God with all our mind, speech and deed. For
doing this we should (if necessary) leave caste, family, mother, father,
sister, son, wife, even as the snake discards his skin. Prahlad left his
father but would not give up God’s name, Bharata and Shatrughna
gave up their mother but never Rama. Rishis’ wives gave up their
husbands for the sake of God. Thereby they not only lost nothing but
gained all the four ends. Narsaiyo says: The women of Vraj gave up
their all for the sake of Vitthal and sported with the Lord.
1-11-1930
210

‚◊⁄UŸ üÊË„UÁ⁄U, ◊‹ ◊◊ÃÊ ¬⁄UË
O Good man, remember God and give up thy egotism, think of
the source from which thou hast come. What art thou and what dost
thou cling to? Without understanding (the root of things) thou sayst
‘this is mine, that is mine’ but if thou wilt use thy judgment thou wilt
observe that the body is not thine for try what thou wilt, thou canst not
keep it (for ever), it is bound to perish. When this body perishes there
will be many more new ones and thy wife, children and others will
deceive thee. Thou thinkest always of wealth and that is the greatest
stumbling block in thy way. Thy lord is near thee and thou dost not
know Him, thou hast lost thy chance and wasted thy time. Thou art in
deep sleep and suffocated; why wilt thou not listen to the words of the
sages and wake up? Narsaiyo says: It is a matter of shame thou wilt
not wake up, if thou only wilt, thy age-long desires will abate.
2-11-1930
211

•Áπ‹ ’˝rÊÔÊ¢«U◊Ê¢ ∞∑§ ÃÈ¢ üÊË„UÁ⁄U
Throughout the whole universe Thou alone art; Thou appearest
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

385

as many, taking diverse forms. Thou art the informing Beingin the
material body. Thou art the essence of light, Thou art the word of the
Vedas in the void, Thou art the air, water, earth. O Lord, Thou
spreadest out high up in the trees, similarly having created a multitude
of forms and a variety of tastes from One Being Thou hast become
many. The Vedas declare and the other Shastras bear witness that
there is no distinction between a nugget of gold and a gold earring;
when it undergoes shapes, it wears different appearances and different
names but in reality it is all gold. Thou art the seed in the tree and
Thou art the tree from the seed and from this phenomenon one sees
change in form. Narsaiyo says: This is all a matter of the mind but if I
worship Thee in true faith Thou wilt appear as Thou art.
3-11-1930
212

ÖÿÊ¢ ‹ªË •ÊÃ◊Ê-Ãûfl øËãÿÊ ŸÁ„U
As long as the secret of the soul is not known, all practices are
useless; thy life as a human being has passed away uselessly like the
rains out of season. What though thou bathest daily and performest
worship and dost service in the temples, what though thou givest alms
staying in thy own house, what though thou adoptest long hair,
smearest thy body with the sacred ashes. What though thou hast
removed thy hair, performest austerities and visitest holy places, what
though thou takest the rosary and takest His name; what though thou
markest the sacred mark on the forehead and keepest the tulsi1 leaf,
what though thou drinkest the Ganges water; what though thou canst
recite the Vedas and knowest the grammar and pronouncest correctly;
what though thou knowest the tunes and their effect; what though
thou knowest the six systems and the permutations and combinations
of letters. All these are devices for finding the wherewithal for one’s
support if thou hast not known the soul of souls. Narsaiyo says: Thou
hast wasted the priceless human heritage if thou hast not known the
secret of the universe.
4-11-1930

1

386

Basil
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

213

¡ ª◊ ¡ªÃªÈL Œfl ¡ªŒË‡ÊŸ
It is useless to sorrow over what God ordains. Without His will
we cannot move a blade of grass. If we do fuss about things, what is
left over is a legacy of sorrows. It is ignorance that prompts one to say
‘I have done this’, even as a dog under a cart fancies himself
shouldering the weight of the cart. A few yogis only know that the
whole universe depends upon Him. If a man could dispose things, he
would root out all enemies and have only friends, he would have no
kings and no beggars, he would plant on every house flags
betokening (limitless possession of wealth). Even as a creeper gives in
its season leaves, fruit and flowers so does man receive what is his due
in due time; a foolish man only will therefore resort to vain
cogitations. Often does man write much and fails to say the right
thing. People worship what they like and they seem to believe
whole-heartedly that theirs is the only true belief. But Narsaiyo says
with folded hands: Consider wordly happiness to be vain; everything
is nothing without Krishna; I want my God from birth to birth.
5-11-1930
214

¡ÊªËŸ ¡Ê™§¢ ÃÊ ¡ªÃ ŒË‚ ŸÁ„U
As I awake I see no world, the world was a conglomeration of
enjoyments perceived in the dream-land. The joys are all
transformations of mind and its sports are identical. Life is but the
sport of Brahm[an]. The five elements spring from Parabrahm[an]
and they cohere (through His will). The flowers and the fruit are of
and from the tree, the branch is not separate from the stem. The Vedas
declare and the other Shastras bear witness that1 . . . Life springs from
Siva’s will. He has devised the fourteen worlds. Narsaiyo says: Many a
saint has found salvation through realizing ‘Thou art That’.
6-11-1930
215

äÿÊŸ œ⁄U „UÁ⁄U ÃáÊÈ¢ •À¬◊ÁÃ •Ê›U‚È
O lazy man of poor wit, contemplate God so that the miseries of
life may be alleviated. By engaging in any other pursuit, thou wilt
gain nothing. God of Death will fool thee by leading thee into snares.
1

Note by Gandhiji: “For this verse see 107 of which this is an exact
repetition.”
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

387

All the good flows from dedication to the feet of Shrikrishna; there
is immeasurable bliss in seeking that shelter. Regard all other things as
useless and treasure Krishna’s name in thy heart. Put away infatuation
at a safe distance and rest before the feet of Hari. Do not turn away
when the real thing is brought to thy notice. O fool, thou hast built
castles in the air; know that they are without anyfoundation. The
world praises those who weave into their acts the qualities of the Deity.
Poor Narsaiyo dedicated himself to God; he considers nothing
comparable to the praise of God.
7-11-1930
216

¡ÍŸÈ¢ ÃÊ âÊÿÈ¢ ⁄U Œfl›U ¡ÍŸÈ¢ ÃÊ âÊÿÈ¢
This temple is worn out and the dweller is yet young. This body,
O dweller, is tottering, the teeth are gone, only the gums are left. Thou
art attached to the body but thou hast flown and the body remains.
Mira says: O God (this being the condition), may I love Thee and
drink in Thy love.
8-11-1930
217

Ÿ„UË¥ ⁄U Áfl‚ÊL¢ „UÁ⁄U •¢Ã⁄U◊Ê¢âÊË Ÿ„UË¥ ⁄U Áfl‚ÊL¢ „UÁ⁄U
I will not forget Hari who is in my heart. I had gone to the
Jamuna to fetch water and on the way I found that priceless Lord. In
passing through Brindaban I fell at Thy feet. Thou hadst worn
saffron-colour dhoti and embroidered frock, Thou hadst saffron mark
painted on the forehead; Thou hadst a peacock-feathered crown and
rings in Thy ears; Thou wast playing on the flute. Mira says: What
need is there to describe Him further? I have surrendered my all to
Him who is my Lord and Master.
9-11-1930
218

’Ê‹ ◊Ê ’Ê‹ ◊Ê ’Ê‹ ◊Ê ⁄U ⁄UÊœÊ∑Î cáÊ Á’ŸÊ ’Ë¡È¢ ’Ê‹ ◊Ê –
Do not utter anything else than Radhakrishna. Do not take the
bitter leaf when thou hast sugar-cane in front of thee; do not take
shelter under the light of the firefly when thou hast the sun and the
moon before thee; do not take lead in the place of jewels like
diamonds and rubies. Mira says: I have given my all against Giridhar
(God).
10-11-1930
388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

219

◊Èπ«UÊŸË ◊ÊÿÊ ‹ÊªË ⁄U –
O dear Lord, I love Thy face; as soon as I saw Thy face, the
world became useless to me and my mind became detached from it.
The happiness that the world gives is like a mirage, one should move
about deeming it of no account. Mirabai says: Blessed Lord, my only
hope is in Thee and I consider myself fortunate (in that I have seen
thee face to face).
11-11-1930
220

flÒcáÊfl ŸâÊË âÊÿÊ ÃÈ¢ ⁄U, ‡ÊËŒ ªÈ◊ÊŸ◊Ê¢ ÉÊÍ◊
Thou hast not yet become a devotee of God; what is thy pride
based on? Thy heart does not swell with joy to see men of God, it does
not melt to sing God’s praises. Thy desires have not abated, thy eyes
are red with anger, thou wilt be a true Vaishnava if thou canst draw
another towards thee, thou art nothing so long as thy contact does not
influence one for the better, thou art not pained to see others in pain,
thou dost not hesitate to speak ill of others, thou hast no true love for
Vitthal (God) , thou art not ashamed of repeating ‘I, I’. Thou hast no
liking for serving others, thou canst not give up selfishness, thy acts
don’t accord with thy speech, when challenged thou deniest thy
speech(?); thou hast no relish for prayer, thou hast no faith in Hari
(God), so long as thou hankerest after the world, the world is thy
master and thou its slave; if thou wilt master thyself thou wilt find, the
true thing Daya says: Whether thou likest it or not, I must say what is
true.
12-11-1930
221

„UÁ⁄U, ¡flÊ ÃflÊ „È¢U ŒÊ‚ Ã◊Ê⁄UÊ
O God, such as I am, I am Thy servant. O Ocean of Mercy,
take me by the hand, Thou art companion in distress, Thou art
protector of the fallen, Thou dost not dismiss from thy presence the
wretch who seeks Thy protection no matter how much sunk he may
be in sin. O Thou deliverer, Thou shieldest Thy devotees who may be
tempted to do wrong, Thou givest fortune to the unfortunate and O
Giver of boons, Thou givest capacity and satisfaction, O good Lord,
Thou makest crooked straight even when human endeavour has
failed. O God who deliverest from misery, Thou washest the sins of
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

389

the undeserving sinner, Thou protectest Thy devotees without their
asking, Thou reckonest their faults as merit, Thou removest the
difficulties of those who invoke Thy aid, Thou dost not distinguish
between the great and the small, Thou art the help of the helpless,
Thou knowest the aches of men’s hearts, Thou art the friend of the
afflicted, Thou sufferest, Thou takest away fear from men and Thou
overlookest blemishes, Thou art the Lord of all, the Soul of souls,
Thou alone art independent, Thou art the beloved of Pritam, Thou art
the guardian of Thy servants, Thou art my Rock.
13-11-1930
222

◊„UÊ∑§c≈U ¬ÊêÿÊ ÁflŸÊ ∑Î cáÊ ∑§ÊŸ ◊›UKÊ
You may call to mind the sages of all the four yugas and you
will find that no one saw God without much pain and tribulation.
Brave men have great regard therefore for the devotees of Vishnu,
only the cruel-hearted are against devotion. Dhruva, Prahlad, Bhishma,
Bali, Bibhishana, Vidura, Kunti’s sons, Vasudeva, Devaki, Nand, Siva,
the devotees of Vraj, all these pillars of devotion had to suffer
tribulation. Again Nala, Damayanti, Harishchandra, Taramati,
Rukmangada, Ambarish, Narasinha Mehta, Jayadeva, Mira, all these
seekers had to go through purgatory before they tasted real happiness,
Vyasa had his troubles both mental and physical, so had Tulsi and
Madhav. The world carps at the asceticism of Siva; Sita, who was like
mother of the universe had to undergo the fiery ordeal. The world
bows to her for she suffered though sinless. Even those saints who
have burnt all the past, present and future acts have the fear of
suffering. It is God’s mystery inexplicable. One can only say such is
His will. After all virtue and vice are products of man’s imagination;
the world dances to the tune of Krishna. Dayaram says: Without the
will of the Beloved not a blade moves but the weak mind is under
hallucination of ‘I did it’.
14-11-1930
223

èÊ≈U∑§ÃÊ¢ èÊfl◊Ê¢ ⁄U ªÿÊ ∑§Ê›U ∑§Ê≈UË fl„UË
Returning again and again to the world, aeons have passed away.
O God, now the limit is reached, take Thou me by the hand, scorched
by the three agonies I have flown to Thee for protection, cool down
the fevers. I entreat Thee, O Thou Fount of Mercy, let Thy blessed
feet be my abode of refuge, let Thy merciful glance burn up my sins.
If Thou wilt look at my sins, Thou wilt cease to be paramount Lord.
390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

How [can] a ruby be compared to ø∞ÊÊ≈UË, I am a slave, Thou art Master,
Thou wilt therefore be generousto me Thy slave? Full of hope I have
come before Thee, eternal God, knowing Thee to be all-powerful. O
Thou upholder of dharma how can I leave Thy door in
disappointment? Make me Thine own, don’t say nay to me. O Thou
Deliverer, listen the prayer of one so helpless as I am. Look at me but
once and fulfil my yearning, speak to me with Thy divine smile and
say ‘Daya, thou art mine’.
15-11-1930
224

„UÁ⁄UŸÊ ◊Ê⁄Uª ¿U ≥ÊÍ⁄UÊŸÊ, ŸÁ„U ∑§Êÿ⁄UŸÈ¢ ∑§Ê◊ ¡ÊŸ
Godward way is for the brave not for the cowardly. Before one
can treasure the sacred name in the heart, it is necessary to be ready to
lay down one’s life. He only gets that divine joy who surrenders
children, wife, wealth and his own head. Those who would find pearls
risk their lives in going in deep waters. Such people face death bravely
and have no doubts lurking in their minds. But those who watch these
brave deeds from a safe distance shiver even to think of the risks. The
way of love is a fiery ordeal, cowards flee before it. Those who are in
it enjoy rare happiness, the spectators are scorched. Love is a bargain
of life not to be easily had. Those who have attained the heights have
passed through the fire of self-purification. Those who have drunk
deep of the nectar of Ramanama are an object of envy. But those only
who know what divine love is recognize them when they see them.
They witness the divine sport of Pritam’s Lord.
16-11-1930
225

¡ŸŸË ¡ËflÊ ⁄U ªÊ¬ËøãŒŸË
Blessed be Gopichand’s mother who planted in her own son the
seed of vairag1 . Her preaching resulted in the world appearing like a
furnace to Gopichand. Blessed be Dhruva’s mother who said bitter
things to her son Dhruva so that he left a kingdom to seek the shelter
of the forest. Sage Bajand when he saw his camel in a prostrate
condition was shocked and learnt from the event the lesson that the
world was a fleeting show and left it. Great was the self-denial of
Bhartrihari who left 1,600 queens, left his palaces and went into the
wilderness.I dote on all these who forsook this vain show. There have
1

Note by Gandhiji: “ ‘Asceticism’ is an approach to the meaning.”

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

391

been others, worldly men good and bad too numerous to count.
Where is Ravana with his brood? Where are the eight thousand
children of Sagar king? Where is the fortune of Nand? All has passed
away like a dream. Dwellers in palaces have gone and so have kings
from their kingdoms. The Gods, the demons, the munis and ordinary
folk all have vanished like dreams. O men, it were good then if you
would deliberately leave this empty show; for the God of Death will
surely compel you to do so one day. Nishkulanand says: I take my
oath upon it that that fate awaits every one of us.
17-11-1930
226

àÿÊª Ÿ ≈U∑§ ⁄U flÒ⁄UÊª ÁflŸÊ
No matter what one does, self-denial will not last unless it is
based on dislike for the thing given up. If there is deep down the
desire for it, it will not be relinquished. A man may wear the garb of a
sannyasi but that will bring him no nearer the goal if the garb only
hides the desire that has its full possession of the wearer. So long as
desire, anger, greed and passion are not rooted out, the thing will
come to the surface the moment there is an opportunity; the very
sannyasa may become an additional source of self-indulgence. Just as
the seed does not sprout during the dry hot season but does so as soon
as the rains come, so is it with man’s desires; they await the due
season. Just as iron moves in front of a magnet so do the senses move
when they are face to face with their objects. They are still for want of
opportunity but they run riot as soon as the opportunity comes.
Therefore mere external renunciation will not answer if there is no
corresponding response within. Such external renunciation will mean
licence even from the restraints of Varnashrama (the four divisions)
and is likely to result in harm. Such a man becomes useless like milk
gone bad. It won’t yield ghee or butter and is unfit to drink.
Nishkulanand says: A man’s renunciation is wrong when he hovers
between self-denial and self-indulgence, household affairs and their
relinquishment.
18-11-1930

392

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

227

¡¢ª‹ fl‚Ê√ÿÈ¢ ⁄U ¡ÊªË∞
The yogi has migrated to the forest. He has given up all love
of the body. He cares not to talk about the world, he has
becomeindifferent about its comforts. He who had richly upholstered
cots and lived in palaces has not even straw to lie on, lives in the shade
of trees. He who had rich shawls and embroidered robes now sports a
ragged blanket and bears heat and cold. He who had a variety of tasty
foods now lives upon pieces of chapati thrown in the begging bowl.
He at whose call thousands answered and who was followed by large
armies is now wandering alone and unshod. O king, if you would stop
I would prepare food for you; I would prepare rice puddings in no
time and it will be put in your begging bowl. (The king answers:) He
who waits for food, expects to have a dish, is no yogi, he is a
householder desirous of enjoyment. He is doomed. He who gives up
his kingdom and adopts sannyasa may not fix his mind on wealth
and family, he considers all indulgence as a malady. Nishkulanand
says: Blessed be he who gives up all desire for physical comforts and
adopts sannyasa, he has left his family, it is true, but he has gained an
imperishable family.
19-11-1930
228

¡«UèÊ⁄UÃŸË ¡ÊÃŸÊ ¡ÊªË
Those yogis who are like Jada Bharata have full control like a
powerful foe over the senses including the mind. They remain
immovable like a rock in the face of temptations. They will perish
rather than be weak in faith or patience. During the whole day they
never allow themselves with the body. He is the true man who will not
indulge the body. They move about in obedience to God’s will and
serve mankind. He who comes across such yogis is on the way to
obtaining salvation. Such a man when he comes in contact with such
yogis whether by design or accident is, Nishkulanand says, surely
purified.
20-11-1930

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

393

229

œË⁄U œÈ⁄¢Uœ⁄UÊ ≥ÊÍ⁄U ‚ÊøÊ π⁄UÊ
They are patient and brave and true warriors who have shed all
fear of death. Even if there are crores against one they will regard
them as straw. They have to face the determined enemy called
temptation, but they will not flinch even though they should die.
Poets, noted pundits, are very intellectual but they would not [sic] such
an enemy—for in that army desire, anger, vanity, ambition are chief
warriors, for them (the learned) there is no standing against thisarmy.
Wandering yogis, ascetics and the like fight under the shelter of God.
Against such an army true warriors alone fight. Yogis know through
the mouths of their teachers the art of fighting. Muktanand says: After
having defeated this army of temptations they enjoy immortal bliss.
21-11-1930
230

≈U∑§ Ÿ ◊‹ ⁄U Ã ◊⁄UŒ π⁄UÊ ¡ª◊Ê¢„UË
Those [who] will not break their plighted word are real heroes.
They will not be moved from their purpose by any of the three fevers.
They will act with decision and patience. They would never harbour
doubt about their action or its timeliness. We have to die some day
without fail, some sooner, some later, let us not flinch for the sake of
worldly enjoyment. He who understands things clearly through the
heart and then acts in the teeth of all danger is a hero. He will not
entertain suspicions about others. He will never forget Brahmanand’s
God.
22-11-1930
231

⁄U Á≥Ê⁄U ‚Ê≈U Ÿ≈Ufl⁄UŸ fl⁄UË∞
We must risk life itself but realize God, we may never recede
from the attempt. I looked within, did not chip [sic] wisdom and
placed my head at the feet of Hari. One may not move without
knowing the wisdom of the step but having moved forward there
should be no looking back; in the field of strife we must fight unto
death. With what face can one return who bravely goes forward and
then at the critical moment beats a hasty retreat? It is wise to make
calculations beforehand; it is no use going out to battle in bravado.
394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

But having once gone, there should be no retiral even though one
may be cut to pieces. We must sing of Hari with zest and may not step
back when the call comes. Brahmanand says: We should rather die
than accept defeat.
23-11-1930
232

‚Œ˜ÔªÈL ‡Ê⁄UáÊ ÁflŸÊ •ôÊÊŸÁÃÁ◊⁄U ≈U›U‡Ê ŸÁ„U ⁄U
Without the help of a true guru this dark ignorance cannot
be dispelled nor can the seed that generates life and death be burnt.
Not without listening to the nectar-like speech of a loving teacher, nor
without acquiring the capacity for distinguishing between truth and
untruth, nor without knowledge based on experience will the knots of
the heart be undone. Even though one may read the Shastras daily
and keep the mind and the ears under control, true happiness will be
unattainable without true thought. There is no gain in harping on
‘mine and thine’. A wise man distinguishes between right and wrong.
Nothing is to be gained from concentration on wife, children and
domestics. Keshav says: We will never meet good men who can show
us the way to perfect bliss without serving God and without diligent
search.
24-11-1930
233

◊Ê⁄UË ŸÊ«U Ã◊Ê⁄U „UÊâÊ „UÁ⁄U ‚¢èÊÊ›U¡Ê ⁄U
My pulse is in Thy hands, O God. Take care of me, regarding
me as Thine keep Thy prestige. I do not know what is good for me
and what is not, misery always stares me in the face. O God, look at
me, what is happening to me? Thou art the true physician from time
immemorial; Thou knowest all the remedies, my time is near, do Thou
be punctual. O God, why art Thou waiting? Why dost Thou give me
up whilst there is yet hope? O God, do Thou remove my great misery.
Keshav says: What will happen to me? I am undone if the whole battle
is lost, be Thou warned. O my Protector, Thy prestige will be lost (if
anything happens to Thy servant).
25-11-1930
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

395

234

ŒËŸÊŸÊâÊ ŒÿÊ›U Ÿ≈Ufl⁄, „UÊâÊ ◊Ê⁄UÊ ◊Í∑§‡ÊÊ ◊Ê
O Lord of the afflicted, do not desert me. In this great ocean of
birth and death I am tossed about, do not let the occasion of saving
me slip by. Thou art my only refuge, I do not know the means, O
Keeper of my life, do not give me up because I am so worthless. Thou
art Mother, Father, Family, all in all. O Ocean of Mercy, do not dry up
for Thy slave’s sake. Keshavlal has Thy protection, O Lord of the
Universe, desert me not on any account.
26-11-1930
235

èÊÁÄÃ fl«U∏ fl‡Ê âÊÊÿ ⁄U◊Ê¬ÁÃ èÊÁÄÃ fl«U∏
God comes to us through devotion. If He did not come, we
should not be free from the bondage of birth and death. Devotion is a
means of attaining true bliss and makes birth on this earth worthwhile.
Even the Vedas testify that God comes to His devotees. He who is
prowess personified allows Himself to be tied up as if He was helpless.
He appears wherever His servants are in distress. He, the Lord of the
Universe, Fountain of Mercy is unattainable without devotion.
Meditations, austerities, vows and the like are useless without devotion.
Without it, wealth, youth, strength, intellect, cunning all these put
together are useless (if there is no devotion). Colour, beauty, family,
caste cannot help (where devotion is absent). Ajamil, Narad, Sabari,
the prostitute, the elephant—these declare the virtue of devotion.
Keshav says: No one person is able to recite all the power of devotion.
27-11-1930
236

∑§Êß¸ ‚„UÊÿ ŸâÊË, Á’ŸÊ „UÁ⁄U ‚„Êÿ ŸâÊË
There is no help for thee but God. Thou art the least in strength
and yet in thy egotism owing to possession of house, land and riches
thou sleepest in peace; instead thou shouldst worship God with
devotion and with due observance of self-restraint. Why wilt thou
needlessly slave for others? Think deeply and realize that terrible time
is fleeting. Keshav says: Thou canst do what thou wishest with this
priceless body.
28-11-1930
396

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

237

⁄UÊ◊’ÊáÊ flÊÇÿÊ¢ „UÊÿ Ã ¡ÊáÊ
He only knows what it is who is smitten by love of Rama.
Dhruva had that experience and so had Prahlad and they found their
goal. The Shastras say that Shukadevji was smitten even while he was
in the embryo. God came to King Mordhwaj and dominated his mind.
He went to Kashi and submitted to being sawn by his wife and son.
Rana came upon Mirabai in anger with a drawn sword in his hand and
presented her with a poison cup. God turned it to nectar. He accepted
Narasinha Mehta’s draft and helped him in the nick of time. Devotee
Dhano says: He has thus saved thousands of His servants.
29-11-1930
238

¡Ÿ ⁄UÊ◊ ⁄UÊπ ⁄U, ÃŸ ∑È§áÊ ◊Ê⁄UË ‡Ê∑§
Who can destroy him whom God would keep? I see no one else
besides God. At His pleasure he makes a rich man poor and a poor
man king; He makes a lake of a desert and a desert of a lake. He
reduces a mountain to a straw and a straw He converts into a
mountain. He saved manjari’s1 young ones from a furnace. He saved
the eggs of a lizard 2 . Such is His power. O God, Thou helpest Thy
servants in the nick of time. The hunter has his bow strung, [a falcon]3
is about to dart but a snake bites the hunter and [the falcon] has a
wound in his head. The eagle has fallen and the happy birds have
flown. He the mighty Tailor sits with his yardstick and scissors, adjusts
everything and takes care of all. The Lord of Dhiro is the sole
personification of Truth.
[1-12-1930] 4
1

Cat’s
The Gujarati text of the bhajan has “≈UÊ≈UÊ«UË”,which means a sandpiper.
3
The source has “âè´¿æ‡ææ_ _”.Gandhiji has left the word untranslated.
4
Note by Gandhiji: “This is marked as on 30-11-1930 but done in the early
morning of 1st December,”
2

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

397

239

Ã⁄UáÊÊ •ÊâÊ «UUÈ¢ª⁄U ⁄U «UUÈ¢ª⁄U ∑§Êß¸ Œπ Ÿ„UË¥
The mountain is in the straw but no one sees it in it even as none
would notice a lion hidden among a flock of sheep. But he can
discover himself by his roar, as the musk deer among the ordinary
flock. The Absolute is hidden in the phenomenal as oil in the seed,
fire in the wood, ghee in milk. Who will listen and to whom shall I talk
of the Illimitable and the Unknowable? Speech does not reach it.
There is an abode which is beyond the intellect. Though the mind is
swift like the wind it cannot overtake it. This Immortal, Indivisible
essence pervades everything movable and immovable. It has made this
universe, there is not an atom where It is not. But by the grace of a
true guru It is attainable. Why go in search of It here and there when
It is in you? Servant Dhiro says: Thou art wherever I look.
1-12-1930
240

π’⁄UŒÊ⁄U ◊Ÿ ‚È’ÊÃË
Beware O my mind, you have to walk on the edge of a sword;
with courage you have to fight for truth; time is theenemy, the year is
the lord, the twelve months are the generals, each month has thirty
days which are the under-officers and then there is the day and the
night and so in the year seven hundred and twenty. The hundred
years of a lifetime are the besiegers of the body fort; these have to be
defeated. There are five senses after you and then there are anger,
desire, greed, infatuation, illusion, egotism—these are all first-class
warriors tyrannical. You have to fight a very powerful foe. You have
love, knowledge, true teacher, purity, contentment, forgiveness, hymns,
faith. With these on your side you have to give battle. Meditation and
yoga practices and the like will, Dhiro says, enable you to stand the
heat of the battle.
2-12-1930

398

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

241

ŒÈÁŸÿÊ ÃÊ ŒËflÊŸË ⁄U ’˝rÊÔÊ¢«U ¬Êπ¢«U ¬Í¡
The world is mad, it respects humbug. The fool does not know
the Maker though He is nearest him. He worships lifeless stocks and
stones as Siva. How dark are people who ignore life? Under the sun’s
blaze one does not see the philosophers’ stone. Put a stone vessel in
the sea and try ever so hard, it is bound to sink. How can you press oil
from sand or milk a metal cow? What avails a daily clean bath to a
man who is unclean within? What is the use of destroying the
snake-hole after the snake has bitten you? Knowers alone know how
love is wounded. God is not far, He is near; only look within, clean thy
heart and see the Lord within—the powerful Lord of Dhiro is
everywhere in the world.
3-12-1930
242

ÁŸ≥ø ∑§⁄UÊ ⁄UÊ◊ŸÈ¢ ŸÊ◊ ŸâÊË ¡ÊªË âÊß¸Ÿ ¡ÊflÈÈ¢
Resolve upon enthroning Ramanama in thy heart. Yoga is no
use, nor is the saffron-coloured robe nor mixing up all thy food.
Whether thou wearest bhagava or white garments is of little
consequence, the thing to do is not to hurt any creature and to wish it
well. Put the worldly men on one side, the yogis on the other and then
show me the yogi who has seen God face to face. Because they served
God, Narasinha Mehta, Mira, Prahlad, Sena barber, Dhano, Peepo,
Rohidas, Koobo, Potter Goro, Rajput Bodano, Gangabai sawGod face
to face. Poor good people, good-hearted butchers, worshipped God
and found peace; show me the yogi who did likewise. Rama is not to
be attained by smearing oneself with ashes or by hanging head
downward nor by leaving wife and retiring to the forest. God can be
attained only by diligent search. Rama is for him who can be happy in
the jungle and who regards palaces as jungle, who regards bitter as
sweet and sweet like bitter. Even as oil is hid in the seed, ghee in milk,
so is God hid everywhere, says Narbho.
4-12-1930
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

399

243

„UÁ⁄U¡Ÿ „UÊÿ ÃáÊ „UÃ ÉÊáÊÈ¢ ⁄UÊπflÈ¢ –
Men of God should have abundant love for all; they should
shed all egotism. Through God’s name they should banish the
threefold afflictions, leave off sinning and take Ramanama. They
should consider all to be good and themselves to be unworthy. They
should in perfect humility distribute alms. They should devote
themselves to their faith body, mind and speech and regard God as the
giver and the enjoyer. They should not weaken in their decisions; they
should speak sparingly. They should entrust secrets only to the
trustworthy and their speech should be humble and [they should] be
serious in giving opinions; they must not talk big before those who
know how to discriminate, they should take the name of the limitless
God and attain salvation and help others to do likewise, their devotion
should be as of poor people. Bhojo a humble servant says: By the
grace of God the three afflictions do not go near such people.
5-12-1930
244

èÊÁÄÃ ≥ÊÍ⁄UflË⁄UŸË ‚ÊøË ⁄U
Devotion is for the brave, they do not turn back after having
once begun. Having made up their minds, they go forward in full
faith. They have killed desire, anger, arrogance and greed. When the
temptations swelled and when the heat commenced, the cowards
trembled and fled. The true men stood their ground and fought with
God as their Help and Guide. They outdistanced many and then
began to have a glimpse of Brahm[an]. They destroyed the effect of
past action and met God face to face. They would not wish for the
various gifts. To such salvation is easy. Bhojo Bhakta says: Thosewho
have given up themselves body and mind and all and are ever
equi-minded are the true devotees and they have heaven as their
abode.
6-12-1930
400

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

245

ªÈL ¡Ë Ã◊ ∑§„UÊ ¿UÊ ⁄U ’˝sÔ ÃÊ⁄UË ¬Ê‚ flSÿÊ
O teacher, you say Brahm[an] is in me but I see Him not; tell me
what distinguishes Him. Is the head He or is the head in Him, is He in
the eyes or are the eyes themselves Brahm[an] ? Is He in the nose or
in the mouth ? I am puzzled. Pray help me out of my doubt and
delusion. Is He in the feet or in the hands, in the heart or the chest? If
He is in the feet—where is He? O teacher, teach me. When the pupil
was rested, the teacher spoke: O pupil, listen, today the ignorance must
be dispelled. He the loved one is not in any particular limb, let me
warn you betimes; He eludes one unless one enquires within. He is as
near as you are intent upon Him. Therefore when one is absorbed in
Him, one sees Him though He has neither form nor colour. Bapu says:
Yet you will see Him in many forms.
7-12-1930
246

¡ËèÊ‹«UË ⁄U ÃŸ „UÁ⁄UªÈáÊ ªÊÃÊ¢ •Êfl«UÈ¢ •Ê›U‚ ÄÿÊ¢âÊË ⁄U
O tongue, why dost thou tire of singing God’s praises? Thou
hast not enough time for gossip which is ever on thy lips. Thou art
expert in talking ill of others. Thou art ever ready for tasty things;
thou art ready also for quarrelling but when it comes to the matter of
praising the Lord, thou art too busy. At the time of death no one is of
any use, the dear ones are like so many foes. . . . 1 You will then rub
your eyes. When the time approaches sesame is sent for and so is tulsi
leaf, Ramanama is also taken but when you were young you carried
yourself with a high head. What is the use of Ramanama on
death-bed? Is it any use digging a well after a house has caught fire?
Of what use is a light brought after the thieves have stolen things? You
are intoxicated with your own infatuation; wake up and look around.
What is the use of weeping when time knocks at the door? It costs
nothing to sing Hari’s praises, not a hair is touched. The weary way
will not be passed without effort but the whole can be easily covered
by reliance upon God.
8-12-1930
1

Here Gandhiji has left untranslated the words: “fl¡Ÿ œ⁄UËŸ ‚fl¸ÁSfl ‹‡Ê ”

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

401

247

èÊªflÃ èÊ¡¡Ê ⁄UÊ◊ŸÊ◊ ⁄UáÊÈ¢∑§Ê⁄U
Worship God, take Ramanama which is the talisman. This body
is a vessel, have true faith in thy heart; the world ocean contains
unfathomable waters in the shape of endless desires. The earthly body
chains thee; thou art filled with egotism. By the aid of a true guru
thou canst cross the ocean. This human body is unattainable even by
the gods. Being in it cultivate the companionship of the good and
gain the inestimable end. If thou wilt not, thou wouldst repent. Time is
fleeting. From the little insect to Brahma all embodied ones have the
fear of death hovering over their heads. This body is a momentary
thing, a mere morsel for the God of Death. Why all this arrogance
about so momentary a thing? Thou hast been born again and again
and carried the load of egotism, delusion and infatuation, thou hast
not known God and hast therefore suffered. Gavaribai says: Have faith
in the true guru, sing the Lord’s praise and attain bliss; accept this
advice of mine; if thou wilt not thou art doomed.
9-12-1930
248

‚¢Ã∑Î§¬ÊâÊË ¿UÍ≈U ◊ÊÿÊ ∑§ÊÿÊ ÁŸ◊¸›U âÊÊÿ ¡ÊŸ
By the grace of the good, delusion disappears and the body
becomes pure. By thinking of God at every breath the five sins are
washed away. Even as a herd of elephants flees on hearing the roar of
a lion even so does a man attain freedom if he has the courage (of a
lion) ; white ants do not affect fire, the fabled gem is not affected by
dirt; so does a knowing man remain unaffected in the midst of this
limitless ocean of turmoil. The son of a magician knows all his tricks;
even so do men of God know the tricks of God and remain untouched
thereby; one acquires merit by cultivating the companionship of the
good and he reaches his goal. Pritam says by worshipping the Lord
the worshipper attains the eternal kingdom.
10-12-1930

402

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

249

„UÁ⁄UŸ èÊ¡ÃÊ¢ „U¡Ë ∑§Êß¸ŸË ‹Ê¡ ¡¢ÃË ŸâÊË ¡ÊáÊË ⁄U
Those who trust in God have never yet been known to have
suffered discredit. The Vedas testify that it is ever well with those who
are intent upon God. He saved (His devotee) Prahlad and destroyed
Hiranyaksha. He gave the kingdom to Bibhishana and destroyed
Ravana. He gave a necklace to Narasinha Mehta. He gave an eternal
kingdom toDhruva and made him His own. He turned in to nectar the
poison given to Mirabai. He clothed Draupadi and stood by the side
of the Pandavas. Premaldas says: God will remove the misery of those
devotees who would thus worship Him.
11-12-1930
250

•ŸÈèÊfl ∞flÊ ⁄U •¢Ã⁄U ¡Ÿ ©UŒ âÊÿÊ
The works of him who has an inner experience do not bind him
for he has known God. He is the knowing one who has broken all ties.
He is beyond everything and is a mere witness of everything; he is
independent of all the six worlds. Being above these he stands alone.
Of millions the fewest only realize this. One who has the inner
experience knows the Nameless One. He has attained salvation for he
is past the dual state, without striving for the One indivisible, he
perceives It as if naturally. The truth is that all created things have to
perish and so this endless ocean of life and death continues to roll on.
The last stage is beyond the waking, dreaming, sleeping and the state
beyond these three. It is beyond the physical and ethereal. That which
is above even the first cause is described by the Vedas as ‘not this, not
this’. I dote on the mother of him who has dedicated himself to
common good, who is goodness personified and who is like the true
guru. Nirant says: He who is eternal though nameless has many
names.
12-12-1930

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

403

251

ÁŒ‹◊Ê¢ ŒËflÊ ∑§⁄UÊ ⁄U ŒËflÊ ∑§⁄UÊ
Light thy heart and sweep out from there evil thoughts and
anger. Let mercy be oil and love the oil tray, let meditation on God be
the wick and let knowledge of Brahm[an] be the light. When the heart
is thus truly lighted all darkness will vanish and then thou shalt
recognize Brahmaloka (God’s abode). O men, recognize this light
that dispels darkness. Ranchhod says: I have entered the home, have
found the key and opened the lock and there is light on earth.
13-12-1930
252

•¬Ífl¸ •fl‚⁄U ∞flÊ ÄÿÊ⁄U •Êfl‡Ê
When will the matchless time come so that I would be rid
of all knots external and internal? When will I give up all the subtlest
ties and go the way the great sages have gone? Would that I was
indifferent to all the moods and that the body was used merely for
self-restraint, that there was nothing to bind me for any cause
imaginable and that I had no illusions about the body. Would that I
should gain knowledge that comes from removal of obstruction in the
path of perception, that I regarded body as separate from the soul and
that I had recognition only of the soul. Would that obstruction to right
conduct too was removed and there was concentration on pure self.
Would that there was steadfastness of the three yugas (?) running
practically to the time of death and that steadfastness was incapable of
being shaken by sufferings however great. Would that even the yoga
was only for attaining greater restraint over self and that there was
implicit obedience to the precepts of the Jina for the sake of the soul.
Would that even that activity also perceptibly decreased and I was
absorbed in self-realization. Would that there were neither likes nor
dislikes in matters received through the senses and that I was
unaffected by their play. Would that I engaged in activities that came
to me in due course and was not enslaved by time, place or
circumstance. Would that I was angered against anger and that against
respect paid to me I had humility enough not to be affected by it.
404

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Would that in respect of maya I was but a witness to its blandishments
and against ambition I had ambition to thwart it, I had no anger
against even the extreme wrongdoer and had no pride if an emperor
paid respects to me, that I was unmoved even if the body perished and
had no desire even for the greatest gifts. That I was the same to friend
and foe alike as towards praise or insult, that there was [in-]difference
in me whether I lived or died, that even regarding the cycles of birth
and death or salvation I had only the simple natural state that I had
crossed the alluring ocean of different temptations and was intent
upon the state where all the passions are1 quenched, that at the time
[of] death I would shed all desire and had perfect knowledge, that all
the four kinds of activities were to me like a burnt hope— mere ashes,
that I was living out only this life and that after that there was no more
birth. That I had no desire for even an atom, that I was sinless,
immovable and intent upon self-realization, that I was absorbed in the
spotless, eternal everloving, neither small nor big, formless self-acting
Being, that owing to past actions I was fit for the abode of the
released—where [there is] eternal bliss, perfect perception and perfect
experience. This is the state which the all-knowing Jina realized but
could not describe. How can any other person describe it? It is
capable only of being experienced. I have set my heart upon that state
though it may be at present beyond my capacity. Nevertheless
Rajchand is determined that God willing he will attain that state.
14-12-1930
253

◊Ê⁄UÊ¢ ŸÿáÊ¢ÊŸË •Ê›U‚ ⁄U Ÿ ŸË⁄UÅÿÊ „UÁ⁄UŸ ¡⁄UË
How neglect[ful] must my eyes be that they never saw Hari.
They never set their gaze upon Him, they would not be calm enough
even to have a glimpse of Him. They have been immersed in sorrows
or enjoyments, have burnt themselves with their heat. They have not
devoted themselves to having God’s darshan (sight) and yet God is
everywhere, He fills His creation. Among the movable and the
immovable objects there is not an atom but has His presence in it. He
is like the heavens pervading all. He is like the air inhabiting my heart.
If I would but look at Him, He is there staring me in the face. Brahma
1

The source has “were”.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

405

and His creation cannot be separated even for a moment. But we of
the earth earthy have no inkling of that vital principle. An owl may
live for a hundred years and still will not know what the day is like.
The Lord is like the ocean—too big for the eyes to scan. The tongue
gets fatigued to tell of Him and so simply says He is vast. O God,
when will the spiritual sight be opened? When will this deep darkness
be dispelled? O God, listen to my petition and lift this dead curtain. O
my eyes, look deep and there is Hari. O eyes, get rid of the laziness
and calmly see Him. Just set the gaze upon Him and look at Him to
heart’s content.
15-12-1930
END
From a photostat: C.W. 4903. Courtesy: Mirabehn

459. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
SATURDAY MORNING, DECEMBER 13/16, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

This time I got your packet at 12 noon on Wednesday. I got a
copy of the booklet Gitabodh 1. I take it that those who make notes
about the work they do as yajna do so in their dairy. If you remind
people often enough about this, they will be careful. See that everyone
is soon able to use the instruments for weighing yarn and testing its
strength. I have replied to Mahadev’s questions in my letter to Durga,
and to questions about my health in my letter to Kakasaheb.
Therefore read both the letters.
Afternoon
There was a letter from Jayaprakash saying that Prabhavati
would go over there. She may have even arrived there before you get
this letter. If she comes, look after her very carefully. She gets fainting fits and these should stop immediately in the Ashram. You
may buy any fruits which may be necessary for her. Consult a
doctor if necessary. You may write to me about her whenever you
wish to.
1
Gandhiji’s discourses on the Bhagavad Gita, given in letters to Narandas
Gandhi; vide, 1st footnote of “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, October 30/November, 4,
1930. For the text of these discourses, vide “Letters on the Gita”, 21-2-1932.

406

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Night, December 15, 1930
I got Manilal’s letter. I felt relieved. Let him observe as many
restriction as he chooses, but not at the cost of his health. 110-115 lb.
is certainly low weight. Manilal should maintain his weight between
120 and 125; if, however, he has kept up his strength, he will regain
that level after he is released. He should guard against any disease
insidiously attacking him. The reading which he has done is quite
good, but in order to derive the fullest benefit from his work he
should carry out my suggestions as far as possible. Really speaking,
however, when he has the benefit of the company of a person like
Nanabhai1 , and will now have the benefit of Mahadev’s company,
there should hardly be any need for me to guide him. The reading he
is doing at present is good indeed. There is little in it, however, to be
remembered and digested. The reading which I have suggested will,
while developing his memory and power of thinking, also
beinteresting to him. Jivanshodhan2 can be understood only if it is
read carefully twice or thrice. He is doing right in reading it once
again. One reason why my writings are easy to follow is that these
days I write with the sole aim of making myself easily understood by
all the inmates of the Ashram. Formerly too I wrote with the general
public in view, and not for men of learning. It is natural, therefore,
that my writings should be easy to understand. Let him write to me
again. He should write as often as he gets time and is permitted to do
so.
I have had no reply to my inquiry about Devdas’s letter. I have
even suggested that he should write again. If the Bombay air suits
Jamna, do not insist on her returning to the Ashram. Do you still
make bread there? If you do, of what quality are you able to make it,
and who actua-lly makes it? If it is of good quality and if anyone is
coming on a visit here, send a sample. You had described the process
of making it, but it did not succeed here. I have not been able to
discover where the error lay.
I can say that, up to this evening, the bhakhari of jowar and
bajra seems to have done me no harm. I eat very little in bulk but can
keep up my strength all right. No one should worry on my account. I
will not be obstinate and cling to the experiment.
1
2

Nrisimhaprasad Kalidas Bhatt 1
By Kishorelal Mashruwala, a Navajivan publication

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

407

I did not find Hariyomalji’s and Gijubhai’s letters. I wonder if
Gijubhai was written in place of Haribhai. I did not find the latter’s
name in Radha’s note.
Blessings from

BAPU1

Tuesday Morning, December 16, 1930
Pranayama (control of breath) and asanas (yogic postures) are
referred to appreciatively in this chapter, but we should remember that
at the same time the Lord has stressed the need for brahmacharya, i.e.,
keeping the observances calculated to take us nearer and nearer to
God. It should be clearly understood that the mere practice of asanas
and the like can never take us to the goal of even-mindedness. Asanas
and pranayama may be of some slight help in steadying the mind and
making it single-purposed, provided that they are practised to that
end. Otherwise they are no better than other methods of physical
training. They are very useful indeed as physical exercise and I
believe that this type of exercise is good for the soul, and may be
performed from a bodily standpoint. But I have observed that these
practices do only harm when indulged in for the acquisition of
supernormal powers (siddhi) and the performance of miracles. This
chapter should be studied as a summary of the teaching in the
preceding three chapters. It cheers us up in our spiritual struggle. We
should never be down-hearted and give up the endeavour to reach
evenness of temper.
BAPU

[PS.]
There are 71 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I

1

For the text of the Gita discourse (Ch. VI) which followed, vide “Letters on
the Gita”, 21-2-1932

408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

460. LETTER TO SANKERJI 1
YERAVDA,

December 16, 1930
MY DEAR SANKERJI,

I was glad to hear from you of your progress. Can you give me
the figures of khadi production in Malabar, or at least in Cochin? Do
you know where Ramachandran is? Do please write to me from time
to time.
Yours,

BAPU

The Hindu, 29-12-1930

461. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 16, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

Please send me four pounds of cotton. Kakasaheb’s place is
now taken by Pyarelal. He spins faster and, therefore, a greater
quantity of cotton will be consumed than formerly. Kindly inform the
people you buy the cotton from, that it is full of particles and seeds.
As a result, we have to spend much time in cleaning it and some of the
cotton is wasted.
I hope I do not give you too much trouble. I do believe that, if
you store cotton for my sake, you will also be able to use it for other
purposes.
I hope all your sisters are quite well.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 4817. Courtesy : Premlila Thackersey

1

Of “Swaraj Bhawan”, Ernakulam (Cochin State), Kerala

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

409

462. LETTER TO MANSHANKAR J. TRIVEDI
December 16, 1930
CHI. MANU,

I got your letter. Though you are so near the Ashram, I do not
send this letter along with the other post for the Ashram, and delay its
reaching you by some days. Instead, I am taking the risk and writing
it directly to you. I believe you will get it. Why do you give way to
despair? One who believes in God can never feel despair. Since you
are very eager to work, you earn merit as if you had been actually
working. Why, then, do you feel impatient? Who knows for what
service God has destined you? Or how can we say that your
aspirations in themselves are not sufficient for His work? You do
perform the daily yajna of spinning; what else is it, if not service?
Start repeating Ramanama and rouse yourself. Shake off despair.
Banish the very thoughts of weakness and disease. If you take interest
in the Gita and the Ramayana, go on repeating to yourself verses
from them. Write to me direct. And write often.
Blessings from

BAPU
C HI. M ANU
C/ O P ROF. T RIVEDI
TILAK R OAD, P OONA C ITY
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 7773

463. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 16, 1930
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

I have your letter. Even if I agree to see you I am afraid the
permission will not be granted. Therefore for the time being, we must
be content with letters alone. By speculation I did not mean that no
forward transactions should be entered into. Speculation means
gambling. With the expectation that market prices will go up I buy
1,000 bales of cotton. I do not need any cotton, I do not even store it
in any warehouse. Only a book transaction is made. Now I await a rise
in price. I sell the cotton when it rises; this I consider gambling. The
nation or, rather, the world has lost a great deal through such
410

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

transactions. This was what I meant in my letter1 . Yes, I expect much
more than this, but, at present, you will not be up to that. Without at all
depending upon future market prices, to sell the commodities at a
little more than the cost price is what I consider unsullied trade. Today
it might be difficult to conduct such business, but ultimately, it might
bear fruit. You might remember this is what I visualize for khadi. But
I know this is a tall order. I shall be very happy and content if you
brothers can give up speculation. However, do only what is
intelligently acceptable and within your power. I would not at all wish
that you should act upon the suggestion simply because it happens to
be mine and that, too, sent from jail. Faith should not have a place
where reasoning is applicable.
Jayaprakash informs me that, although you are not recruiting
any new people just now, he will be absorbed somewhere because of
my recommendation 2 . I certainly hold that Jayaprakash is a worthy
young man but I do not wish that a post be created where none exists
today.
I was a little worried to read of Malaviyaji’s fever in the newspapers. I am relieved now. I hope he will emerge from the jail in good
health. I am glad about your health too. I am again experi- menting
with a milkless diet. This time constipation was res- ponsible for it.
Now I am taking chapatis prepared from millet for the prisoners,
vegetables, three tolas of almonds and dates. I am trying to give up
dates. Constipation has disappeared. I shall revert to milk if I lose
strength. It is nearly a month since I gave up milk.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From Hindi : C.W. 6191. Courtesy : G.D. Birla

464. LETTER TO UDIT MISHRA
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 17, 1930
BHAI UDIT MISHRAJI,

Your letter. I have in general given the literal translation of
Bhajanavali3 . Now it is up to Mirabehn. I do not consider the
translation worth publishing. It cannot even be published while I am
1

Vide”Letter to G.d. Birla”, 3-12-1930.
ibid
3
Ashram Bhajanavali.
2

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

411

in jail. How can I choose from the bhajans? Different bhajans appeal
on different occasions. We might say that all are well liked. But I do
wish to drop a few in the new edition. In “Who is not devoted to
Rama and Vaidehi” 1 I take Rama to mean Daridranarayana and it is
our duty to forsake the company of one who does not serve
Daridranarayana. Non-co-operation emanates from that.
Thanks for making a start in Gujarati. Considering all this
connection with Gujarat, it is good to learn the language too. As a
matter of fact, the more Indian languages one knows the better.
I do not use the enema regularly. I regard it efficacious to use
only when the need arises. To use it daily is not good. It can also
prove harmful.
My blessings to the children. I hope the ear-trinkets taken off
have not been replaced. My hope is that now the children would have
become simpler than ever before.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 4218

465. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 18, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

A person without art is like a beast. But how will you define art?
Art is “skill in work”. The yoga of the third chapter of the Gita is
perfect art. And this is also true about the activities generally known as
art. Any activity in which the masses cannot participate is not art, but a
kind of self-indulgence, whether it concerns the voice or clothes or
stone. Large numbers singing Ramdhun in unison is art, which ought
to be cultivated. Many temples have art, and their art is something
which can be appreciated by the masses. The daily worship and
readings from holy books which take place in temples, if kept within
measure and done with genuine faith, are the best form of art. Thus,
there is art wherever harmony prevails as regards the time, the place
and the occasion. I do not like films. I have never gone to a cinema.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 5267

1

412

A verse from Vinaya Patrika by Tulsidas
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

466. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI MADHAVJI THAKKAR
December 18, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

I got your letter. I understand what you say about the children.
They ought to gain strength. If their present diet is kept up and they
get regular exercise, they certainly will. You may write and make
whatever suggestions you think necessary regarding them to the
people at Calcutta and then stop worring about the matter. For you
cannot do more than that at present.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6807

467. LETTER TO BHAWANIDUTT JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,

December 18, 1930
BHAI BHAWANIDUTT,

I was glad to have your letter. God grants an opportunity to
those devoted to service. Much work can be accomplished through
Prabhudas’s charkha when you have gained mastery over it.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi : G.N. 104.

468. LETTER TO SUMANGAL PRAKASH
YERAVDA MANDIR,

December 18, 1930
CHI. SUMANGAL,

I had fully and promptly answered the letter you wrote me from
your home. Have you not received it yet ? I am happy to learn that
you have improved health. I know you see the letters I write
to Kanta, so there is little need to write to you. Yes, I have great hopes
of Kanta. Let us see what happens. Her health causes some worry.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: Sumangal Prakash Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

413

469. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
Y. M.,

December 19, 1930
MY DEAR ANAND,

Before you can throw off tenderness you will have to realize
that it is bad. I am quite clear that you should not take Rs. 25 for
clearing the debt to Father-in-law. There is no hurry about paying it
off. It is good for you to nurse the feeling that you should pay. As
you become hardy, you might save something out of Rs. 75. But you
may not deny yourself necessaries. You will have an opportunity later
of being able to repay the debt.
Love.
BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

470. LETTER TO RADHABAI OAK
December 19, 1930
DEAR, SISTER,

You must have got my message. I was happy to learn that you
are working hard in the field of public service. But it seems you fight
shy of khadi saris. How can you serve the poor if you feel averse to
the sacred products of their labour? Think over this.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
S MT. R ADHABAI OAK
C/ O S USHILA
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6726

414

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

471. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
December 19, 1930
CHI. SUSHILA,

The letter to Radhabai is enclosed. Why do you write vancha
vish1 ? Why did you split the word? And why vish? It should be veesh.
The dictionary2 published by the Gujarat Vidyapith contains rules for
spelling; acquaint yourself with them. Tara is bound to know about
this. Is not language also included in our love for things Indian? We
ought not to murder a language.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat the Gujarati : G.N. 4780.

472. LETTER TO BALBHADRA
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 19, 1930
CHI. BALBHADRA,

I have your letter. You seem to be rendering good service. And
simultaneously you have been improving your weight. That is indeed
creditable. Explain what you mean when you say that you eat
everything. Do not overstep the limits of propriety. Do not beg from
anyone. Be content with what you get.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 9215

473. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 19, 1930
CHI. PURUSHOTTAM,

Since you have been doing your duty with sincere devotion, you
should feel no other desires. What path should I suggest to you? We
daily recite the verse Prajahati yada kaman 3 . You should burn up
1
2
3

Meaning ‘I shall give to read’
Jodanikosh; vide”Jodanikosh”, 7-4-1929.
Bhagavad Gita, II. 55

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

415

every personal desire. You will then yourself discover the path. Reflect
over the verses describing the qualities of the sthitaprajna1 and know
that they are for persons of your character. Think which of those
verses you are not able to follow in conduct, and why. If you do this,
all your mental problems will disappear. Write to me from time to
time. My respectful greetings to the elders, and blessings to Jamnadas.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C.W. 901. Courtesy : Narandas Gandhi

474. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
December 19, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

I got your letter. Is Kripalani all right? Kanti and others will
meet me in a few days. Pyarelal tells me that his books about the rules
governing sandhi and samas in Sanskrit are with you, or that you
know where they are. Send them here. He requires them for a
systematic study of the Gita. Both of us keep good health. So far,
rotlas of jowar and bajra seem to have agreed with me.
I give detailed news about my health in the letter meant for all,
and so I do not write about it separately in each letter.
You can send letters to Pyarelal through Trivedi2 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 1814

1
2

416

Bhagavad Gita, II. 55
Jayashankar Trivedi of Poona
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

475. LETTER TO VIDYA HINGORANI
Y. M.,

December 19, 1930
MY DEAR VIDYA,

I am sorry you have not got my letter. I have forgotten your
question. You must repeat it, if you want the answer. I trust you are
keeping well. Are you taking enough daily exercise? You should set
apart at least a few minutes daily for Hindi.
Love.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

476. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

4.30 p.m., December 20, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter betrays about my health an anxiety which is wholly
unnecessary. The weight which was taken on Thursday showed an
increase of 11 /2 1b., a very good increase in seven days. Nor do I feel
any weakness. I do my two hours’ spinning on the takli standing as a
rule without feeling any appreciable fatigue. I have just now sat down
to write this after finishing the takli. All the mistakes made last time
are being avoided. Stools are well formed. Pyarelal tells me there is no
smell worth noticing. The food is all well cooked, i.e., vegetables and
chapati. The letter is rebaked when I receive it. Last time, you should
remember, it was all raw food including cereals and pulses. 1 As a
matter of fact, I am now taking practically what I was taking before
starting the raw cereals. The only difference is taking bajri or jwari in
the place of wheat. Perhaps it is a change for the better. I am taking
once boiling water, lemon and salt. In spite of all this apparent
improve [ment] if I find any irregularity about the stools or weakness
(persistent) or a continuing decrease in weight, in any one of the three
things happening, I shall go back to milk. But just now with the good
feel about the health I must not deprive myself of the joy of avoiding
milk and taking the bajri or jwari chapati. And what is more, I like the
1
In Bapu’s Letter to Mira, Mirabehn explains; “I had reminded Bapu in a letter
of the severe attack of dysentery he had had at the end of a previous food experiment
he had carried out in Sabarmati Ashram.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

417

taste of these chapatis. This detailed explanation and description
ought to give you and other friends full satisfaction and free you
from all worry as to the future.
In my opinion, while it is necessary, so far as you are concerned, to keep a watch on your menu, your chief trouble is mental. Any
pressure on the mind reacts immediately on your body. This anxiety
complex, you should try to throw off. “Be careful for no- thing.”
“Look at the lilies of the field, they toil not, neither do they spin and
yet Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.” I do
not know whether I have quoted correctly. Anyhow the lilies only
seem neither to toil nor to spin. They do both but so naturally that we
do not notice their toilsome spin. If they did not toil, they would
wither. Only they have not the egotism and hence attachments, likes
and dislikes that we have. But when we toil like them detachedly, our
toil will not be noticed and therefore will not adversely affect the
body.
7.30 p.m.
You and I and all of us have to make a conscious and deliberate
effort to realize this blessed state. Or else, our reading of the Gita is
vain.
You will take care not to burn yourself with the primus. You
know how Gujarati women have burnt themselves over the use of the
primus. The loose saris lend themselves to the wick especially at the
time of lighting it. As it is kept on the floor, they have to bend and the
rising flame easily catches a fold or a loose end of the sari. It may be
wise for you, therefore, to keep it on a metalmounted stool. Then too
there is precious little room in your little dormitory. Anyway, you
have my warning. You will now take what precautions you may think
right.
In my seclusion, the idea of your bringing out a paper does not
at all commend itself to me. That ties you down and I should like you
to remain free for what comes to your lot. And then the paper will
absorb the labour of several others. I dread the idea. But my opinion
has no value. You and the other workers are the best judges.
Yes, I have jut finished the first part of the introduction to my
translation of the Gita 1 . I hope to do at least a paragraph every day. If
I succeed, the introduction cannot take long.
The new Gandiv 2 has almost all the improvements I had
contemplated. It has two springs for the two mals. It is working like a
1
2

418

Anasaktiyoga
A new type of spinning-wheel
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

musical instrument and requires very little attention. For the execution of these improvement I am thankful to the Superintendent and an
English co-prisoner, who is a clever mechanic and who takes a serious
interest in the work. He has applied the spring to the holder in an
original way. The idea is incredibly simple and equally effective. But I
must not keep you over this any longer.
I am glad you have taken Surendra in hand. It is criminal how
he neglects his body. Even St. Francis, though he called his body an
ass, took some care of it. And after all the ass is a most useful and
patient animal. The brother ass can be equally useful if properly
treated and neither pampered nor neglected.
And now here is the first verse of the morning prayer :
“Early in the morning, I call to mind that Being which is felt in
the heart, which is sat (the eternal), chit (knowledge), sukham (blis),
which is the state reached by perfect men and which is the super-state.
I am that immaculate Brahman which ever notes the states of dream,
wakefulness and deep sleep, not this body, the compound made of the
elements (earth, water, space, light and air).” You will be interested to
know that the first verse was commended on 6th May last.1
I am sorry that the very first verse needed correcting. The more
I think, the more clearly I see the meaning. And then I don’t mind
how often I cut about the translation. Formerly I used to shudder to
utter this verse thinking that the claim made therein was arrogant. But
when I saw the meaning more clearly, I perceived at once that it was
the very best thought with which to commence the day. It is a solemn
declaration that we are not the changeful bodies which require sleep,
etc., but deep down, we are the Being, the witness pervading the
countless bodies. The first part is the recalling to mind the presence of
the vital principle and the second part is the affirmation that we are
that vital principle. The description of the Being, the Brahman, is also
quite apposite. It is, nothing else is (sat), it is all knowledge or light
(chit), and naturally, therefore, it is all bliss (sukham) or the word
generally used is anand. The rest is simple. You will compare this
translation with what you have already, translated by Valjibhai. If
there is a material difference, let me have his translation. In
scholarship I should yield the palm to him. So now God willing, you
may expect a present of this character every week. And here goes the
1

Vide “Ashram Bhajanavali”, 15-12-1930.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

419

bugle telling me it will presently be 9 p.m.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat : C.W. 9284. Courtesy : Mirabehn

477. LETTER TO MAHALAKSHMI MADHAVJI THAKKAR
December 20, 1930
CHI. MAHALAKSHMI,

I got your detailed letter, which was fully worthy of your name.
Its enthusiasm pleased me. But, according to our principle, I cannot
give any decision about the work being done there. Nor should you
rely upon the opinion of a prisoner. I have already explained the
proper relations between a leader and the volunteers working under
him or her. You should discuss with Mithubehn herself your
differences with her. This is the attitude I have adopted from the
beginning and I do not wish to go further than this. You are free to
follow what seems to you your dharma. We observe the rules and
regulations in order that we may know this dharma. The inner voice
does not speak in every person. It speaks only in one in whom it is
awake.
May God bless you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6808

478. LETTER TO MAHAVIR GIRI
December 21, 1930
CHI. MAHAVIR,

You may ask me any question that may arise in your mind. I
have plenty of time here to reply to people’s questions. If we cannot
overcome all our shortcomings at a time, we may first overcome those
which we can easily remove. If we proceed thus, we shall gradually be
able to overcome all of them. Your handwriting cannot be described
as bad, but you can improve it and make it better still.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6222

420

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

479. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR,

December 21, 1930
CHI. MANI (PATEL),

Is it possible that I should go on writing to you even if you
never drop me so much as a line? Have you forgotten your promise
that you would be writing to me? But better late than never. Realize
the importance of keeping promises. Give me an account of your jail
experiences. Did you keep good health? What food did you take?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 75

480. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

December 21, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

There is again no letter from you.1 How is that? You should not
put off writing till the last day. You should write early. From
Narandas’s letter I thought that your letter would be enclosed but it
was not. This is your third lapse. Do not commit it a fourth time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

1

This sentence is in Hindi.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

421

481. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
December 21, 1930
CHI. MRIDULA,

So you came away before time, did you? How was your health?
Write to me your experiences. Tell Khurshedbehn to write. What was
your diet while you were in the nursing home? How did you spend
your time?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 11110. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

482. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
December 21, 1930
CHI. NIMU,

I got your letter. Are you not pleased that Ramdas has once
again been honoured?1 Or, do you repent having married him? If not,
you too, should be ready. How many teeth has Sumitra got now? What
all has she started eating now? Does she suffer from constipation?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

483. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO SHANTILAL J. MEHTA
[December 22, 1930] 2
CHI. SHANTI,

You did well in writing to me. I hope you are quite well. I will
do nothing on my own responsibility. Manilal himself will do what
seems best to him. I am afraid he will not be able to leave India just
now. At a time like this . . .3

19 F IRST AVENUE, D URBAN
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./XXII

1
2
3

422

Presumably by courting imprisonment
From the Gandhi Sangrahalaya Records
The rest of the letter is not available.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

484. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
December 22, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN (SENIOR),

It no doubt puts a very heavy responsibility on us when parents
of grown-up girls entrust them to us. God will help us to bear it.
When, however, you feel in a particular case that the responsibility will
be beyond your strength, plainly refuse to accept it. Sent away any
girl who refuses to submit to your discipline. Explain the position
clearly to the parents and the girl before you accept her. If we do not
take such steps of practical wisdom, God will not help us. He never
helps the timid, the lethargic and those who are not vigilant.
Have any facilities you require, but safeguard your health. If
you think that tea and coffee are essential for it, take either without the
slightest hesitation or without feeling ashamed about doing so. Giving
up tea or coffee is not at present the purpose of your sadhana; that
purpose is the service of those among the inmates of the Ashram who
suffer.
I cannot think of one single remedy which will help Madhu and
all others in the Ashram who suffer from constipation. I will tell you
how I overcame it in my case. For three or four days, I ate only
cooked greens like tanka. That completely restored my bowel
movement. Then I added almonds to the diet. You do not need them
for the people there. Perhaps you will not get even greens. But you
can certainly get onions. If those who suffer from constipation eat
boiled onions, that, too, will probably help them. If you can get
tomatoes, you may mix them with onions. If simple boiled onions do
not taste well, even with the addition of salt, and if tomatoes are not
available, they may use kokum.
The persons may try shirshasan. It has helped people to
overcome constipation from which they had suffered many years. The
asana should be done only on an empty stomach. It is quite easy to
do. The skirt should be tucked up behind and one should stand on
one’s head, supporting the body against a wall. After some practice
the support of the wall will not be necessary. The head should be
supported by the palms joined together.
I suppose you know that these days I eat the rotlas of jowar and
bajra, and vegetables, served to prisoners in jail. The vegetables
for me have to be cooked separately, because those cooked
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

423

for other prisoners contain spices. I continue to eat dates. In place of
milk I take four tolas of almonds. I keep fairly good health. If I do
not keep it up, I will resume milk.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 8768. Courtesy : Gangabehn Vaidya

485. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 22, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I got your letter full of information. Both the meanings of nijanamagrahi1 are good. The meaning suggested by Narandas may suit
Gujarati better, but the one suggested by you is not altogether inappropriate. I imagine that you yourself are a little girl and reply to
your question about prayer. Just as we have parents who gave birth to
us, so they had their parents who brought them into the world. If we
go further and further back like this, He whom we can conceive as the
Father of all is God. It is because He is that that we also call Him the
Creator. As our parents often come to know what we want without our
telling them, so does God know our wishes. If our human parents have
this power to know what we want, the Creator of all must have
infinitely greater power to know our heart. That is why we also think
of God as Antaryami, the Dweller within. It is not necessary that we
should be able to see Him. We have never seen a good many of our
relations. Somebody’s parents may have gone away to a foreign
country or died while he or she was a child, but such a man or woman
trusts other people and believes that the parents live or lived. Similarly,
we should trust the testimony of saints about the existence of God and
believe that the Antaryami does exist. If that is so, it is easy to
understand why we should sing bhajans to Him and pray to Him. If
we are good children, we bow to our parents, prostrating ourselves
before them, the first thing in the morning after leaving bed and the
last thing at night when going to bed. We should do the same to God.
And as we tell our parents what we desire, so we should tell God. This
should be enough for today. If you do not understand anything in
this, do not hesitate to question me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 10247
1

424

One who clings to the Name, which is his very self
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

486. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
December 22, 1930
DEAR SISTER,

I got the two boxes of dates and the cotton send by you. Need I
thank you for them? Write to Vithaldas and tell him that the dates
were excellent. This does not mean, of course, that he should send me
such dates more often. My request was that he should communicate
the price to the Superintendent here and supply the dates as and when
required, provided his brother orders enough quantity to spare some
and sell it. I got your letter too. I will write to you when I require
more cotton.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 4818. Courtesy : Premlila Thackersey

487. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 22, 1930
CHI. LILAVATI,

You are being really tested. See that you do not fail in the test.
One preserves one’s self-respect better by giving up the very desire
for being respected. You will not get another Gangabehn who will
look after you like a mother as she does. She has an overbearing
temper. Endure it. Understand and appreciate her zeal for service and
her sympathy for all. Anyone who wishes to serve must learn to act as
a member of an organization. To do this means to obey somebody’s
authority. One’s superior has his or her superior too. Think over the
verses of Chapter XII of the Gita. One of them says that a devotee and
lover of God is equally indifferent to respect and disrespect, to praise
and censure, and holds friend and foe in equal regard. Let this be true
about you. Do not feel it a burden to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 9318

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

425

488. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 22, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have your letter. From your postcard received yesterday, I
thought I would receive a letter today, but I did not get one. From
Jayaprakash’s letter it would seem you have now gone to the Ashram.
But it is not clear from your letters whether you have. I should like
you to go to the Ashram as soon as possible. I do not like your
continuing to get the fainting fits. I must now get a report of your
talks with Father. Incidentally, that will give me news about his health
too. I am quite well. So far, I have been able to digest jowar and
bajra.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3385

489. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Thursday Morning, December 18/23, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your packet yesterday evening. The letters to the Ashram
which I handed in this time, that is, on Tuesday last, should reach you
on Thursday, that is, today. I suggested to the official here to post
them immediately, if possible, and he told me afterwards that this
week’s letters were posted on Tuesday itself.
I welcome your long letters, but I shall not be happy if you take
special trouble to make them long. I can understand what a burden
you are carrying. I did not want an explanation in regard to Keshu.
But I can understand your having given it so that you could your
pour out your heart and satisfy yourself.
I had a postcard from Surajbhan, in which he says that he would
be happy if Yashodadevi was called to the Ashram. She lives with the
family of Lala Dunichand, a lawyer, in Ambala. Write to him.
The Ratilal episode is both happy and painful. His foolishness is
painful, but the display of humanity by the merchant, who returned
the diamond, and by Gopi, who returned the money, makes one
426

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

happy. In my eyes, their subsequent conduct wipes out their initial
guilt. Champa, of course, has always been foolish. She listens to no
persuasion and re-mains fond of diamonds and other jewels, and loses
money in conse-quence. Ratilal must have returned. Even if he has
not returned, that will not worry me. God always saves him. But this is
what life is. We pass our time in undoing the consequences of one
another’s error. For those who can remain unattached while doing
this, their labour is not wasted. To them it is a spiritual striving and
they realize God through it. I had an experience of this yesterday
when I saw God in a worm and a weevil. You are wrong if you think
that you know Pyarelal fully. Being a poet, he is bound to be
dreaming always. I asked him to remove a worm from the dates. He
should have put it in a safe corner, but, instead of thinking about his
duty, he was thinking of something else, God knows what, and he put
the worm in the wash-basin. The weevil, too, was dropped into the
same. If now I washed my hands or face in the basin, I would be the
cause of the death of both. I therefore, decided not to wash in it. But
when, after I had finished my work, I got ready to wash my hands, I
did not see the worm and the weevil in the basin. They had slowly
moved away. I look upon this experience as seeing God in the two
worms. An atheist or a rationalist would describe the incident as mere
accident. It was an accident, no doubt, but seeing God is also an
accident. If we but understand the truth, we would see Him every day;
otherwise our whole life would pass without our seeing Him. But I will
not dwell further on this. I wanted to note this incident in the diary
yes-terday, but, in my preoccupation with other work I wrote in it only
about the daily sacrificial work and forgot to note this. While writing
about the merchant and Gopi, I remembered this holy experience and
have shared it with you. I learnt much else, too, from it yesterday. God
alone knows whether I shall be able to digest all that. I will now answer
your question here. As we reflect deeper and remain peaceful, the
meaning of ahimsa and truth becomes clearer. I even realize the
supreme utility of these two. I believe we realize God in the degree to
which we practise them. I am gett-ing more convinced than ever in my
view that seeing God except through truth and ahimsa is an
impossibility. How can members of a group practise ahimsa towards
one another? They can do so by displaying generosity towards coworkers and their faults and everyone regarding his own faults with
strictness. Anyone who observes the faults of others believes, whether
he is conscious of the fact or not, that he does not have the same
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

427

faults. This gives rise to pride. The true rule is that one should oneself
observe all rules strictly and tolerate others who seem slack in
observing them. This is not kindness but strict justice. Do we really
know what effort is made by a person in observing a rule even as
slackly as he does? If our seeming strictness in observing rules comes
naturally to us, what is the value of that strictness? Is it any cause for
wonder if a man like Bhima can lift a weight of four pounds with the
utmost ease? A girl, however, might slip down while trying to lift one
pound; what would we think of that Bhima if he laughed at her then?
Really speaking, the effort of that girl to lift one pound is of much
greater value than Bhima’s lifting the weight of four pounds. If
Bhima had not lifted that weight, somebody else as strong would have
lifted it; but by her effort to lift one pound that girl taught the world a
lesson in doing one’s duty and earned God’s grace. Our dharma
therefore does not lie in criticizing others and thereby commiting
violence; it lies in becoming more vigilant ourselves. If a strong
bullock is yoked with one seemingly or really weak, the former’s duty
is to do more work and make up for the deficiency of the latter. The
driver goads it to labour harder. If the strong bullock does not do the
work expected of it, it is looked upon as a shirker; it is selfish and has
no pity on the other one. Let us never be shirkers. Let us always do
our duty. God will judge us and our co-workers. He can see into the
hearts of all. We scarcely can see into our own. We easily learn this if
we strive sincerely to cultivate ahimsa.
Through the pursuit of truth, we know the measure of purity in
our motives. It increases our vigilance in regard to the smallest social
duties and to our daily work. If we strive for truth, we would not be
content merely to attend prayers but would try to concentrate our
attention on them. We would try to follow the songs and the discourses, be punctual in attending the prayers and respond to them as
to a fresh experience every day. The freshness does not consist in the
variety of bhajans or other recitations, but should result from the
increasing purity of our heart. We should grow daily more contented
and feel greater peace of mind. If we do not have this experience, the
fault will lie not with the quality of the prayers but with the element of
untruth-fulness in us. If we attend the prayers with sincere devotion to
truth, we would experience nothing but peace. The faithful who visit
temples do not observe the lack of cleanliness in them, or pay
attention to the hypocrisy of the priest. They do not see the image as a
stone. They experience peace in the midst of noise and return from
428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the temples purified in heart. A person like me who feels suffocated
by the noise there and sees the image only as a piece of stone should
never visit a temple. God appears to us in the form in which we
worship Him. For He is not outside of us. He is in the hearts of us all.
If we understand this truth, our simplest and smallest actions would
shed lustre on us and help us to see God. In order that we may learn
this, prayers, spinning, and other daily duties are like a spiritual
lighthouse to us or a right angle which is the standard of
measurement.
Saturday Morning
If Giriraj remains quiet, that problem will then be over. I see that
it will not be possible now to get the children to the Ashram. He has
entrusted them [to somebody else]. Trust them to their fate now. I am
going on quite well at present. I have gained a pound or a pound and
a half in weight this week. I cannot say that I have at last succeeded in
giving up dates and raisins. Only a few days ago, Jamnabehn and
Vithaldas sent some dates and I ate them for two or three days. And
now again I have stopped eating them. I am thus observing the effect
of eating them and not eating them. I do want to give them up if I
can. At present, therefore, my diet includes a little quantity of greens
or cabbage or beetroot or turnip or pumpkin, bhakhari of bajra or
jowar, four tolas of almonds, and lemon. If God keeps me fit with
these, so far so good; otherwise I will humbly resume milk or curds. I
cannot say yet that I am able to live on this diet. I will not say, either,
that I shall not be able to do so. I had never expected that I would be
able to digest jowar and bajra. At present, however, I seem to have no
difficulty in doing so.
I have noted what you say about yourself. Your selection of the
items and their quantities is correct. I see that you have given up
ground-nuts; there is nothing wrong in that. The fact that you are
losing weight will do you no harm at all. You should not lose strength,
however. If you find it necessary, increase the quantity of milk or
curds. It will per-haps help you if you add just one tola of almonds to
your diet. Solve the problem of Parnerkar firmly. It seems to have
turned out a painful chapter. I got the chapters of Gitabodh. So far I
have not received the piece of leather.
You may extract from any of my letters what I say about the
yajna of spinning and publish it. There is no harm in publising
similar other material of public interest. The more the people do
yajna for self-purification, the better. A mass yajna has an altogether
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

429

miraculous effect. If you can, keep up with what you have started. The
spinning-wheels and all other things must be in perfect condition.
These things produce an effect on our minds and make a difference
to the speed. Your speed has increased well enough. I have not been
able to go beyond 200 on the spinning-wheel and 60 on the talki. But
I do hope to do so. I do not know if there is something wrong with
my fingers. If the nerves running through them are weak, it is possible
that they may not be active enough. Just as you go to bed early, it will
also be good if you make it a rule not to rise earlier than a fixed hour.
You should do what you can between 4 and 9 and then stop. If you
have more things to do than you can finish during that time, you may
omit those which you safely can. You should entrust to others the
things which they can attend to. It is really not necessary to give you
advice in this matter, but I have said something all the same in order
that you may be more careful. One test of non-attachment is that a
person who is non-attached always feels as if he had no work, though
he is never inactive even for a single moment. At present, however,
that state of mind “is a wish beyond our reach”. All the same, we
should grasp with our intellect the meaning of that verse and, having
done so, strive to reach that state. The condition of a non-attached
person should never seem pitiable. He should never have an
expression on his face which might make anybody feel sorry for him
and think that he was carrying an excessive burden of work. Think
what “burden” of work God has to carry. Nevertheless He is the king
of those who do not work. He is an object of pity to no one. On the
contrary, we hunger for His mercy. We should never be satisfied with
a state a whit inferior to His, though He may carry the burden of the
entire universe and we that of something smaller than even a particle
of dust. Just as He ever feels light, though carrying the burden of the
universe, so should we do though carrying the burden of a mere
fraction of a particle of dust. We can easily attain such a state of mind
if we reduce ourselves to a cipher. Mirabehn finds it impossible to
become non-attached, but she is a good woman and, therefore, will
one day approach that state. From here I think she would do well not
to undertake the responsibility of a new paper. I had understood
about Sitla Sahay even without a letter from him, and that is why I
wished to get one from him.
I do not like to give to anyone the impression of my palm.
Apart from that, it would be against jail rules to do so. I have,
therefore, no choice in the matter. Kakasaheb could not even give his
signature on his photograph. And I think that it is a good rule too. I

430

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have written a letter1 to Purushottam; read it. Kanu, too, seems to have
been upset a bit.
Sunday Morning
2
It was not at all satisfied by . . . ’s letter. I take it that you will
see him personally, or probably you have already seen him. Discuss
the matter with him and convey to me the impression you form. This
case, too seems like . . . ’s3 . The latter would not admit anything more
than what had come out and produced an impression on Surendra,
Chhaganlal and others that nothing wrong had happened. He did not
succeed in producing that impression on me, and ultimately confessed
having been guilty of a serious lapse. I would not be surprised if a
similar thing should happen in . . . ’s 4 case. His language gives the
impression of a guilty person attacking an innocent. Look into this.
Kusum has referred in her letter to the problem that has arisen
about the offer of a job to her in Porbandar. Read my reply to her
and guide her as you think best. My compliments to Jaya for having
gone to the rest-house 5 . Has she any relation there to whom I can
write? If Kakasaheb has not been able to win over the others, I think it
would be best to let the Gita recitation go on as at present. The
suggestion to complete the whole recitation in seven days by reciting
some verses in the morning and some in the evening has not appealed
to me. I will congratulate ourselves if we can improve upon the
present practice. I have noted that you took two and three-quarter
hours to write your letter to me. The time taken in dispatching the
letters must have been in addition to this. It is fine indeed if you can
get all this time. If you can reduce it a little, however, you should
certainly do so.
I see that I made an amusing mistake about Vidyabehn 6 . I will
be more careful in future when several persons claim the same name.
I think you did right in detaining Bhagwanjibhai’s 7 Manibehn.
She will be welcome to the Ashram when the two reach a level so that
they feel as brother and sister to each other. At present it is best that
they remain away from each other.

1

Vide “Letter to Purushottam Gandhi”, 19-12-1930.
The names have been omitted.
3
ibid
4
ibid
5
Prison
6
There were two women of this name : one, the wife of Anand Hingorani, and
another, the daughter of Raojibhai Manibhai.
7
Bhagwanji P. Pandya
2

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

431

Bhansali has been testing you a good deal. I got two Godrej
boxes. I have written to the dealers to inquire for more. You may use
the donation by Soniramji for any cause that you think good. Inform
him to what account you credit the sum. Take Nayan to a doctor, if
necessary. She must be helped to get rid of her fever. Your solution
concerning Kashinath seems all right.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The responsibility for Amina’s Urdu education rests on us.
Giriraj used to teach her. He should start doing so again, or some
other arrangement should be made.
December 21, 1930
If you have kept a copy of my letter to Hari-ichchha, show it to
Radha. Read my letters to Kaka and to Mirabehn. Did you show
Shanti’s letter to Manilal? If you did not and if you remember its
contents, acquaint Manilal with them. Read my letter to Shanti. I have
gone through Gitabodh again. I have not been able to read your
letter, though. If you do not follow any point or if my explanation is
incomplete, write to me about it.
BAPU1

[PS.]
There are 72 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I

490. LETTER TO HORACE G. ALEXANDER
YERAVDA C ENTRAL P RISON,

December 23, 1930
DEAR FRIEND,

I was glad to hear from you. If the R.T.C. results in doing
something worthy of the great sacrifice of the nation and therefore of
acceptance, I should be delighted. But as I have told you, having been
filled with distrust nothing but an accomplished result will reassure
me.
1

For the text of the Gita discourse (Ch. VII) dated December 23 which
followed, vide “Letters on the Gita”, 21-2-1932.

432

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The question of debts is incredibly simple. The Lahore
resolution has an explicit condition about reference to an impartial
tribunal.1 But you have my assurance that no Congressman has ever
enunciated the doctrine of total repudiation. What Congressmen,
including myself, demand is that the nation’s representatives should
have the right of having any portion of the so-called national debt,
concessions and the like, being referred to an independent tribunal
whose decision should be final and binding on both the parties. I feel
I am quite safe in saying this even for Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. Not to
adopt the course above indicated would be disloyal to the nation as
total repudiation without just cause would undoubtedly be dishonourable.
Whatever Maulana Mohamed Ali may think of me, I have
nothing but kindly feelings about him. And I feel sure that time will
remove misunderstandings. Having no feeling either against Islam or
Mussalmans, I feel absolutely at ease.
My love to Reginald. I know Charlie Andrews is not now with
you.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
HORACE ALEXANDER
144 OAKTREE L ANE
S EELY OAK
BIRMINGHAM
From a photostat: G.N. 1409

491. LETTER TO MANMOHANDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 24, 1930
BHAISHRI MANMOHANDAS,

I have your letter. I have not however received the proofs of the
book. I am making inquiries. I will go through them when I get them.
Your being my namesake has at least this advantage for me, that
I am saved from a good deal of correspondence.2
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 7
1
2

Vide “Speech at Subjects Committee, A.I.C.C. —II”, 1-1-1930.
Part of Gandhiji mail used to be misdelivered to the addressee.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

433

492. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR MORARJEE
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 27, 1930
CHI. SHANTIKUMAR,

I have heard from you after a long time. I did not get your
detailed letter which you mention. It will be better, therefore, if you
write again. I have not been able to read the book sent by you. The
better part of the day is spent in spinning and carding, and the
remaining time is taken up by correspondence. I can, therefore, do
very little reading.
I am very glad indeed that you have gone to live at Juhu.
Grandmother will enjoy peace of mind there.
Does Sumati keep well?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 4720. Courtesy : Shantikumar
Morarjee

493. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 27, 1930
CHI. MANI (PATEL),

At last I have a letter from you. You have somewhat made up
for previous neglect. Do build up your health at any rate. You had a
great deal of work1 on your hands, so there was no need to read any
books. You did well to put up a fight2 .
I am now all right. Due to constipation I had stomachache one
day; therefore I had my bowels flushed and took only vegetable soup
the next day; this cured my constipation. Since that day I have not
taken milk. I take one roti made of local jowar or bajra and vegetable
with a few almonds. There is no reason for anxiety on my score.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4 : Manibehn Patelne, pp. 75-6
1
2

434

That of looking after numerous fellow-prisoners
On the question of women prisoners’ right to wear bangles
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

494. LETTER TO VANAMALA PARIKH
December 27, 1930
CHI. VANAMALA,

You have written your letter in a beautiful handwriting. It is not
enough that your speed on the takli is the same as mine. Can an old
man and a child have equal capacity? Have you heard with what speed
they spin in Wardha? Even a girl of your age spins 80-85 rounds in
half an hour.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 5757

495. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRA KHARE
December 27, 1930
CHI. RAMBHAU,

A resolution is as good as a vow if we regard it as such. You are
in the sacred land of the Himalayas. Shake off your laziness, etc., to
which you confess. Remember that you have gone there to serve
Prabhubhai1 and to become a good boy. Therefore, spin regularly on
the Magan spinning-wheel. Follow Prabhubhai’s advice and get rid of
the last trace of laziness.
Your handwriting is not too bad nor the mistakes too many.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 287. Courtesy : Lakshmibehn Khare

496. LETTER TO MATHURI KHARE
December 27, 1930
CHI. MATHURI,

Is not this coloured paper lovely? It is a very good thing that
you no more doze off during prayers. With effort handwriting can
become as beautiful as pearls.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C.W. 258-a. Courtesy : Lakshmibehn Khare
1

Presumably Prabhudas Gandhi who was in Almora

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

435

497. LETTER TO SHARDA C. SHAH
December 28, 1930
CHI. SHARDA,

I have your letter. I invariably write to you. But if I fail to do so,
you too do not write to me. I agree to this condition, though children
should not insist on this. You have each to write one letter to me and I
have to write one letter to each; but I have thousands or lakhs of
children. So I write as many as I can. But everyone who writes to me
expects me to write to them myself. What is to happen then?
You should get rid of your cough.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C.W. 9896. Courtesy : Shardabehn Chokhawala

498. LETTER TO KALAVATI TRIVEDI
December 28, 1930
CHI. KALAVATI,

Your letter. The handwriting is better than before. It shall
certainly improve through effort. You must regularly write something
in a clear hand, be it only for ten minutes. Keep a model before you.
Be engrossed in service.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi G.N. 5269

499. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
December 28, 1930
CHI. VASUMATI,

Does the doctor say that your ear-drum has been damaged, and
that, if it cannot be cured, it would be advisable to remove it? If that is
so, you should get it removed even at the risk of certain deafness
which might result from its removal, and save yourself from the
present pain. Is there a continual discharge from the ear? You should
not ignore this disease. I am still able to carry on without milk.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 9297

436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

500. LETTER TO MADHAVJI V. THAKKAR
December 28, 1930
CHI. MADHAVJI,

It is not unlikely that you will get this letter. It is the same to us
whether we are in jail or outside. Even self-purification is a form of
service, and we must strive for it wherever we are whether in jail or
outside. Even if we devote ourselves to service, we must make our
hearts pure.
Surendra himself is responsible for his bad health.
I am acting with proper caution. If, none the less, I do make
mistakes, how can that be helped? I would rather that I made mistakes
in dealing with the body than in matters concerning the soul.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6809

501. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
December 28, 1930
CHI. PREMA,

I do not want you to bind yourself with a promise. I am satisfied
with your assurance. Do not shout so loudly as to harm your throat.
Did the fast have any beneficial effect on it? I should like somebody
to go through the letters which the children write to me from the point
of view of both language and handwriting.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 10248

502. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
December 28, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

You have not wasted your time in shortening your long letter.
This practice will ultimately make your thinking clear. And as our
thinking becomes clearer we are able to express in a few words
whatever we have to say. Quest for exploring the soul is nothing but
our detecting, in the process, attachment, hatred, etc., lurking in our
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

437

heart. This is similar to the exploring of the Himalayas which involves
facing a number of difficulties and cliffs.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C.W. 332. Courtesy : Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

503. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
December 28, 1930
CHI. KANTA,

I got both your letters together. You have done well to return to
the Ashram. Go back only when you have fully recovered. If you
drink hot water with salt, it will relieve the cough. Take deep breaths.
You must breathe only through the nose. Though you do not
likeonions, can you not eat them as medicine? Onions boiled in water
should not smell. Do not eat oily foods. Rotlo and salt will be enough.
Drink plenty of boiled water with it. You may take milk and ghee
whenever offered. You should keep soda handy and use it when you
are offered buttermilk.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati. Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

504. LETTER TO KUSUM DESAI
December 29, 1930
CHI. KUSUM (SENIOR),

It would be very good if Shanta spends some time with you. If I
know what you wish in regard to punishment, I can consider and
suggest something. A fast may contain an element of violence in it. If
it is likely to take the form of blackmail, it should be avoided. I do not
remember if you had asked this question before.
Has not Shankarbhai’s passing away increased your
responsibility? Has the widow any children? Is she educated? Apart
from that, was there any other responsibility on Shankarbhai? If the
438

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

widow desires to remarry, I assume that you will help her to do so.
Give me all the facts.
My weight has again reached 101.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 1815

505. LETTER TO N. M. KHARE
December 29, 1930
CHI. PANDITJI,

Cannot we lead children playing in streets in“singing
processions”? They will acquire, in the process, some education in
letters too. But I need not write about this, since you are already
discussing the matter with Kaka. It is very necessary to keep the
people and children occupied in useful activities.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : C.W. 214. Courtesy : Lakshmibehn Khare

506. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
December 29, 1930
MADAM TEACHER,

You say that everything is all right. Excellent! To say that all is
well after finishing me!1 I hope you will be satisfied with this lesson
for today. I will not follow the frog in the stroy simply because you
praise me much. I am quite aware how fine my Urdu is, but I am not
ashamed of it. Words of love need no more ornament than love itself
does, no matter how foolish they are or how like the mere prattle of a
child. You are quite right in comparing with music an operation by
skilled doctors. Let us be thankful that the gentlemen spared your
nose although they made away with all the bones. We must now think
of some punishment for Father. All of you should help me in that.
How could youths with white beard go to a hospital? What sort of a
1

These sentences are in Urdu.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

439

make-believe is that? I hope he is now as strong as an Arab horse.
To Mother, vandemataram; to Father, bhur-r-r-r; to you,
Blessings and many good wishes from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : S.N. 9625

507. LETTER TO JUGATRAM DAVE
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 29, 1930
BHAI JUGATRAM,

I have been expecting a letter from you every day. You have
piled up a fairly big heap of facts before me. It requires a special art
to deal with Mithubehn 1 . Use all the art you have. I have received
complaints against her from the women too. In any case, Time is the
friend of all. He sets everything right. Probably that is why in English
they call Him Father Time. We believe Him to be God Himself. If He
destroys the worlds, He does that too for their good.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 2690

508. LETTER TO KUNVARJI MEHTA
December 29, 1930
BHAI KUNVARJI,

Your letters contain useful information. If we do not forsake
truth and non-violence, even our misfortunes will help us. Hence
follow them scrupulously and persuade other also to do the same.
Write to Pragji and tell him that he should not become impatient.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am still able to carry on without milk.
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 2691

1

440

Mithubehn Petit
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

509. LETTER TO GANGABEHN JHAVERI AND NANIBEHN
JHAVERI
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 29, 1930
CHI. GANGABEHN AND NANIBEHN,

I got your full letter. I cannot guide you from here in detail. Is
it not our principle that a prisoner should not take interest in problems
outside nor guide anyone? I have merely drawn your attention to the
principle which we have accepted. Think over it and then unhesitatingly follow what seems to you your dharma. If you cannot decide
where your dharma lies, you may consult Pannalal or Narandas. Now
Kakasaheb also is there. Discuss the matter with him and then do what
you conscience tells you. Write to me from time to time. Both of you,
take care of your health. Has Pannalal completely recovered now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3109

510. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
December 29, 1930
CHI. KASHINATH,

I got your letter. I fully approve of what you did about Shanta’s
husband. It is enough if Shanta keeps up her courage. Whatever
happens, Shanta should refuse to go to him. Let him, if he wishes,
come again to attack her. She should resist if he comes to carry her
away by force. She should not be alone at any time. You need not
take the trouble to find out where the man has gone. It is enough that
you have written about it to his people at home. Be vigilant lest he
come stealthily and attack her again. If Mother is of the same mind as
you in this matter, you will meet with no difficulty in following the
course which you have adopted.
I have already replied to the question regarding marriage. I see
that it is not enough, and also that it is. I have only pointed out the
Vedic ideal modified to suit modern times. If one is unable to follow
it, one may modify it further as much as necessary. It is not for me to
take measure of anyone’s inability in this regard.
VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

441

I don’t mind your having written about Gangabehn. She is not
intentionally partial to anyone. She may act in that manner through
haste and lack of understanding. However, she is the fittest to be the
women’s leader. For Kalavati and others, therefore, service lies in
doing as she says, and they ought to be satisfied with that. They
should not lose heart if people give no co-operation in the work
regarding cleanliness, khadi, etc. In the long run people are bound to
yield to love and their daily experience of other people’s conduct.
Their presence by itself is enough in such places, provided they spend
the whole day in work. And they must carry the takli and the
spinning-wheel with them. They should also clean people’s latrines,
etc.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 5289

511. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
December 29, 1930
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I have your letter. If you regarded the world as unreal, i.e.,
transitory, does it in any way go contrary to reason? Whatever is
transitory is unreal because it does not endure for ever. And there is
no question of being attached to what is transient. After all you will
seldom find reason being exercised in matters of faith. If it could be
grasped by reason it ceases to be a matter of faith. Faith might indeed
one day lead to experience.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C.W. 333. Courtesy : Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

512. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Saturday Morning, December 27/30, 1930
CHI. NARANDAS,

This time I got your packet only yesterday (Friday) after 2
o’clock. Because of Christmas there seems to have been some
confusion in the post office. Here the officials seem quite careful
442

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

about my post. That is why you got my packet on Thursday.
I got the piece of leather for sandals. I see Mahadev’s name in
your list, but I did not find his letter. Perhaps there was a letter by
Durga, but I do not find even that. I did feel that Ratilal would return.
Where had he gone on his pleasure trip? Send with a visitor some time
a sample of the bread which you make there. We do not know when
Giriraj will see reason. Go on doing your best. His heart is pure and
he is filled with the spirit of self-sacrifice. One day, therefore, he is
bound to see reason. “No one seeking to do good ever comes to
harm.” 1
I understand everyone being nervous about my experience in
diet, for I have not fully succeeded in it. But perhaps you may tell
people that you know that I wake up in time and make necessary
changes, and that my body responds to them. How can I give up a
dharma which has come to me unsought? I was weighed yesterday
and again seemed to have gained a pound and a half. I advisedly say
“seemed” because on the previous occasion I was weighed after I had
passed stool and this time before I had done so. The weight of the
stool is not real gain in weight, but an unnecessary load. We may
therefore count half a pound less; even then there has been a gain of
one pound. But more important than the weight is the energy which I
feel in my body. I feel no sign of weakness yet. I eat without
difficulty one bhakhari of the size which they make here, half a piece
at one meal. The quantity of almonds which I eat comes to nearly two
ounces. At present at any rate I feel that, if I can continue to digest
this amount of food, I shall be able to keep up my strength.There is,
therefore, no reason at all for worry. I am taking the utmost care, and,
after all, even in this matter one needs to practise non-attachment.
Who can say when that thing, more fragile than glass, will slip from
one’s hand and break?
I suppose you remember that you sent to Kantu 2 a diary made
of handmade paper. He has now sent it for my autograph. The
binding is very bad. Not only that there is no neatness about it, but he
has so bound it that one cannot turn the pages at all. The art of
binding books is easy to learn. It can be learnt in a very short time.
Someone from among us should learn it. Or we should get our
binding done outside. I intend to get the diary re-bound in the press
here. This is just by the way. I have mentioned the matter for future
1
2

Bhagavad Gita, VI. 40
Kantilal Gajiwala; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 5/9-9-1930.

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

443

guidance. “Yoga is skill in work.”1 This should be illustrated even in
our least important activities. “Skill in work” lies also in not
attempting what we cannot do. That is a case of action in inaction.
Even refraining from something is a form of action. There is a saying
in English borrowed from Persian. “He who knows that he knows not
is wise.” I am prompted to say all this form my own unhappy
experience. I observe that my spinning displays too much evidence of
lack of skill and slackness despite all the care that I take. There may
be a knot in the thread which I observe, but I let it go. At times the
yarn is much too loose, but I let it remain. I have acquired no
proficiency at all in joining broken thread. But I go on, all the same.
What kind of yajna is this? Whether you call it carelessness, laxity or
indifference, I observe every day this weakness in me in regard to this
great yajna of spinning. I try every day to improve myself, and fail.
But I keep hoping that one day I shall do well in my yajna. Even if I
do not, I derive consolation from the verse : “After man lives, the
enlightened one attains Me”2 . It is a dangerous verse. One may use it
to remain content with one’s lethargy. If a person pays attention to
the meaning of every word in it, he will not fall, otherwise the verse
can be the cause of much harm to one. I hear the bugle sounded
every day at 5.30. It is now time for me to pace up and down.
7.30, Tuesday
If you send your packet by unregistered parcel, it may per- haps
be delayed. Make inquiries, however, and do what you think best. This
time I have been hard pressed for time to cope with the work.
Ordinarily, I should be spinning at this hour. I get letters from
Prabhavati from time to time. She should arrive in the Ashram any
day now. Drop me a postcard as soon as she arrives. Most probably I
shall get it. Read my letters to Kaka and Mirabehn. Today I stop here.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Did you read the account about Amidas? If you have not read it,
get a copy from Harivallabhdas. He seems to have preserved one.3
[PPS.]
There are 82 letters.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati : M.M.U./I

1

Bhagavad Gita, II. 50
ibid
3
For the text of the Gita discourse (Ch. VIII) which followed, vide “Letters on
the Gita”, 21-2-1932.
2

444

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

513. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
December 29/30, 1930
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter. This time I must be very brief as the post came two
days late. I start therefore with the translation of the 2nd verse1 : “ I n
the early morning I worship Him who is beyond the reach of thought
and speech yet by whose grace all speech is possible. I worship Him
whom the Vedas describe as neti, neti (not this). Him they (the sages)
have called God of gods, the unborn, the unfallen, the source of all.”
I do not think that this calls for any explanation. The translation
of the preface2 is proceeding apace. And as there was no Ashram post
till Friday, I devoted the spare time to translating more paras. The
result is that now there are only 10 more left. It will be time then to
consider whether I can translate the Gita notes I am writing for the
Ashram inmates. Just now the 100 rounds on the takli take up much
time. But I am now showing an increase in speed. The speed on the
Gandiv today was for me quite a record, i.e., 169 rounds in 40
minutes. This means 255 in 60 minutes. The improvements are
primarily responsible for this speed. If I continue to show
improvement, I may have some more time for writing work. For I do
not want to be greedy just now in the way of increase in the output. I
shall stick to 300 on the wheel and 100 on the takli till I show a
permanently marked increase in speed.
I was quite sure you would get your foreign mail.
Of my health which is excellent more in the general letter.
Of your journalistic venture my opinion remains unaltered and
is reinforced by the recent ordinance. But, as I have said, my opinion
ought not to count one way or the other.
Love.
BAPU
From the original : C.W. 5425. Courtesy : Mirabehn; also G.N. 9659

1
2

Of Ashram Bhajanvali; vide “Ashram Bhajanavali”, 15-12-1930.
To Anasaktiyoga; vide “Anasaktiyoga”, 27-6-1929

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

445

514. LETTER TO SHANTA S. PATEL
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

December 30, 1930
CHI. SHANTA (SHANKARBHAI),

I have your letter. Let me give my blessings just now for the new
year. If you take a vow, do so after full deliberation and, having taken
one be firm in keeping it. There is no need at all to undertake a seven
days’ fast. It is likely to prove too much for you. It is enough if you
fast on the birthday. Write to Shankarbhai and to me and tell us what
vow you take. Take the vow in the presence of the girl friends living
there. If possible, spend that day with Kusumbehn. It would be good
before taking your vow to consult her. The difficulty which you point
out about eating food without spices is only an excuse. One who is
determined to eat unspiced food will certainly find out what to eat.
Surely, there are no chillies in rotla, rice and buttermilk. [Is it not so?]
One should be satisfied with a rotla, buttermilk and salt. Just as we eat
and drink every day, we should also write the diary every day.
Everything can be done if one has the will. Kamu has not
acknowledge my letter. Ask her whether she got it. What will her
husband do at Ahmedabad?
How can anyone say that there is no sin in killing bugs and
fleas? Even in cutting up vegetables there is sin. However, we do
commit some sins which we regard as unavoidable. When we smoke a
place to protect ourselves against fleas, countless fleas are killed, but
we feel helpless and do that all the same. However, we realize through
such necessities that it is everyone’s duty to seek deliverance from
bodily life.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 4057

515. LETTER TO HARILAL DESAI
December 30, 1930
CHI. HARILAL (DESAI),

I am hard pressed for time just now and will not, therefore, write
a long letter. You did well in giving me all the details. I do not wish
446

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Valji to know my opinion for the present. He may be told about it
after he is released. I am confirmed in my opinion after reading Hariichchha’s letter. But what happened has happened. I have written to
Hari-ichchha and explained to her how she can now make the best of
an unfortunate event.1 She will probably show you that letter if you
have not seen it already. Ask her to show it to you.
Your duty now is to cling to the job which you have accepted.
You may think of something else to do only when circumstances arise
in which you on your own leave it—for I have already observed your
unsettled state of mind. I have faith in you despite that, for you
belong to Valji’s family and are sincere at heart. Such persons often
become steady all at once. What has Dudhibehn2 decided to do?
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 6626

516. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
December 30, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I got four letters from you together. You should not forget that
after all I am a prisoner. I get the letters when the Superin- tendent
visits [me]. However, I continue my efforts to see that I get my letters
immediately. When will you now go to the Ashram? I should like you
to do so without delay. Your weakness must disappear. Don’t be eager
to start wroking as soon as you reach the Ashram. Take milk, curds
and furits in sufficient quantities. And you of course know the
benefits of open air. May God protect you in every way. Don’t worry
about me. I had given up eating fresh fruits during the [Dandi] march
itself. Nor do I feel any need for them. I seem to be able to digest
four or five tolas of almonds and that keeps up my strength.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3386

1
2

She was married to a widower.
Valji Govindji Desai’s wife

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1932

447

517. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,

December 30, 1930
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

For want of time, only this much now. I have understood your
problem with the takli. Do you have that problem with the bamboo
one or the iron takli? Your faith will produce the right means even in
material things for you. Hence, be patient. For the present, keep a
watch on how much yarn the Magan spinning-wheel, in its existing
form, gives. You should not have any problem when a devotee of the
Magan spinning-wheel, i.e. Dhiru, is with you. If the takli has started
giving 330 rounds of yarn per hour, why cannot the Magan-wheel
give 3330 rounds per hour? Do not be alarmed by it. Initially, the
takli gave only 30 rounds, now it easily gives ten times more. It is not
impossible to produce on Magan wheel ten times more than the takli.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original S.N. 32964

518. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
December 31, 1930
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I get your letters. But I put off writing to you thinking that you
will soon be in the Ashram. The more you stay on there, the more I
feel worried. Why don’t you go away immediately and leave matters
to take care of themselves? If Jayaprakash cannot go immediately,
cannot he ask Harasubabu? I see that the longer you delay in going
to the Ashram, the weaker you are becoming. What further can I now
write even to Jayaprakash?
What is your diet in your present condition of health? Who
watches over you when you are in a swoon? What did Father tell you
when you met him? I feel afraid even to ask you questions, for it may
be a burden on your mind to think and reply to them. I dismiss my
worries in the faith that God has been protecting you and will
continue to do so. I am quite well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G.N. 3387

448

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

519. A LETTER
YERAVDA MANDIR,

December 31, 1930
CHI.,

It is possible that, from an academic standpoint, my
interpretation of the phrase “
is of no value. But I think
it is possible to interpret it to refer both to the self and the body. The
self unclouded by ignorance knows neither birth nor death. However,
one who believes that it dies must believe also that it is born again.
For, nothing in this world suffers total destruction, not even physical
body. It ceases to exist in one form and takes another. It goes on
ever changing its form. After the body has been reduced to ashes it
will not remain unchanged for ever in the form of atoms, for the
atoms will change too. “When turned into ornaments, gold acquires
different names and forms but it, ever remains gold.” Does this
appeal to your reason in any way? As Vinoba’s style is very lively, he
wins our interest. However, I have come to the conclusion that it is
possible to put more than one interpretation on the words of the Gita
and that all of them may be right. The central meaning would remain
the same, and consistent with it there may be as many interpretations
as one may wish, which together, like the numerous instruments in an
orchestra, produce a beautiful symphony. As regards “is seated,”
“sits” and “walks,” it is possible to draw out three distinct meaning.
But the Gita is not a technical or scientific work composed with such
precision. It abounds in repetitions, and there is looseness of
expression too. This is not a defect, but it is there.
These days I have been spinning on the takli at least 100 rounds
a day. I have given up the iron takli, after having tried very hard to
spin well on it, and now I am back to the bamboo takli. I feel a little
better with it. The speed has risen to 75 per hour. It will go up still.
After I have mastered the bamboo takli fully, I will return to the iron
one.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati : C.W. 9317. Courtesy : Narandas Gandhi

VOL 50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

449

520. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
[December 1930] 1
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

You have construed the answers to your questions all right.
Even then I will add a little here.
There is no end to conflicts of loyalties and to miseries. True
desire for knowledge arises from this.
The body can be said to be an abode of punya 2 in spite of its
origin in papa 3 in so far as it is a means to realization of the atman.
Knowledge means the realization of the self. One who has fully
realized truth and non-violence is a perfect jnani in spite of being
unlettered. This includes the answer to the question why we should
obtain, etc.
Non-attachment means absence of attachment. Attachment
means the desire for a certain fruit. Attachment is implicit in wanting
to climb the Himalayas. Climbing the Himalayas when it falls to one’s
lot is doing it free of attachment.
Yoga : Action performed without attachment. You write books
but you do not crave for honour on that account, nor money nor
praise from anyone. And since it has been your lot to render service
through writing what you do is yoga.
Generally I do not forbid asking questions. But the better and
correct way is to solve such problems by oneself and to consult others
in case of doubt. Unless we did it our discrimination will not develop.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : C.W. 331. Courtesy : Bhagwanji Purushottam
Pandya

521. LETTER TO GANGABEHN JHAVERI
[1930] 4
CHI. GANGABEHN,

Neither you nor Nanibehn 5 should worry. For now I will not
part with those of you who have remained behind. I shall see the result
1
2
3
4
5

450

As supplied by the addressee
Merit
Sin
From the contents; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 26-4-1930.
Wife of the addressee’s stepson, Pannalal Jhaveri.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of the step I have taken. You and Nanibehn should try to teach
Mahalakshmi what she finds difficult. Tell Ba that I shall most
probably reach there tonight.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 3129

522. LETTER TO DURGA GIRI1
[1930]
CHI. DURGA

2

I have your beautiful letter, Go ahead. Work well. Never forget
to get up early. Be fully awake during the morning prayers.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalta, p. 30

523. LETTER TO SATYADEVI GIRI
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

Silence Day [1930]
CHI. SATYADEVI3 ,

There will be no end to my troubles if you girls or other people
start thinking that I have forgotten those to whom do not write. Can
anyone write to each member of such a large family? But you all can
certainly write.
Your handwriting is good, and the sketch of a flower-pot with
flowers standing upright is so good that the flowers seem to emit
fragrance. Are you doing everything carefully? Is Dharma3 still
naughty?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalta, p. 33
1

According to the source, this was written from Yeravda Central Prison; also,
this and the two following items were originally written in Gujarati.
2
ibid
3
Addressee’s brother.
VOL 50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

451

524. LETTER TO DHARMAKUMAR GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR

Silence Day [1930]
CHI. DHARMAKUMAR,

Your letter. You must form the habit of writing in ink and
produce print-like alphabet. You indulge in mischief, don’t you?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Virat Vatsalta, p. 35

525. LETTER TO SHANTA
January 11 , 1931
CHI. SHANTA,

Your letter. Be brave and remain firm. You are facing an
intricate problem.2 Ponder well over the verses recited during the
prayers in the women’s section. Understand their meaning.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5274

526. LETTER TO MANMOHANDAS GANDHI
January 1, 1931
BHAISHRI MANMOHANDAS,

I got the pages of your booklet. I have gone through them.
You have collected some useful statistics. But the title of the booklet is
certainly not appropriate. It gives more and more reliable information
about mill-cloth than about handloom cloth. After reading it, I felt
that its title “How to Compete with Foreign Cloth” was too ambitious
for the contents. You have not attempted a careful and detailed
examination of hand-spinning. If you have realized that the masterkey for the solution of the problem is hand-spinning, you should put
1
In the source ‘1’ appears to have been corrected to ‘7’, presumably the date
on which the letter was posted.
2
Vide “Letter to Kashinath Trivedi”. 29-12-1930.

452

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the truth in your own manner. If you are not convinced that it is so,
you should not give it a place in your scheme yielding to the present
atmosphere. I am becoming more and more convinced that, without
hand-spinning, permanent boycott of foreign cloth will be impossible
and that even hand-weaving cannot survive without it. If you share
this view, you should explain it convincingly.
Despite my partiality for hand-spinning, I don’t think that
Talchekar’s contention is supported by facts. I have even had
correspondence with him on the matter. His claim that handspun yarn
is superior is not borne out by experience. By carefully co-ordinating
a variety of factors, it may be possible to produce hand-spun yarn
which would be stronger than mill-yarn, but the ordinary hand-spun
yarn will always be weaker than mill-yarn. But what does it matter?
As compared to hand-made bhakhari, the biscuit produced in a
factory with the help of dies will always be perfectly round in shape,
smooth and attractive in appearance, and still the former will continue
to be preferred to it. You have tried to convince the readers that millcloth and handloom cloth can supplement each other. It may be
possible for some time to regulate things in that manner, but not
permanently. The division of the booklet into sections is not accurate.
Go through it again. I have nothing more to add.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8

527. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
January 1, 1931
CHI. PREMA,

This week’s post, too, seems to have been delayed. Meanwhile
I have started writing my letters.
When the mind is occupied with nothing else, it starts thinking
about the boys and girls. Probably the children don’t know why the
23rd of December is the shortest day. In trying to explain this, you
will automatically explain to them some facts of geography and
astronomy. Will you not try this? While explaining the reason for the
23rd being the shortest day, speak about the longest day and about
the dates on which the day and the night are equal. Simultaneously,
you may explain the change of seasons. While doing so tell them what
Christmas means. In such discussions, both the parties should feel
interested. This is also true about the indigenous tables and methods
VOL 50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

453

of oral calculation. These things, too, can be taught to children in an
entertaining way. From this, I am generally led to think about botany.
I can a complete ignoramus in this field. You, perhaps, know
something of the subject. If you do not, you can pick up some
general knowledge without much trouble and impart it to children,
and to me through letters. You can teach as you learn. But you
should not feel this as a burden on your mind. It will be a boon to the
children and to me if you make some such effort.
I constantly feel that we don’t give to children all that we ought
to. We should, therefore, give that at any rate which we can without
much trouble to ourselves. Discuss this matter with Narandas.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10249

528. LETTER TO KRISHNADAS
[Before January 2, 1931]
MY DEAR KRISHNADAS,

Your letter of 16th instant does not acknowledge my letter in
reply to your previous letter. Did you not receive it? In it I
expressed my joy at hearing from you and asked you to tell me about
Guruji, etc.
I have now received the pieces of khadi which, of course, I shall
use with great pleasure and share with Pyarelal if and when he needs
any clothing. Please thank all the co-workers for these beautiful
pieces. 1 There need be no apology for coarseness or unevenness.
Beauty lies in the gentleness and evenness of the heart behind the
work. I am using only coarse and uneven khadi, and by reason of
this habit, thin and glossy stuff will feel probably unpleasant.
Do write to me all about you. How are your parents? Where is
Guruji now? Do you ever go to see Hemprabha Devi? If not, do go
now. How are you keeping? Tell me also all about Panditji. We are
both keeping fit and well.
Love.
BAPU

The Hindustan Times, 2-1-1931

1

Six pieces of khadi, woven from yarn spun by political prisoners in DumDum jail on October 2, were sent to Gandhiji..

454

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

529. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
January 2, 1931
DEAR ANAND,

I am glad you got all my letters. The problem you present is
incredibly simple. With all your faults and limitations, you should
unreservedly offer your and Vidya’s services to Father whenever he
can accept them. only you must not interpose yourself between Father
and Mother. If he wishes to retire for a while or longer you need not
grieve. It is a natural and proper thing. It would be better ifhe took
some social or humanitarian service. There need be no question of his
approaching you or you him. Let him know that you are his for ever.
The rest will be easy.
As for your distraction the greater your faith in God and your
losing yourself in your task, the greater will be the inner peace.
Love to you both.
BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

530. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI PATEL
YERAVDA MANDIR,

January 2, 1931
CHI. SHIVABHAI,

I have your letter. I had also got your letter describing your
difficulties at Pij, and replied to it. I hope you received my reply.
You have done well in confessing everything. In my opinion,
you should certainly not have physical relations with your wife. You
should make some arrangement for her education so that her intellect
may develop. If you are firm in your decision to have no physical
relations with her, you should plainly tell her about that so that she
may not remain discontented and may not go on hoping. You should
also let her marry again if she wishes to do so. You should not do that
if deep in your heart you crave for physical gratification. In any case,
you should make it clear to her that you cannot satisfy her as long as
the present movement lasts. Since she is poor, you should bear the
burden of maintaining her. You should ask her to go and live in the
Ashram. The remedy against attacks of lustful thoughts is to devote
VOL 50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

455

oneself to work. How can a person who is always absorbed in work
ever get time for such thoughts?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9503

531. LETTER TO MAITRI GIRI
YERAVDA MANDIR,

January 2, 1931
CHI. MAITRI,

You certainly are careless in writing to me. I should be happy if
you change. Why do not all of you who are there immediately give
water to Dheds and Bhangis? And you can also plead with the people
who give their left-overs to the latter to eat. Do you tell Gangabehn
about all this? I don’t mind your growing fat, but you should take
care to make your body firm and as strong as steel. The only way to
do this is hard physical work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6223

532. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,

January 2, 1931
CHI. RAMABEHN,

I understand your enthusiasm. But the Gita tells us that, even if
paradharma looks more attractive, swadharma is better for us. 1 We
may die while doing swadharma. Somebody else’s work is fraught
with danger. Swadharma means one’s own work. Your work is what
Mithubehn may assign to you. You and others who support you
should reason with Mithubehn. Till she is won over, you should keep
patience. You yourself say that you get something to learn every day.
Why then should you be impatient? In any case, a prisoner has no
right to say what work she will do and what work she will not do. My
1

456

III. 35
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

blessings to all who have returned from jails. I should know why
Joshi has returned with ten pounds less.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5329

533. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 3, 1931
CHI. MIRA,

I have read the two renderings you have sent me of the first
verse of the morning prayer. For use and perhaps conveying the
meaning, I prefer my rendering. If you find any obscurity anywhere,
please tell me. The second I sent you by the last mail. 1 Here is the
third.
“In the early morning I bow to Him who is beyond darkness,
who is like the sun, who is perfect, ancient, called Purushottam (the
best among men) and in whom (through the veil of darkness) we
fancy the whole universe as appearing even as (in darkness) we
imagine a rope to be a snake.”2
The idea is that the universe is not real in the sense of being
permanent, it is neither a thing to be hankered after nor feared
because it is supposed to be God’s creation. As a matter of fact, it is a
creation of our imagination even as the snake in the rope is. The real
universe like the real rope is there. We perceive either when the veil is
lifted and darkness is gone—compare. “And with the morn, those
angel faces smile which I have loved long since and lost awhile.” The
three verses go together and I think are Shankar’s composition. You
do know of Shankar, do you not? Five more days and I shall have
finished the translation of the preface. My suggestion is that I
continue to send you the verses and the bhajans with such comments
as then occur to me. You should for your own satisfaction, with the
help of whoever comes your way, translate the weekly notes on the
Gita. The plan I am now following is well thought out, i.e., that of
looking through the translation of the whole Gita in the light of my
rendering and translating the notes. The attempt may lead to
1
2

Vide”Letter to Mirabehn”, 29/30-12-1930
Vide Ashram Bhajanavali,15-12-1930.

VOL 50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

457

something good of which we have no knowledge today. If I begin the
translation of the weekly notes, the above plan may fall through
altogether. It would not be right. Of my food experiment, you will
learn everything from Narandas. The assurance, that the moment I
find it necessary I shall revart to milk, should remove all cause for
anxiety.
By the travelling wheel I suppose, you mean the box wheel of
the Pratishthan type. Whatever it is, your speed is certainly quite
good. Let the Gandiv disappear from your mind unless Kaka has
something to show. . . .1
I was sorry to learn about Romain Rolland’s health. Do please
send him my love and tell him I often think of him and pray that he
may be long spared in the service of humanity. . . .2
Love.
BAPU
Bapu’s Letters to Mira, pp. 146-7

534. LETTER TO CHAND TYAGI
January 3, 1931
BHAI TYAGIJI,

I have your letter. Why does not Balbir write to me? He should
let me know his wishes. He could certainly go to the Ashram if he
really wants to. Who is now the Principal of Prem Mahavidyalaya?
Why has Devasharmaji3 been transferred to Kanpur [jail]? Write out
your ideas on fasting and other subjects. We shall see about their
publication later on.
Give in detail your daily routine.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3267

1
2
3

458

Omissions as in the source
ibid
Also known as Acharya Abhaydev
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

535. LETTER TO MOTIBEHN MATHURADAS
YERAVDA MANDIR,

January 3, 1931
CHI. MOTI,

If you wish to continue to be Moti 1 of Vijayanagar and not
Motibehn in Vijayanagar, you must learn to make your hand-writing
as beautiful as pearls. The handwriting in your letter was quite good,
but you should improve it a little every day. It is one of the virtues of
a person devoted to dharma that he or she is exact in every matter,
small or big. Will no one in Cochin agree to keep Shantu exclusively
on fruit? Write to them and see. One should not be lazy in such
matters. If pus continues to issue from a child’s gums, we ought not
to remain indifferent. If we do, the child will not live long. It is easy
to cure such diseases in childhood. The alternative is for you to keep
Shantu with you and bring him up yourself. I am glad that you have
taken up the task of keeping children clean.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3750

536. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
YERAVDA MANDIR,

January 3, 1931
CHI. CHHAGANLAL (JOSHI),

I just read the news of your having been released. Is it true that
you lost ten pounds of weight in jail? How did that happen? Describe
to me your experiences in jail.
I will certainly expect your weekly letter now. What a pleasant
surprise it was to learn that Dhiru had stuck to the Ashram, though left
alone! But there have been no end of such pleasant surprises. You
are bound to hear everything about me and Pyarelal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5497

1

Literally, ‘pearl’.

VOL 50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

459

537. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

January 3, 1931
CHI. MANI,

I have your letter.
If you meet Father, tell him that I envy his lot, for he is both in
and out of the house of rest and is able to visit the doctor every day.1
He never received such delicate attention so long as he was a free man.
And I hope that in this way he will get rid for good of the trouble in
the teeth and in the nose.
Will he be my neighbour this time too?
If you meet Rajendrababu, ask him to write to me. Did he get
my reply to his letter?
Keep on giving me all the news as long as you are not arrested.
Dahyabhai seems to have taken a vow never to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, pp. 47-8

538. LETTER TO TARAMATI MATHURADAS
TRIKUMJI
January 4, 1931
I was very happy that all of you got an opportunity to visit the
Ashram. I would have been happier still it you could have spent a few
days there. I get news about Mathuradas from time to time. I am sure
his days will pass peacefully. This is a good experience he is getting.
Pyarelal is quite well. My love to children.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 103

1
The source explains: “The Sardar was then in Arthur Road Prison and was
taken every day for a month under police escort to Dr. D.M. Desai’s dental clinic in
Whiteaway Laidlaw Building, Fort, Bombay.”

460

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

539. LETTER TO MAHAVIR GIRI
January 4, 1931
CHI. MAHAVIR,

I got your letter. It seems you are getting daily new experiences. Wherever you go, live with the utmost self-restraint. If the
experiment of starching yarn succeeds, that will undoubtedly help us
very much.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6224

540. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
YERAVDA MANDIR,
Sunday Morning, January 4, 1931
CHI. VASUMATI,

I am writing this immediately after morning prayers. Taste
ultimately is a matter of the palate and the mind. Our vow is that we
will not gratify the craving of the palate. The latter will always feel
and recognize the taste of every food. But to gratify the craving of
the palate means to eat food which it likes and avoid food which it
dislikes. We may certainly eat whatever food the body requires, but
only at the time when and in the quantity which the body requires,
and it does not matter then if it gives us pleasure. When Mahavir has
conquered the palate, he will gladly accept what is for his good.
Ordinarily, a man does not care for his spiritual good and does what
will give him pleasure for the time being even if that is likely to harm
him spiritually. Hence the attitude, that one should accept whatever is
offered to one at any time, is not the right one for a spiritual seeker.
We do not know from experience how a person who has attained
perfection acts, and need not concern ourselves with the question. Let
us wait till we have attained perfection. The question then will not arise
at all. It this does not answer all your question, ask me again.
It is a good sign that we notice even our small defects. We ought
to know whether we are striving to overcome them. If I see that I
have pride in me and if I am a spiritual seeker, I am bound to make an
effort to get rid of it. I shall not feel easy in mind till I have got rid of
it. If there is a snake in the house, we shall not feel easy in mind till
we have caught and removed it. If asked, we can certainly say whether
VOL 50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

461

we are trying to remove it. This is also true about snakes and other
such poisonous creatures in our hearts. I am glad that your ear is now
all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N.9316.

541. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
January 4, 1931
MAD. RAIHANA,

A girl whose brother is mad is hardly likely to be wise ! I have
written a letter to Dahyabhai.1
I am glad that you are improving, but do you think you will
improve so much that you can shoulder the burden of leadership of
the Kadi division? If you do indeed, we shall have to present an
address to the doctor sister. A person with a grey beard, I am afraid,
cannot escape suffering. A white beard is bound to have some effect
at any rate. But all’s well that ends well. I am not surprised to hear
about Father’s exploits. Isn’t he also a branch of the same tree?
Khuda Hafiz.2
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9626

542. LETTER TO KASHINATH TRIVEDI
January 4, 1931
CHI. KASHINATH,

Your long letters are no trouble to me to read. Narandas has also
written to me about you. He says that you refused to show him your
diary. If this is true, your action was not right. Narandas is an
extremely straightforward man and always does what he thinks right.
You can tell him everything. Have a quiet talk with him and, if there
has been any misunderstanding, remove it. If you wish to live in the
Ashram and are not opposed to any of its rules, Narandas on his part
will certainly take you back. He has even written to me to say so.
Whether or not you live in the Ashram, you can keep up
1
2

462

These two sentences are in Urdu.
A farewell greeting, meaning: ‘May God protect you.’
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

connection with it for other purposes. You can ask for papers
relating to your work. Difference of opinion should not mean
personal enmity.
If you think it necessary to engage a lawyer to defend your
brother-in-law, you may do so. If you have sufficient courage,
however, do without a lawyer. Your actions seem all right. I did not
understand your reason for refusing to sign the summons. But that is
a minor matter. I have written to Shanta, Kalavati, Raghavdas and
Banarsidas. Read those letters. You had asked the same, or a similar,
question about art in your previous letter. I have already replied to it.1
Did you get that letter? I got the booklet on vows. I did not see any
letter from Ramnarayan. There was one from Haribhau2 , and I have
replied to him. Convey my blessings to all.
Mother should take only so much of milk as leaves her hungry.
If, however, she cannot remain hungry and begs repeatedly for
something to eat, you may give her a khakhara3 . If she can continue
milk and light diet for some time longer still, she will become all right.
You should do everything with the utmost patience. Don’t feel
unhappy about anything. “What God, World Teacher and Master has
willed for the day, it is futile to grieve over. Without His will we
cannot move a blade of grass. If we do fuss about things, what is left
over is a legacy of sorrows.”4
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5270

543. LETTER TO DURGA DESAI
YERAVDA MANDIR,

January 4, 1931
CHI. DURGA,

It is 7 o’clock on Sunday morning just now. It is extre- mely
cold. The hands shake, but I cannot give myself a holiday from
writing. After I have finished this letter. I will start the spinning yajna.
You have done well in starting the experiment of eating oranges.
While it continues, write to me regularly. Tell me in detail the effect
1

Vide “Letter to Kashinath Trivedi”, 18-12-1930.
Haribhau Upadhyaya
3
Crisp chapati
4
From a poem by Narasinh Mehta
2

VOL 50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

463

which it has. Weigh yourself from time to time. Enemas will also
have to be continued. I suppose you take sun-baths too. If you have
enough strength, you should slowly walk about a little.
Now for Mahadev :
I don’t hope at all to leave this place with any new discovery
about the spinning-wheel. Along with enthusiasm, one must have
knowledge of the craft, too, which I don’t possess. I shall be satisfied
if I can make sufficient changes which will enable me to increase my
speed. I do feel that one can acquire good speed despite one’s age.
If, however, the nerves of my hands have become weak, the speed will
not increase. But I do make changes from time to time to see if they
help me to increase my speed. I see that I displayed great wisdom in
not going to England despite Sastri’s view that I should go. Really
speaking, it required no wisdom to come to that decision. My heart
simply did not consent, however much I tried to persuade myself. The
reins are held by that Master of the Play. Why, then, need we worry at
all? On the contrary, we should daily leave the reins more and more
in His hands and strengthen His hands.
If any trace of fissure is noticed, [he] should immediately take
steps to cure it. And [he] should not give up milk or ghee. It is our
duty to obtain whatever facilities we can get and which are essential
for our health. If we clearly see that we hold the body as a trust, that
it is not our own, we shall think no more about the problem. It is
good that Devdas has been working at Sanskrit to increase his
proficiency in it. Mahadev will be able to help him in that. My
blessings to all prisoners. Pyarelal spins daily 375 rounds on the
spinning-wheel and 100 on the takli, and the work takes up the whole
of the morning and an hour and a half in the afternoon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 16900

544. LETTER TO CHANDRAKANTA
Y. M.,

January 4, 1931
CHI. KANTA,

Your Gujarati letter is excellent. There are only minor
errors. Your handwriting is good. Write to me anything you want to,
important or unimportant. You need feel no embarrassment.
464

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It is good that Mother has come. Shower her with love. While
remaining firm in your resolve, do not forget patience and courtesy.
Go to Bochasan only after you have fully recovered. I see no harm if
you have occasionally taken tea as medicine. I do not even remember
Brother’s questions. He had written a fairly long letter. If the
questions are repeated, I can reply again
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati. Chandrakanta Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi
National Museum and Library

545. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
January 4, 1931
CHI. RAMDAS,

While your case is pending, should not I write to you? What is
Surendra’s diet? I have heard that he has gone down in health. Give
me particulars of your daily routine. What is your diet there? Do they
let you spin?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

546. LETTER TO HEMPRABHA DAS GUPTA
YERAVDA MANDIR,

January 4, 1931
CHI. HEMPRABHA,

It is surprising that there is no letter from you for the last two
weeks. This must not happen. Even if there is nothing worth writing
it will do if you send a few words about your welfare. How are Charu
and Arun? When are Satisbabu and Kshitishbabu to be released?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N.1680

VOL 50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

465

547. LETTER TO BENARSIDAS CHATURVEDI
YERAVDA M ANDIR,

January 4, [1931] 1
BHAI BENARSIDAS,

There is no reason to be so despondent. One who recognizes
his weakness and desires to remove it is already half-way to success.
The resolve to devote the rest of your life to service is all to the good.
Derive greater strength from the calamity that has befallen you.2 So
much in the line of service lies before you. It is gratifying to learn
that the baby is doing well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2523

548. LETTER TO RADHAKRISHNA BAJAJ
YERAVDA MANDIR,

January 4, 1931
CHI. RADHAKRISHNA,

Keep on sending me letters. They contain the news I look
forward to. When Janakibehn arrives, tell her to write to me. They
may certainly arrest Vinoba if they wish. Is there any news of
Chhotelal? How is his health?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3036

1

Gandhiji had written ‘1930’, which is obviously a slip. The letter (G. N.
2524) under reply was dated December 24, 1930.
2
The addressee’s wife had died in September 1930 leaving behind a newborn
child.

466

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

549. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVALEKAR
YERAVDA MANDIR,

January 5, 1931
BHAI SATAVALEKARJI,

I am grateful for your promptitude in sending me
Gitashlokardhasoochi and other books. Are handmade slives strong
enough to yield 19,000 yards of yarn in eight hours ? What is the
count? Will this charkha be entered in the prize-winning charkha
competition? If possible, send me the pocket-size charkha.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 4761. Courtesy: S. D. Satavalekar

550. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
January 5, 1931
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I get your letters. Generally they are quite regular now. But I
have not been very regular n writing to you thinking that you will
now be leaving for the Ashram any day. Of course I think of you
every day. I don’t at all like your remaining there. If Jayaprakash
cannot leave just now, and if he wishes, someone from the Ashram will
come to fetch you. Since Kamala 1 has gone to the rest-house, will
you have to go to Prayag now? I have not received the letter which
Jayaprakash was to write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3402

1

Kamala Nehru

VOL 50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

467

551. LETTER TO VANAMALA PARIKH
January 5, 1931
CHI. VANAMALA,

I get your letters. Your speed on the spinning-wheel can be
described as good, but you should increases it still further. Can a
mistake committed through carelessness be forgiven? After writing a
letter, you should go through it once.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I saw your slip after writing this letter.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5758

552. LETTER TO MATHURADAS PURUSHOTTAM
January 5, 1931
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. I will now find some time and read about the
carding-bow. This time I got the post two days late. You have got a
good band of workers with you. You should only think about the
work and not feel worried about it. Never doubt that you are doing
God’s work, provided, of course, you do it in the spirit of yajna. I
have read what you have written about carding. It is good. When you
gain further experience, you will be able to make more definite
statements.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3751

553. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
January 5, 1931
CHI. PREMA,

I have your letter. In my opinion, the view of Vivekananda and
Dhurandhar is one-sided. One should feel in the heart what one says.
Surdas, Tulsidas and other bhaktas have described themselves as
cunnings, lustful, etc. In doing so, they were not merely using the
468

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

language of modesty, but speaking from the heart. The truth is that
we feel both ways. In an enlightened state, we know ourselves to be
Brahman, but in the ignorant state we feel meek and humble before
that Merciful One. He who does not feel so but knows himself as the
perfect Brahman may not sing bhajans praying for God’s mercy.
You will not come across one such person in millions. To realize
one’s smallness is the beginning of being great. The drop of sea-water
which has become separated from the sea would dry up if it
thought that it was still the sea. If it admitted to itself that it was no
more than a drop, it would flow towards the sea, merge in it and
become one with it.
“Culture” means refinement of feelings and “education”
means knowledge of literature. Education is a means and culture
is the end. The latter is possible even without education. For instance,
if a child is brought up in a truly cultured family, it will unconsciously
imbibe culture from its environment. In our country at any rate,
present-day education and culture have no connection with each
other. If the educated still retain some culture, that is in spite of their
education. This fact shows that the roots of our culture are deep.
My blessings and compliments to Prasannabehn. I should like
her to draw her husband also to the Ashram.
You seem to be running a competition in the opposite direction
with Narandas with regard to weight. It is good. You can afford to put
on some more weight, and Narandas to lose some.
I like the translation of Gitabodh which Dhurandhar is making.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10250

VOL 50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

469

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
VICEROY'S LETTER TO SIR T. B. SAPRU 1
VICEREGAL LODGE,
SIMLA,
August 28, 1930
DEAR SIR TEJ BAHADUR,

I have to thank you for informing me of the results of the conversations held
by Mr. Jayakar and yourself with the Congress leaders now in prison and for sending
me copies of their joint letter of the 15th August and of your reply thereto. I should
wish you and Mr. Jayakar both to know how great has been my appreciation of the
spirit in which you have pursued your self-imposed public-spirited task of
endeavouring to assist in the restoration of normal conditions in India. It is worth
recalling the conditions under which you entered upon your undertaking. In my letter
of 16th July I assured you that it was the earnest desire of myself, my Government and
I had no doubt also of His Majesty's Government, to do everything we could to assist
the people of India to obtain as large degree of management of their own affairs as
could be shown to be consistent with the making of provision for those matters in
regard to which they were not at present in a position to assumeresponsibility. It
would be among the functions of the Conference to examine in the light of all the
material available what those matters might be and what provision might be made for
them. I had previously made two other points plain in my speech to the Legislature
on the 9th July. The first is that those attending the Conference would have the
unfettered right of examining the whole constitutional problem in all its bearing.
Secondly, that any agreement at which the Conference was able to arrive would form
the basis of the proposals which His Majesty's Government would later submit to
Parliament. I fear as you will no doubt recognize that the task you had voluntarily
undertaken has not been assisted by the letter you have received from the Congress
leaders. In view both of the general tone by which that letter is inspired and of its
contents, as also of its blank refusal to recognize the grave injury to which the
country has been subjected by the Congress policy, not the least in the economic
field, I do not think any useful purpose would be served by my attempting to deal in
detail with the suggestions there made and I must frankly say I regard discussion on
the basis of the proposals contained in the letter as impossible. I hope if you desire
to see the Congress leaders again you will make this plain.
There is one further comment I must make upon the last paragraph of your
reply to them dated 16th August. When we discussed these matters, I said if the Civil

1

470

Vide “Statement to T. B. Sapru and M. R. Jayakar”, 5-9-1930
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Disobedience Movement was in fact abandoned, I should not desire to continue the
Ordinances (apart from those connected with the Lahore Conspiracy Case and
Chittagong) necessitated by the situation which EX-HYPOTHESI would no longer exist.
But I was careful to make it plain that I was unable to give any assurance, if and when
the Civil Disobedience Movement ceases, that local Governments would find it
possible to release all persons convicted or under trial for offences in connection
with the movement not involving violence, and that while I should wish to see a
generous policy pursued in the matter, the utmost that I could promise would be to
[ask] all the local Governments to consider with sympathy all the cases individually
on their merits.
Upon the point of your reference to the representation of the Congress at the
Conference in the event of their abandoning the Civil Disobedience Movement and
desiring to attend, my recollection is you explained that the demand of the Congress
was not for predominant, in the sense of majority, representation at the Conference
and that I expressed the view that I should anticipate little difficulty in recommending
to His Majesty's Government to secure that the Congress should be adequately
represented. I added that if events so developed, I should be ready to receive a panel of
names from the leaders of the Congress Party of those whom they would regard as
suitable representatives. I feel that you and Mr. Jayakar would desire to be clearly
informed of the position of myself and my Government as it may be desirable that the
letters should be published at an early date in order that the public may be
fullyinformed of the circumstances,in which your efforts have failed to produce the
result you hoped and they so certain]y deserved.
Yours sincerely,
IRWIN
The Hindu, 5-9-1930

APPENDIX II
NOTES OF CONVERSATIONS WITH VICEROY 1
(a) On the constitutional question, the position would be as stated in the four
fundamental points in para 2 of the Viceroy's letter to us of 28th August.
(b) With reference to the question whether Mr. Gandhi would be allowed to
raise at the Round Table Conference the question of India's right to secede from the
Empire at will, the position was as follows: “As the Viceroy has stated in his said
letter to us, the Conference was a free conference. Therefore, anyone could raise any
points he liked, but the Viceroy thought it would be very unwise for Mr. Gandhi to
raise this question now. If, however, he faced the Government of India with such a
question, the Viceroy would say the Government were not prepared to treat it as an
1
Held at Simla with Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and M. R. Jayakar between August
21 and 28. Vide also 1st footnote of “Statement to T. B. Sapru and M. R. Jayakar”,
5-9-1930

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

471

open question. If, in spite of this, Mr. Gandhi desired to raise the question, the
Government would inform the Secretary of State of his intention to do so at the Round
Table Conference.”
(c) As regards the right to raise the question at the Round Table Conference of
India's liability to certain financial burdens and to get them examined by an
independent Tribunal, the position was that the Viceroy could not entertain any
proposition amounting to total repudiation of all debts, but it would be open to
anyone to raise, at the Round Table Conference, any question as to any financial
liability of India and to call for its examination.
(d) As regards the granting of relief against the Salt Act, the position of the
Viceroy was that (1) the Salt Tax was going to be provincialized if the
recommendation of the Simon Commission in that behalf was accepted, and (2) there
has been already great loss of revenue and therefore the Government would not like to
forgo this source, but if the Legislature was persuaded to repeal the Salt Act and if any
proposal was put forward to make good the loss of revenue occasioned by such repeal,
the Viceroy and his Government would consider the question on its merits. It was not,
however, possible for the Viceroy to condone open breaches of the Salt Act so long
as it was law. When goodwill and peace were restored and, if Indian leaders desired to
discuss with H. E. the Viceroy and his Government how best economic relief couldbe
given to the poorer classes on his behalf, the Viceroy would be glad to call a small
conference of Indian leaders.
(e) With reference to picketing, the position was that if picketing amounted to
nuisance to any class of people or was coupled with molestation or intimidation or
the use of force, the Viceroy reserved to the Government the right of taking such
action as the law allowed or taking of such legal powers as might be necessary to
meet any emergency that might arise. Subject to the above when peace was
established the Ordinance against picketing would be withdrawn.
(f) With regard to the re-employment of the officers who resigned or had been
dismissed during the Civil Disobedience campaign, the position was that this matter
was primarily a question for the discretion of local Governments. Subject however to
there being vacancies and as long as it did not involve dismissing men who had
proved loyal, the local Government would be expected to re-employ men who had
thrown up their appointments in a fit of excitement or who had been swept off their
feet.
(g) As for the restoration of printing presses confiscated under the Press
Ordinance, there would be no difficulty.
(h) As regards the restoration of fines and properties confiscated under the
Revenue Law, that required closer definition. As to the properties confiscated or sold

472

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

under such law, there might be the rights of third parties involved. As to refunding
fines, there were difficulties. In short, all that the Viceroy could say was that the local
Government would exercise their discretion with justice and take all the circumstances
into consideration and try to be as accommodating as they could.
(i) As to the release of prisoners, the Viceroy had already explained his views
in his letter to us dated July 28th.
The Hindu, 5-9-1930

APPENDIX III
NOTE FROM NEHRUS1
NAINI CENTRAL PRISON,
August 31, 1930
We have had further interviews with Mr. M. R. Jayakar and Sir Tej Bahadur
Sapru yesterday and today, and have had the advantage of long talks with them. They
have given us a copy of the letter, dated August 23, addressed to them by His
Excellency Lord Irwin. In this letter, it is stated clearly that Lord Irwin regards
discussion on the basis of the proposals contained in our joint letter of August 15 to
Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar as impossible, andunder the circumstances, he
rightly concludes their efforts have failed to produce any result. This joint letter, as
you know, was written after a full consideration by the signatories to it, and
represented the utmost they were prepared to go in their individual capacities. We
stated there that no solution would be satisfactory unless it fulfilled certain vital
conditions, and that a satisfactory declaration to that effect was made by the British
Government. If such a declaration was made, we would be prepared to recommend to
the Working Committee the advisability of calling off Civil Disobedience, provided
simultaneously certain steps indicated in our letter were taken by the British
Government in India.
It was only after a satisfactory settlement of all these preliminaries, that the
question of the composition of the proposed London Conference and of the Congress
being represented at it could be decided. Lord Irwin, in his letter, considers even a
discussion on the basis of these proposals as impossible. Under the circumstances,
there is or can be no common ground between us. Quite apart from the contents, the
tone of the letter and the recent activities of the British Government in India clearly
indicate that the Government has no desire for peace. The proclamation of the
Working Committee as an illegal body in the Delhi Province soon after a meeting of
it was announced to be held there, and the subsequent arrest of most of its members
can have that meaning and no other. We have no complaint against these or other
arrests or other activities of the Government, 'uncivilized' and 'barbarous' as we
1

Vide 1st footnote of “Statement to T. B. Sapru and M. R. Jayakar”, 5-9-1930

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

473

consider some of these to be. We welcome them. But, we feel, we are justified in
pointing out that a desire for peace and an aggressive attack on the very body, which
is capable of giving peace and with which it is sought to treat, do not go well
together. The proscription of the Working Committee all over India and the attempt
to prevent its meetings must necessarily mean that the national struggle must go on,
whatever the consequences, and that there will be no possibility of peace, for those
who may have some authority to represent the people of India will be spread out in
British prisons all over India.
Lord Irwin's letter and the action taken by the British Government make it
plain that the efforts of Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar have been in vain.
Indeed, the letter and some of the explanations that had been given to us take us back,
in some respects, even from the position that was previously taken. In view of the
great HIATUS that exists between our position and Lord Irwin's, it is hardly necessary
to go into details, but we should like to point out to you certain aspects of his letter.
The first part of the letter is practically a repetition of his speech to the Legislative
Assembly and of the phrases used in his letter dated July 16, addressed to Mr. Jayakar
and Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru. As we pointed out in our joint letter, this phraseology is
too vague for us to assess its value. It may be made to mean anything or nothing. In
our joint letter, we have made it clear that a complete National Government
responsible to the people of India, including control over the DefenceForces and
economic control, must be recognized as India's immediate demand. There is no
question of what are usually called safeguards or any delay. Adjustments there
necessarily must be for the transference of power and in regard to these we stated that
they were to be determined by India's chosen representatives.
As regards India's right of secession at will from the British Empire and her
right to refer British claims and concessions to an independent tribunal all that we
are told is that the Conference will be a free conference and any point can be raised
there. This is no advance on the previous statement made. We are further told,
however, that if the British Government in India were definitely faced with the
possibility of the former question being raised, Lord Irwin would say they were not to
treat it as an open question. All they could do was to inform the Secretary of State of
our intention to raise the question at the Conference.
As regards the other proposition, we are told that Lord Irwin could only
entertain the idea of a few individual financial transactions being subjected for
scrutiny. While such scrutiny may take place in individual cases, its scope will have
to extend to the whole field of British claims including, as we have stated, the
so-called Public Debt of India. We consider both these questions as of vital
importance and previous agreement in our joint letter seems to us essential.
Lord Irwin's reference to the release of prisoners is very restricted and
unsatisfactory. He is unable to give an assurance that all of the non-violent civil
disobedience prisoners even will be discharged. All he proposes to do is to leave the
matter in the hands of the Local Governments. We are not prepared to trust in such a

474

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

matter to the generosity or sympathy of Local Governments or local officials but,
apart from this, there is no reference in Lord Irwin's letter to other non-violent
prisoners. There are a large number of Congressmen and others who were sent to
prison for political offences prior to the Civil Disobedience Movement. We might
mention in this connection the Meerut Case prisoners who have already spent a year
and a half as under-trials. We have made it clear in our joint letter that all these
persons should be released.
Regarding the Bengal and the Lahore Case Ordinances we feel no exception
should be made in their favour as suggested by Lord Irwin. We have not claimed
release for those political prisoners who may have been guilty of violence not
because we would not welcome their release but because we felt that as our movement
was strictly non-violent, we would not confuse the issue. But, the least we can do is
to press for ordinary trial for

these fellow-countrymen of ours and not by an

extraordinary court constituted by an Ordinance which denies them the right of
appeal and the ordinary privilege of accused.
Amazing events including the brutal assaults that have occurred even in open
court during the so-called trial make it imperative that the ordinary procedureshould
be followed. We understand that some of the accused in protest against the treatment
accorded to them have been on hunger-strike for a long period and are now at death's
door. The Bengal Ordinance, we understand, has been replaced by an Act of the Bengal
Council. We consider this Ordinance and any Act passed on it most objectionable,
and the fact that an unrepresentative body like the present Bengal Council has passed
it does not make it any the better.
As regards the further picketing of foreign cloth and liquor shops, we are told,
Lord Irwin is agreeable to the withdrawal of the Picketing Ordinance, but he states
that if he thinks it necessary, he will take fresh legal powers to combat picketing.
Thus, he informs us that he might re-enact the Ordinance or do something in Simla to
it whenever he considers it necessary. The reply regarding the Salt Act and certain
other matters referred to in our joint letter is also wholly unsatisfactory. We need not
deal with it at any length here as you are an acknowledged expert on salt. We would
only say we see no reason to modify our previous position as regards these matters.
Thus Lord Irwin has declined to agree to all the major propositions and many
of the minor ones laid down in our joint letter. The difference in his outlook and ours
is very great, indeed fundamental. We hope you will show this note to Mrs. Sarojini
Naidu, Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel, Mr. Jairamdas Doulatram and in consultation with them
give your reply to Mr. Jayakar and Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru. We feel that the publication
of the correspondence must no longer be delayed, and we are not justified in keeping

VOL.50 : 23 AUGUST, 1930 - 5 JANUARY, 1931

475

the public in the dark. Even apart from the question of publication, we are requesting
Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Mr. Jayakar to send copies of all correspondence and
relevant papers to Chaudhri Khaliq Usman, the Acting President of the Indian
National Congress. We feel we ought to take no steps without immediate information
being sent to the Working Committee, which happens to be functioning.
MOTILAL
SYED MAHMUD
J AWAHARLAL
The Hindu, 5-9-1930

476

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

