1. LETTER TO KASTURBHAI LALBHAI
May 20, 1934
BHAI KASTURBHAI,

I have written to Chamanbhai. I hope that you will prevent
implementation of the Mill-Owners’ Association’s resolution. I will
not let the tradition which has been followed for so many years be
broken without sufficient reason.
The insistence on paying Mr. Patankar his fee also seems to me
to be derogatory to our good name.
Vandemataram from

M OHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33150

2. INTERVIEW TO “THE HINDU”
May 20, 1934
Gandhiji left Patna early morning by the Sealdah Express and was seen off by a
large number of people. Tired as he was, he hardly failed, except for a brief while
when he was asleep, to stretch his hand across the window at every passing station
and ask for “coppers” for his Harijan work and got silvers in plenty. This was for
darshan alone, but if one wanted a brief interview ten rupees cash down was the price.
He said :

In trains, I do nothing else except collect funds for Harijans.
At Mokameh station, a Bengali rushed in and told Gandhiji that he had Rs.
1,001 to be given away to the Harijan Fund. The Mahatma was all smiles and
stretched out his hand. But the Bengali gentleman said: “But you must come to
Calcutta and take it. We shall give you plenty more.”
[CORRESPONDENT :] Now that the All-India Congress Committee has passed a
resolution accepting your statement of 7th April and making you sole civil resister
on behalf of the Congress, can you kindly tell me how and when you propose to give
effect to it if at all ?
GANDHIJI : I cannot tell you how, because I myself do not know.
So far as the date is concerned, it was fixed when I was put out of the
Yeravda Prison. Beyond that all is a perfect blank to me as to anybody
else. But I must repeat what I stated at the time I was discharged, that I
would strain every nerve to prevent civil resistance from becoming a

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

1

necessity.
[C .] Your resolution1 sanctioning council-entry is different from the Ranchi
resolution in so far as yours makes no reference to the White Paper and does not
define the Congress attitude towards it. Can you tell me the signifiance of the
resolution as apart from the Ranchi resolution and the attitude which in your opinion
should be taken by Congressmen in regard to the Ranchi resolution?

[G.] The Ranchi resolution was an independent resolution

enabling the Swarajists to know their own mind and to enable them to
function if it became impossible, from circumstances beyond the
control of their organization, to obtain recognition from the All-India
Congress Committee. But the All-India Congress Committee having
been allowed to meet, there was no occasion for that body to adopt the
resolutions of the Ranchi Conference. It was enough for the All-India
Congress Committee to appropriate the Council Party and turn it into
its own agency for the purpose of working the political programme of
the Congress. And it was unncessary to define the attitude of the
Congress towards the White Paper, as that attitude is well known. The
Congress can accept nothing that is inconsistent with its objective,
namely, the attainment of purna swarajya.
Asked whether he intended the Swarajya Party to be dissolved, Mahatma
replied :

This question I have already answered in reply to your previous
one. The Swarajists have become part of the Congress organization.
By the time the interview concluded, the train had reached Jahajah where, it
may be remembered, not long ago an anti-Harijan demonstration pelted stones at
Mahatmaji’s car smashing the glass window. The demonstration today at this place
was of the friendliest nature, more than a thousand people having gathered on the
platform and continuously shouted “Mahatma Gandhi-ki-Jai” and pelted the author of
the Harijan movement with flowers. Gandhiji, however, told the crowds that what he
wanted was not flowers, but money.

The Hindu, 21-5-1934

1

2

Vide “Resolution on Council-Entry”, 19-5-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

3. INTERVIEW TO “THE HINDUSTAN TIMES”1
May 21, 1934
Q. What are your impressions about the All-India Congress Committee
meeting?

A. Considering the revolutionary character of the two
resolutions, the criticism was restrained, and the voting showed an
extraordinary sense of responsibility and appreciation of facts. The
attendance, too, was quite good.
Q. Do you think it will be necessary for you to offer civil disobedience in
pursuance of the permission given to you by the All-India Congress Committee?

A. There is the 3rd August next in front of me, but what will
happen that day is more than I can say 2 . I have no pre-conceived
plans. Sufficient unto the day is the work thereof.
Q. How do you look upon the emergence of the Socialist group within the
Congress? Have you any message in this connection?

A. I welcome the emergence. And if it acts, as I am sure it will
act, with due restraint and in keeping with the special conditions of the
country, it can only do good. I understand that it is pledged to nonviolent methods to the exclusion of violent methods.
Q. How do you expect Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Sardar Vallabhbhai and Abdul
Ghaffar Khan to view your advice to the country ?

A. I have no doubt that, if they had been out they would

have acted precisely as I have. How, being in jail, that is, being
ignorant of the outside world at first hand, they would view its
proceedings is surely an illegitimate question.
The Hindustan Times, 22-5-1934

4. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
May 21, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have read Elwin’s3 letter. I return it separately to save postage.
After I have seen his institution it seems that we shall have to help him.
1

Gandhiji got down at Byree and walked to Gandhi Seva Ashram at
Champapurhat. It being his day of silence, he wrote down his answers.
2
Vide footnote 2, “Speech at A.I.C.C. Meeting, Panta- I”.
3
Verrier Elwin
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

3

From where does he get the money at present? How does he teach
music? Who else is there with him besides Shamrao?
Non-vegetarian food seems indispensable for him. He has not
enough faith [in non-violence] to be able to live on fruit and milk.
But he need not be denied help because of his food habits. If,
however, he stops spinning or slackens in it, I don’t think we should
ignore that. He may give up spinning entirely if he has not faith in it.
I do not wish to say that he should be helped only if he continues to
spin. What I want is that he must be truthful. All that is necessary is
that whatever work is done, should be done sincerely. Elwin, being a
good and simple-hearted man, may deceive himself. It is therefore
necessary that friends should watch him.
Dr. Ansari’s plan for a party 1 must have been finalized. You
should take enough interest in the matter at least to see that everything
goes well. Rajaji also should take interest in it. Having brought in
Malaviyaji, we should help him and also see that he does no harm,
which he can either by delaying or acting hastily.
Did you see the programme up to July? It will help workers at
most places to see me if they wish to do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2933

5. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
C HAMPAPURHAT (UTKAL),

May 22, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter the day before. It is about three o’clock just
now. Everybody in the . . .2 Ashram has fallen. We arrived here
yesterday (Monday). Our good friend Masani of the Socialist Party is
with us. He is returning to Bombay today. Agatha3 also is with us. She
will leave in about four days. Ceresole4 will join today. He will remain
1

The Congress had appointed a Parliamentary Board under the presidentship of
Dr. Ansari for contesting elections to the Central Legislative Assembly; vide p. 8.
2
Omission as in the source
3
Agatha Harrison
4
Pierre Ceresole, Swiss Engineer, who had come to India in connection with
the Bihar earthquake relief work

4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with me for three or four days. Muriel 1 , too, is coming. She will stay
for two days. I don’t give the names of the other local workers who
are accompanying me. This tour on foot will end in Balasore on the
12th. It has been decided that after that we should stop walking and I
should spend a few days in each province, doing the work from a
fixed place. The programme is as follows: I should reach Bombay on
the 14th and from there go to Poona on the 17th. Thereafter I go to
Ahmedabad on the 26th and from there proceed to Sind. I will spend
three days in Sind and three in Lahore and then go to the U. P. I am
enclosing a copy of the programme. It is, however, subject to changes.
I had called workers from all provinces to meet me in Patna. They
were of the view that I must visit every province. It was finally decided
that I should visit every province and stay in one place for a few days.
It will be the time of the monsoon then and walking will probably be
difficult. You have already read about the decision taken at Patna.
Please rest assured that what has happened is the best. That is what the
people desired, and they were only waiting for me to agree. But acute
differences arose as soon as the first step was taken. There is no limit
to the goodness and patience of Ansari and Malaviyaji and to Dr.
Roy’s overbearing temper. Let us see what happens now. I will send
with this a fine word picture drawn by Sushila2 . Probably Om3 also will
write. I will ask Agatha to write, too.
Ba has been released. She will first go to Wardha and Delhi and
then join us somewhere.
I wished to spend Rs. 5,000 from the Flood Relief Fund for
Harijan victims of similar calamities but I was told that you had given
instructions not to spend any amount from that Fund. I, therefore, got
only Rs. 1,000. I thought it necessary to ask you before drawing
more. Please write and tell me what instruction you remember to have
given or what your wishes are.
Surendra4 is fasting in Wardha. He is doing so only for the sake
of his health. The jail food has broken the health of even stalwarts.
Narandas suffered from bleeding nostrils and came out of jail an old
man. Swami’s iron constitution also has broken down. The same thing
happened to Surendra. A diet of pure starch and fat was not adequate.
1

Muriel Lester
Sushila Pai, then head mistress of the Vanita Vishram, Rajkot, who later
became Secretary of the Kasturba Memorial Trust
3
Umadevi Bajaj
4
An inmate of the Ashram
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

5

I see that milk and curds are essential. Manilal’s Sushila has given
birth to a son. Manilal hasn’t informed me at all about this. I have lost
all interest in this growth of the family-tree. My only feeling is one of
profound sadness. However, who can thwart Nature? Or we can adopt
the European way (birth-control) and sing: “Come, let us enjoy
ourselves, Beautiful-eyed One, but prevent the natural consequence of
our indulgence.” I can’t help feeling that we shall not gain spiritual
knowledge if we follow that path. So long as Death remains
unconquerable, nothing that Man does will avail him. Hence the first
verse of the Ishopanishad. Do you remember it? I used to recite that
Upanishad every day in jail, trying to memorize the verses. If you
don’t remember them and if you wish, I will send you a copy of the
Upanishad. It contains only 18 verses. The author has compressed all
knowledge within that short compass. There is no difference between
its teaching and the Gita’s. What is present in it in the form of a seed
has become a beautiful tree in the Gita. I will stop here now.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 102-3

6 . LETTER TO AMRIT LAL CHATTERJEE1
May 22, 1934
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 1447. Courtesy: A. K. Sen

1

According to the addressee this was an acknowledgment of a report on civil
resisters and Harijan sevaks; vide “Letter to Amritlal Chatterjee”, 23-4-1934

6

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

7. LETTER TO LALJI K. PARMAR
May 22, 1934
CHI. LALJI,

I got your letter. I was pleased. My effort will have succeeded if
you now remain vigilant and go on improving daily. Write to me from
time to time. Do you get any pay? How do you live?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 3296

8. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
May 22, 1934
CHI. AMALA,

My condolences on the loss of your companion, the squirrel.
You are right in thinking that those round you do not act up to the
principle they profess. They do not realize that mere refraining from
killing is not enough. It is necessary to show active sympathy for
sufferers.
You should not be anxious about me. The march will do me
good. I am certainly keeping well.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Enclosed1 for Lalji living there.
Speigel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

9. LETTER TO N. S. HARDIKAR
May 22, 1934
MY DEAR HARDIKAR,

I have your strange letter twice sent, first without the quotation.
It is a favourite saying of mine that you have quoted. There was no
anger in the use of that expression. But it should be enough for you
to have the admission from me that I am not without anger. It is
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

7

therefore right for critics to fling it in my face. But friends tolerate my
shortcoming, and knowing that, I make a Herculian effort to throw it
off. Let me point out to them their shortcomings feeling that among
equals perhaps I am the most experienced in these matters. Remember
too that two wrongs don’t make one right.
If I appeared to be angry, I must have been unconsciously
angry. I was certainly not pretending. The question is, can a man be
unconsciously angry? He can be unintentionally so.
No anger is permissible, it may be unavoidable through human
weakness.
Does this sufficiently answer your questions?
I hope you are well.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From the original: N. S. Hardikar Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

10. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
May [19 and ] 1 23, 1934
BHAI SHARMA,

Amtussalaam has much praise for you and only one complaint,
i. e., you have lost much weight and that you have cut down on your
food. I would like to say only this much that exposing the body to
unnecessary hardship is as much a crime as the pampering of it.
Hence all that is required to conserve the body should be done.
All this was written four days ago.2 I have your letter now. You
can come to me whenever you wish but without deserting the patients
there. My intinerary must be with you. My work will keep me here till
June 12, after that possibly in Bombay.
It will take some time for your wish to fructify. I want you to
gain in steadfastness. But all this can only be talked over. For the time
being it is to the good that you are winning the hearts of the people
there.
Blessings from
BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha,
1932-48, between pp. 68 and 69

1
2

8

Inferred from the contents
That is, on May 19, 1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

11. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI1
LAKHANPUR,

May 23, 1934
I have gone through your Temple-entry Bill and I like its
general approach. If you polish it now and make it as short as possible
and send it to me, I will publish it in Harijan.
SJT. KANAIYALAL MUNSHI
GILBERT BUILDING
BABULNATH ROAD, BOMBAY
From Gujarati: C. W. 7538. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

12. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
[May 23, 1934] 2
SUJNA BHAISHRI,

I have your letter. I won’t be able to come to Bhavnagar. The
plan of touring on foot has changed the whole programme. In every
province that I visit, I will camp in one town and do what I can from
there. Touring on foot cannot be continued in the rainy season, and
all the provinces want a share in the programme. I, therefore, have
decided on a compromise as above. I hope you are well. I take it that
you will send your contribution to the purse to Ahmedabad. It will do
even if you send it here.
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5932. Also C. W. 3248. Courtesy:
Mahesh P. Pattani

13. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
May 23, 1934
CHI. VASUMATI,

Why do you feel unhappy when you don’t receive a letter from
me? I have always assumed that I can postpone writing to you to the
last. I want you to remain where you are and improve your health. If
1
The message was conveyed in a letter of even date from Sushila Pai to the
addressee.
2
From the postmark

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

9

you have come to have faith in Dr. Sharma, continue his treatment.
You should now learn not to be upset by the other troubles.
Tell Surendra that, if Dr. Sharma’s treatment continues, he need
not come to me just now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 9386. Also C. W. 631. Courtesy:
Vasumati Pandit

14. LETTER TO P. NIRUPAMA
May 23, 1934
CHI. NIRUPAMA,

I have your letter. The language is good. Ornaments are
unnecessary; they tend to create in the girls fascination for external
beauty. There should be much less fondness for ornaments in a poor
country. All these reasons go against ornaments.
Blessings from

BAPU
KUMARI P. N IRUPAMA
C/ O S HRI P. M ANJUNATH NAYAK
S UDAMA KUTEER, U DIPI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 9223

15. TELEGRAM TO INSPECTOR GENERAL OF PRISONS
S ALIPUR

May 24, 1934
INSPECTOR GENERAL OF P RISONS
P OONA
JUST

HEAR

WEIGHT
AIR.

KAKASAHEB

SUFFERING.

PLEASE

WIRE

ALSO

KALELKAR
THAT

TRUE

HE

IS

HYDERABAD
NOT

ALLOWED

JAIL

LOST

SLEEP

OPEN

CONDITION.

GANDHI
Bombay Secret Abstracts, Home Department, Special Branch, 800 (40) (4), Pt.
II, p. 177

10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

16. LETTER TO D. K. KARVE
AS AT C UTTACK,

May 24, 1934
DEAR PROF. KARVE,

I have just received your letter of 15th May last. It will give me
great joy if the dispute between you and the executors of the will of
the late Sir Vitthaldas is amicably settled. And whether it is amicably
settled or not, I would like the appeal that has been made for
donations to your University to receive a generous response. It is a
tragedy that a man of your amazing industry and great devotion to
the ideal that he has set before himself should feel the want of funds
for the cause to which he has dedicated his life. If this letter enables
you or the organizers of the appeal to get help from quarters which
were hitherto closed against you I should feel delighted.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
P ROF. D. K. KARVE
S HREEMATI NATHIBAI DAMODHER THACKERSEY
INDIAN WOMEN’S UNIVERSITY
YERANDAWANA, K ARVE R OAD, P OONA 4
From a facsimile: Mahatma, Vol. III, facing p. 344

17. LETTER TO G. V. SUBBA RAO
AS AT C UTTACK,

May 24, 1934
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I confess that I have not been able to go
through the Goshti from page to page, but I have glanced through it.
But I am sorry that your argument does not make any appeal to me. I
have no repentance over the choice of co-workers. Moreover my
decision was not prompted by any sense of repentance or blunder.
The decision in Poona was not an error. It could not be otherwise than
it was. The experiment of individual civil disobedience had to be
made. Confining it to me alone at that time would have been highly
improper as not to do so now would have been cowardly on my part.
Those who have understood the decision do not feel at all that they
allow me to immolate myself whilst they look on unconcerned. Their
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

11

immolation would perhaps be far more difficult than mine.
Nevertheless you must continue your criticism fearlessly. Who knows
some day your criticisms may open my eyes to my many errors of
judgment as you conceive them? And then what does it matter if I
remain unrepentant so long as your criticism does not appeal to me?
Yes, I glanced through the letter of Gopalakrishnayya.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. G. V. S UBBA R AO
S ECRETARY, A NDHRA C ONGRESS S WARAJYA P ARTY
BEZWADA
From a photostat: G. N. 3627

18. LETTER TO CHARU PROBHA SEN GUPTA
AS AT C UTTACK,

May 24, 1934
MY DEAR CHARU PROBHA,

I am sorry I am not going to Bengal. What can I do? How nice it
would have been if you had not gone away from Puri. I would have
made you walk at least to the first village, and I know you would have
enjoyed it apart from its religious merit.
Love.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat: C. W. 1491. Courtesy: A. K. Sen. Also G. N. 8705

19. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI1
May 24, 1934
I have received a wire from Sheth Mathuradas. I will arrive in
Bombay about June 14. You may now do what is necessary.
From Gujarati: C. W. 7539. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

1

The message was conveyed in a letter of even date from Sushila Pai to the
addressee.

12

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

20. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
May 24, 1934
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

Here is another letter from . . . 1 . Nothing will be gained by
letting those two remain in the same condition. . . . should be taken on
travels. I find it necessary to create new interests for her. . . .’s 2
problem presents more difficulty. What should be done about him?
All that I can see is that he will be unable to do anything to help
himself. He requires a companion who can influence him to some
extent and whose advice he can take.
The idea of taking a trip to Calcutta has come to nothing. Now
you can come down only if you have to see me. We shall see after
consulting Thakkar Bapa.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C. W. 7960. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

21. NOTE
AVOID EXAGGERATION

Pandit Lalanth draws my attention to the fact that some
newspapers which favour removal of untouchability have exaggerated
the Deoghar incident and ascribed to those who delivered lathi blows
on the hood of my car, designs upon my life. There is no warrant for
ascribing any murderous motive to the authors of the demonstration.
From the same source comes an unsigned printed leaflet which
threatens death to those who might arrange demonstrations against the
reformers. I refuse to believe that this anonymous leaflet is the work
of any responsible body or person at all. So far as I know, no injury
was done and no counter-demonstration was made against sanatanists
in Calcutta on the day which they had fixed for anti-Temple-entry Bill
demonstration. Neverthless, I cannot be too insistent on reformers
being and remaining non-violent in thought, word and deed. Let them
ignore these sanatanist demonstrations. So far as I have seen, and I
could not help seeing, these sanatanist demonstrations have little, if
any, backing from the public. In any case, we have to win them over
1
2

The names have been omitted.
ibid

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

13

by showing regard for their sentiments. We must not repel or acerbate
them by making irritating or offensive remarks about their activity.
Harijan, 25-5-1934

22. WILL THEY DO IT?
Since I have taken up the walking pilgrimage, hundreds of
villagers have been following the pilgrims. Some even talk about their
woes. Thus, whilst I was reaching Sakhigopal, a representative weaver
himself told me that the weavers were in great distress as there was no
demand for their cloth.1 I told him I had prophesied fifteen years ago
that it would not be possible for them to co-exist with mills, so long as
they used mill yarn, and that the natural supplier and sustainer of the
handloom was the spinning-wheel. In his reply I heard, to the best of
my recollection, for the first time, ‘Give us hand-spun and we shall
weave it.’
‘I will, if you will do as I tell you’, said I.
‘We will’, the old man replied. The weaver was an old man with
a bent back.
I was overjoyed at his replies and said, ‘That is very good. Then
I would teach you, your wife and your children how to gin, card and
spin. You will then have enough yarn for your loom. You will spin
good, strong, even yarn, you will avoid waste. I shall expect you from
your first out-turn to take your khaddar for your own use and then I
shall buy all the surplus khaddar you weave. I shall try to become a
member of your family and give you the benefit of my experience.
Thus, I shall ask you to give up drink and intoxicating drugs if you
are addicted to them. I shall go through your family budget and wean
you from incurring debts.’
The old man’s face lightened up and he said, ‘We shallsurely
follow your advice. At present, starvation stares us in the face.’ I asked
him to bring some of his friends to see me at 3 o’clock at the
Gopabandhu Ashram in Saikhigopal.
He came with his friends, I repeated much of the morning
conversation and said, ‘I know you can’t spin at once enough yarn to
start your looms. I shall, therefore, supply you with enough yarn to
1

14

The meeting took place on May 10, 1934.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

start with for the most promising families. By the time you have
woven it, you will have spun enough to feed your looms. The first
khaddar you weave from this supplied yarn will be taken over from
you. For the second lot, if you have not yet enough yarn of your own,
I will again supply you with some. After that you should become
self-supporting and you should make all your own family
requirements of cloth and then only sell the surplus.
I regard this as an experiment of the highest importance and
potency. There are probably ten million weavers in India. No one has
the correct number, to the thousand even. But ten million is a safe
guess. If these added all the previous processes to the art of weaving,
they would not only ensure their own existence, but cheapen khaddar
to the lowest possible limit and turn out much more durable and
beautiful khaddar than has yet been produced.
The readers of Harijan know that there are in the Central
Provinces several Harijan weaver families which do their own carding
and spinning. I would add to this ginning. The future of khaddar can
be assured if the weavers realize the necessity, for their own sakes, of
themselves doing all the processes antecedent to weaving.
Harijan, 25-5-1934

23. LETTER TO DR. GOPICHAND BHARGAVA
AS AT C UTTACK,

May 25, 1934
DEAR DR. GOPICHAND,

I got your letter in Patna. I do not want to say anything about
what has already happened. But the question still remains as to what
co-workers like you should do. Unless you feel inclined to, there is no
obligation on your part to take any interest whatsoever in the election
except in the way of giving your vote to the Congress candidate, if he
is otherwise a fit person. But if you have the slightest inclination in the
direction, there is nothing whatsoever to prevent you from taking full
share in the elections. However, I should personally feel deeply
grieved if those who were engaged in constructive work such as khadi,
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

15

untouchability and the like were to withdraw themselves from it and
plunge into the turmoil of elections.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. G OPICHAND
LAHORE
From a copy: Gopichand Bhargava Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

24. DISCUSSION WITH M. R. MASANI AND N. R. MALKANI1
May 25, 1934
M. Is your main difference as to method or do you suspect that socialism is
based on violence?
G. It is not a matter of suspicion but of fact. Violence need not
be physical. Your socialistic system is based on coercion.
M. But coercion is used not as an end. It is for the good of the many.
G. Violence is impatience and non-violence is patience. Great
reforms cannot be introduced without great patience. In violence lies
the germ of future failure. For instance, take 100 persons—5 armed
and powerful, who could chop off the heads of the helpless 95 if they
would oppose them. That would be complete failure for the five. But
suppose that someone of the 95 kills these five and acquires power,
without the desire of the remaining 94, you cannot say that the new
rule will be good for all. It may only mean one bad rule followed by
another bad rule.
M. But one could not snatch power without the desire and active co-operation
of the 94.
G. We have assumed absence of desire.
M. But with us the desire exists. The socialistic programme can be understood
and accepted by all.

1 In his introductory note to this, N. R. Malkani, who was Gandhiji’s acting
secretary, stated that these notes had the “advantage of having been passed by
Gandhiji”. Malkani wrote : “It was Friday, the 25th of May, 1934, and we had to walk
five miles in the morning from Sisua to Patpur. . .Gandhiji walked barefooted with a
cloth on his head, the right hand on Masani’s shoulder, the left on mine; his words
instructing us, his hands now soothing and now restraining us; and ‘M’ in this talk
stands to the credit of both Masani and Malkani indifferently . . . .”

16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

G. Talk to the peasant in Orissa about monopoly of trade and
socialization of industry and he will not know what you are talking
about.
M. But the Gujarati or Deccani peasant can understand the rationalization of
land.
G. Well, I have known Gujarati peasants defending and
approving the institution of the Bania in villages. They say the Bania
is their benefactor in distress and so forth. These people have to be
awakened. It is no use having an over-ambitious programme. I am a
practical man. I would cut down your programme to what I actually
do.
M. The present tendency is towards decentralization in agriculture. Intensive
agriculture can only be on a small scale. But the tendency in industry is towards largescale production and later large-scale control. In such cases there is bound to be a
conflict between labour and capital. There are some industries which always will tend
to be on a large scale.
G. Industries like transport, insurance, exchange must be Stateowned. But I would not insist that all large industries should be taken
over by the State. Suppose there is an intelligent and expert individual
who volunteers to run and direct an industry, without much
remuneration and only for the good of society, I would keep the
system elastic enough to allow such an individual to organize that
industry.
M. I too have no objection to such elasticity provided all private profit is
eliminated. If any individual promises to work for society, he should be permitted to
do so. But I would like to make sure that the industries are run on national lines. I
would, therefore, like the industries to be represented on a functional basis in the
State, each trade to have its own representation.
G. That would be superfluous in a State which was based on
adult franchise. India is mostly agricultural and adult franchise would,
therefore, give preponderance to agriculture.
M. In Russia they have a slightly different system. The urban worker’s vote is
weighted—four agriculture votes are equal to one urban vote. For the rest the system
of election is indirect, like our Congress election.

Well, I would not give that preference to the urban vote. In
the Round Table Conference I urged the adoption of adult franchise
and voting by the village community. The proposal was rejected
because the Round Table Conference was not representative.
G.

M. But any conference which has representatives of landlords and capitalists

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

17

will reject adult franchise. They will say one thing but will do the other.
G. Then they have to be persuaded and converted to your views;
I do not believe in the so-called class-conflict.
M. But we can convert individuals, never a system. For instance take the
Champaran planters. To the last they were not converted. But for the pressure brought
on them by the Governor nothing would have been done.

I am not sure. Some planters were converted. What part the
Government and planters played in the matter I do not know. But I do
know that the Government could have done nothing, if the planters
had not stood by them.
G.

M. But if the Governor had been hostile the planters would have resisted to the
last.

That is shifting the ground. I simply say that some planters
were converted. In India Europeans are of four classes—businessmen,
soldiers, civilians and ecclesiastics. Surely you do not suggest that
individuals from these cannot be converted. You must eliminate
violence. And when you do, you will find that there is not much
difference between you and me. Both of us desire the welfare of the
starving millions.
The Hindustan Times, 4-8-1935
G.

25. SPEECH AT PATPUR
May 25, 1934
Mr. Gandhi reached Patpur this morning at 7. The party halted
at Sisua last night.
In a speech at Patpur Mr. Gandhi characterized the locality as a
khadi-growing place and exhorted his audience to use khadi instead
of mill-made cloth. The Charkha Sangh presented him with some
khadi. A purse of Rs. 101 was presented to him on behalf of the
people.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 25-5-1934

18

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

26. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
KAKTIA, 1

May 26, 1934
DEAR SATISBABU,

I have your letter. I am glad of the Bengal decision. How I
should love to pass three months roaming about Bengal after the rains
are over. But though I am not coming to Bengal, not even to Calcutta,
I would like those who have understood the meaning of this walking
pilgrimage to send their subscriptions to me whilst the pilgrimage is
going on in Orissa. You should, therefore, get what copper and silver
pieces you can and send them to me. Bhagirathji, who was here,
agreed with me that even though I may not come to Calcutta, such
subscriptions as could be collected should be sent to me. You have got
the tour programme. The purses may be sent to me at any stage, but if
nowhere else, let them be sent at least at Balasore which I reach on the
12th proximo and which is the last station. You may therefore choose
Balasore for sending purses if you can’t anticipate it.
Love.
BAPU

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 26-5-1934

27. LETTER TO KSHIRODE CHANDRA MAITY
May 27, [1934] 2
If I feel confident that I could do useful work in the direction
indicated by you, I should set aside all other activities and tour in
Bengal for several months. But I have no present hope.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI KSHIRODE C HANDRA MAITY
BYBATTARHAT, M IDNAPUR
From a photostat: G. N. 5058

1
2

A village in Cuttack District
As given in the G. N. register; it is obliterated in the source.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

19

28. LETTER TO MATHURADAS SHETH1
May 27, 1934
Most probably I will arrive there on the 14th and leave for
Poona on the 19th. I will decide finally in a few days. You may
arrange whatever is possible within that time. Please do not take me to
too many places. We should be content with what is possible in one
meeting. Personally I should like to keep at one place and explain my
views to workers and listen to what they have to say. Untouchability
cannot be eradicated merely with the help of money. It will disappear
only if the hearts of large numbers can be melted. I would ask you to
think about this problem.
From Gujarati: C. W. 7540. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

29. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
May 27, 1934
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,

I have written to Gopalan of Cannanore. Chandrashankar or
Valji would not have destroyed the letter. Is it certain that you must go
over to Kashi? If you have to go there, let the meeting of the Board be
held there. Now we have many places for that purpose. I hope your
boils have disappeared now. Things here are well enough, though not
as good as one would wish. That tireless worker, Ramabehn, too has
fallen ill. Neither Harakhchand2 nor Ishvarlal3 is here. The brooms are
new4 . But who can harm him whom Rama guards? I have written to
Raja about Hildapud.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 1139

1

The message was conveyed in a letter of even date from Chandrashankar
Shukla, Gandhiji’s secretary, to K. M. Munshi.
2
Harakhchand Motichand, a wealthy philanthropist from Kathiawar
3
An inmate of the Ashram
4
Gandhiji has used the Gujarati phrase to mean that he was having new people
with him.

20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

30. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
May 27, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I assume that you will be able to manage Dr. Suresh Banerji.
I have already replied to your letter and your wire. You have my
tour programme. I should very much like to break the journey at
Wardha, but I don’t think I can do so. The whole programme is fixed
and it seems desirable to stick to it.
I hope you are keeping well. You must have received my letter1
regarding Elwin.
Malaviyaji has written to me and suggested a meeting of the
Congress Working Committee at Poona. Both places will suit me
equally well if the meeting takes place on a date or dates when I shall
be there. If the strike is going on in Bombay at the time, I won’t like
to stay there at all. But that is beside the point. I shall have to be in
Bombay from the 14th to 18th.
Om is going on well enough. She learns a great deal from
experience, but she is a bit lazy with her studies.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2934

31. SPEECH AT KENDRAPARA
[May 27, 1934] 2
After the rich experiences I am having in Orissa this programme
does not please me at all, but no province save Bengal was willing to
forgo my visit altogether. Almost all the provincial workers agreed
that the walking tour was better. I urged that a walking tour for three
or four days would be a mockery and the spiritual effect would be
missed if it was closely intermixed with railway and motor travelling.
A compromise was therefore effected and the revised programme was
the result. Its peculiarity lies in my being in one and the same place in
1
2

Vide “Speech at Chittaranjan Seva Sadan, Calcutta”, 21-7-1934
From “Weekly Letter” in Harijan, 8-6-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

21

each province during the whole of my stay there. I see that Thakkar
Bapa has made an exception in favour of the United Provinces which
is not one but many provinces. This obviates the mad rush.
The revised programme becomes a predominantly collecting
tour and not one for the delivery of my message. I would, however,
like the workers to meet me at these places and gather the results of
the past six month’s tour and discuss the future plan of work. If I am
to do this solid work I must not be taken from place to place to
receive purses or address meetings. During my stay in each province
there should be no appointments for me to go anywhere. Beyond one
public meeting and one women’s meeting where desired there should
be no other functions. I should like to come in touch with as many
Harijans and sanatanists as possible.
The Hindu, 29-5-1934

32. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
May 28, 1934
CHI. VASUMATI,

I hope you are satisfied now with the frequency of my letters. In
this tour on foot I could have included all the women workers, but it is
extremely doubtful whether any of them would have been able to
endure the hardships. Mira will probably arrive there at about the
same time that you get this letter. The details of the tour, therefore,
will be given by her. If you can stop thinking about your troubles, I
shall believe that you have got the reward of pilgrimages to all the
shrines.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 9387. Also C. W. 632. Courtesy:
Vasumati Pandit

33. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
May 28, 1934
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have gone through your plan. The donkey is missing on page
six. The omission is only through oversight, is it not?
22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The scheme appears somewhat expensive. But what discourages
me is the absence of annual results. Isn’t it a feature of the Russian
plan that it shows yearwise results and ultimately proves its selfsufficiency at least on paper? I do not notice any such attempt in this
scheme.
You must have got my letter about. . . 1 . . . . ’s letter received
yesterday says that . . . is coming to see me. It will be good indeed if
he does come. There is no doubt that . . . is highly perturbed. You are
well, I trust. The touring I like very well. The only regret is that physical exhaustion prevents me from moving around the countryside.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The Calcutta mail-bag should reach me at one of the halts here.
On tour, I lose contact with the other provinces.
From Hindi: C. W. 7961. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

34. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
May 28, 1934
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

You are right in saying that only the rich and educated people
can live with me. I have to turn the rich into poor and place a broom
in the hands of the educated. Why should I have you with me? To
make you poorer still or to place a broom in your hands? What was
there to do in Patna? Did you have to deliver lectures there? 2 If you
wish to serve you must calm yourself. I got your telegram. Why was
the operation postponed? I shall learn that from your letter. Yes, the
best course for you would be to listen to your mother and get
married. Where is the single-mindedness in you that is required for
remaining a virgin? You are prone to all kinds of thoughts. You
cannot concentrate on any one thing. Therefore attain tranquillity if
you wish to remain unmarried. When will you learn Hindi? By now
you ought to know Gujarati too. Tell me now your plan. I shall arrive
in Bombay on the 14th and remain there till the 18th; afterwards,
1

The names have been omitted.
The addressee, wishing to be in Gandhiji’s company, had said in her letter
that he had no place for an uneducated person like herself.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

23

Poona. I shall be in Poona for six days and then on to Ahmedabad.
Make yourself well and give up all childishness.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 306

35. OBSERVATIONS ON M. R. MASANI’S
SOCIALISTIC PROGRAMME
[May 29, 1934] 1
I welcome the rise of the Socialist Party in the Congress. But I
can’t say that I like the programme as it appears in the printed
pamphlet. It seems to me to ignore Indian conditions, and I do not
like the assumption underlying many of its propositions which go to
show that there is necessarily antagonism between the classes and the
masses or between the labourers and the capitalists such that they can
never work for mutual good. My own experience convering a fairly
long period is to the contrary. What is necessary is that labourers or
workers should know their rights and should also know how to assert
them.2
‘Abolition of the rule of Indian princes’ is an arrogation of
power which does not belong to the party or which belongs as much
as the power to abolish Portuguese and French authority in what is
called Portuguese and French India would. It may be unfortunate, but
the dismemberment of India is a fact which may not be ignored. It is
surely enough to concentrate upon what is called British India. It is
large enough territory for any party to operate in, and its successful
operations in British India cannot but have their effect upon the other
parts of India. On principle too I am not for the abolition of the rule
of the princes; but I believe in its reformation and modification in
consonance with the true spirit of democracy.
‘The repudiation of the so-called Public Debt of India incurred
by the foreign Government’ is too vague and too sweeping a
statement in the programme of a progressive and enlightened party.
The Congress has suggested the only real and statesmanlike
1

Vide the following item.
This paragraph was repeated in Gandhiji’s letter dated June 14, 1934, to the
addressee.
2

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

proposition, namely, reference to an impartial tribunal of the whole of
the so-called Public Debt before any part can be taken over by the
future free Government of India.
‘The progressive nationalization of all the instruments of
production, distribution and exchange’ is too sweeping to be
admissible. Rabindranath Tagore is an instrument of marvellous
production. I do not know that he will submit to be nationalized.
Regarding ‘State monopoly of foreign trade’, should not the
State be satisfied with all the power it will prossess? Must it also
exercise all the powers in one swoop, whether such an exercise is
necessary or not?
‘Cancellation of debts owing by peasants and workers’ is a
proposition which the debtors themselves would never subscribe to,
for that will be suicidal. What is necessary is an examination of the
debts some of which, I know, will not bear scrutiny.
I should educate the masses to cultivate habits of thrift. I should
not be guilty of maiming them by letting them think that they have no
obligation in the way of taking preventive measures in the matter of
old age, sickness, accident and the like.
I do not understand the meaning of the phrase ‘the right to
strike’. It belongs to everybody who wants to take the risks attendant
upon strikes.
Does ‘the right of the child to care and maintenance by the
State’ absolve the parent from the duty of caring for the maintenance
of his children?
‘The elimination of landlordism’ clearly means usurpation of
the Zamindari and Talukdari tracts in clause 13. I am not for
elimination but for just regulation of the relation between landlords
and tenants.
How do you seek to oppose the ‘introduction of religious issues
into politics’ if you regulate and control all religious endowments?
What we really want to do is to observe strictest religious neutrality.
But when professors of one of the religions in the State desire some
kind of internal reform without which progress will be impossible for
them, State aid will become inevitable.
These are some of the observations as they occur to me on a
cursory glance of your printed programme.
M. K. G.
From a photostat: C. W. 4883. Courtesy: M. R. Masani. Also G. N. 4125
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

25

36. LETTER TO M. R. MASANI
(CAMP) KENDRAPARA,

May 29, 1934
MY DEAR MASANI,

Here is my answer1 to the questions you left with me. You will
see my answer covers all the questions. With reference to the
resolutions adopted at the First All-India Congress Socialist
Conference2 I should have very little to say against them if your
programme was sound which for the reasons I have given does not
appear to me to be. The resolution is perhaps bombastic; it is certainly
prolix. Do not hesitate to write to me again when necessary.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI M. R. M ASANI,
C/O “THE SUN”
139 M EDOWS S TREET
P OST BOX NO. 62, F ORT, B OMBAY
From a photostat: C. W. 4883. Courtesy: M. R. Masani. Also G. N. 4125

37. SPEECH AT KENDRAPARA
May 29, 1934
I am out to demolish all manner of inferiority complex from the
mind of my Harijan brothers. It is this which is taken advantage of by
the opponents to the Harijan uplift movement and also induces the
Harijans themselves to take the humiliating and absolutely irrational
status assigned to them in society lying down.
Proceeding, Gandhiji ejoined on his audience the need for conducting
themselves in their everyday life in such a manner as to deserve treatment as equals
with their so-called high-caste fellows. And for this it was essential, said Gandhiji,
that the Harijans should scrupulously avoid carrion-eating, uncleanly habits and
drunkenness. A touching scene was witnessed in Mahatmaji’s camp today, when an
inmate was found weeping over the news of the death of a near relation of hers.
Gandhiji consoled her saying that the best way to conquer death was to take no notice
of it. In this connection he cited the example of Sjt. Satis Chandra Das Gupta of the
1
2

26

Vide the preceding item.
Held at Patna on May 11, under the presidentship of Acharya Narendra Dev
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Khadi Pratishthan, Calcutta, who did not give up spinning on his charkha for a
moment even when he heard the news of the death of his son. That was an example of
real heroism which he would like every servant of the nation to emulate.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 29-5-1934

38. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
May 29, 1934
In an exclusive interview with the ‘Associated Press’, in the course of which
he was asked whether he had definitely abandoned tbe Bengal tour, Mr. Gandhi said :

It is not I who have abandoned the Bengal tour. I put myself at
the disposal of the Bengal Board, placing before them my difficulties.
They first dispensed me from the tour in the districts. I offered to go
to Calcutta for a few days if it was thought at all necessary for me to
do so, though I had no mind to go to Calcutta only. The Bengal
Board also thought likewise and came to the conclusion that if I went
to Bengal I should go there for three months. And since that was
impossible Calcutta was abandoned. I should certainly love to go to
Bengal for three months or more. But I do not know whether this
opportunity will come to me during my lifetime.
To another question whether he contemplated any discussion of the Poona Pact
with Bengal Hindu leaders and whether the Pact was still open to discussion and,
incidentally, to revision, Mr. Gandhi replied :

I have always been ready and willing to discuss the Poona Pact
with the Hindu leaders of Bengal. Anything is possible by agreement
of all parties. So far as I am concerned nothing is possible that would
not be consistent with justice to Harijans.
Asked whether he would support untouchables if they started satyagraha for the
vindication of their right to entry into public temples and whether untouchables had
an inalienable right to worship in public temples, Mr. Gandhi said :

I do believe that Harijans have as much right of worship in
public temples as any other Hindus. But I could never be a party to
the use of force in order to vindicate that right. Satyagraha has come
to signify many things. I should therefore want to know the nature of
the satyagraha to be offered. And in any case satyagraha by Harijans
would not be advisable while reformers were trying their utmost to
persuade the orthodox to waive their objections.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

27

Asked whether he would give any lead regarding the entry of untouchables into
the Puri Jagannath Temple, Mr. Gandhi replied :

I have known of the importance of the temple at Puri being
open to Harijans as it certainly was years ago and, as I know from
first-hand evidence, always has been so long as Harijans have gone
without asserting their rights. But I have no lead to give about opening
the temple beyond this—that public opinion should be cultivated in
that behalf.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 30-5-1934

39. LETTER TO CHARU PROBHA SEN GUPTA
May 30, 1934
MY DEAR CHARU PROBHA,

I have your letter. Do by all means join me at any stage you
like. You know my programme, don’t you? On 6th I reach Bhadrak.
Love.
BAPU
1

[PROGRAMME]
MORNING

4th
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
12

EVENING

8 a.m. to 5.30 p.m.
5.30 p.m. to 5.30 a.m.
JuneBaradeshwar Baradeshwar
’ ’ Baradeshwar Nalang
’ ’ Gavadpur
Bhadrak
’ ’ Asura Sinulia
’ ’ Jamjhari
Sirapur
’ ’ Soro Barikpurhat
’ ’ Khantapara
’’ ’’
Khannagar
’ ’ Balasore
’ ’ Leave Balasore at 11.0 a.m.

S HRI C HARU P ROBHA S EN
R AJBARI (BENGAL)
From a photostat: C. W. 1492. Courtesy: A. K. Sen. Also G. N. 8706

1

Written in a handwriting other than Gandhiji’s, this is found on the reverse
of the postcard containing the letter.

28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

40. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
BERIMUL (UTKAL),

May 30, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

It is already Wednesday but there is no letter from you yet.
The newly built ship has already sprung a leak. It may keep
afloat, but one can’t say whether it will reach the port. The Four1 will
meet again in Bombay on the 15th.
Mahendrababu, Rajendrababu’s elder bother, is seriously ill. It is
doubtful if he will survive. If he passes away, Rajendrababu will
suddenly find himself burdened with a heavy responsibility. Write to
him.
Ceresole, Agatha and Muriel are leaving on the 15th. All three
had sufficient experience. Ceresole will come back in October. He will
bring with him some other friends too. The Bihar work is progressing
quite well, thanks to Jamnalalji’s strict supervision. He has taken
Muriel to see . . .2 They will go to Wardha via Anantpur.
Bapa’s place is taken at present by Malkani. Devdas had come
to Patna. He has put on some flesh now. Marriage and Delhi have
done him good. Ramdas is the same that he was, though he seems to
have improved a little now.
It seems Mani is being tested fairly severely (in Jail). Kaka also
is being tested. He was ill. There has been a wire from him saying that
he is a little better now.
Since Sushila, Prabhavati and Om write to you, you must be
getting plenty of tit-bits from them. It can be said that the heat here is
worse than what it is even in Ahmedabad.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 104

1
Madan Mohan Malaviya, Dr. M. A. Ansari, Dr. B. C. Roy and Bhulabhai
Desai of the Congress Parliamentary Board
2
The name is omitted in the source.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

29

41. INTERVIEW TO UTKAL WORKERS
May 30, 1934
Asked if he was satisfied with the formation of the Swaraj Parliamentary Board
in which Utkal was not represented, Mahatma Gandhi said:

I am not particular about it, nor am I at all concerned with the
selection of the personnel of the Board. I am mis-represented by the
Press as such. Only Malaviyaji and Dr. Ansari have taken all
responsibility for it.
As regards the discontent of the Utkal people for being neglected in the matter
of representation on the Board, he said :

I am of opinion that those who can do constructive work should
not worry about representation on the Board. But if you feel keenly
on the matter, you should write asserting your right of representation
of at least one seat.
He further advised the Utkal workers that instead of utilizing his services in
such matters, they should take his more useful services in solving the flood problem
which he was thinking about day and night. Repair of the embankments, which was
prohibited by the Government, was the greatest problem which every representative
of the people of Utkal must think about. To solve this he was writing to an expert
engineer for making a survey. He was confident that if a solution was suggested, the
Government would not ignore it.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 1-6-1934

42. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
May 31, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,

The burden on Dwarkanath has increased. Please know
everything from him and lighten it. Listen to what he may have to say
regarding Manohar and Keshu and look into the matter carefully, and
do what is necessary. Why did Manohar go away suddenly to live in
the orchard? Also inquire and see if Sharma takes too much work on
himself. We must find time in Bombay to discuss all this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2935

30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

43. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
May 31, 1934
BHAI HARIBHAU,

I came to know only just now about your son’s death. All of us
will have to go that royal road sooner or later. If, however, you two do
wish to observe mourning for him, do so by observing complete selfcontrol. Please remember that now we have to observe with all the
greater vigilance the strict rules for civil disobedience volunteers.
I had received your letter. What you mean is this that I also
should demonstrate my love by giving up civil disobedience. If I
think that necessary, I would certainly take that step. But I see no such
necessity. What displeased the Government was not civil disobedience
itself, but the incivility which was displayed in its name. The party of
violence were not, and are not, concerned with demonstration of love.
They didn’t see our non-violence, but saw the subtle violence behind
it and concluded that it was the result of cowardice and that their
violence of the brave was far better. Thus, because our disobedience
was uncivil, neither of the two parties could understand it. Is this clear?
Blessings from
BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 6079. Courtesy: Haribhau Upadhyaya

44.LETTER TO SARITA
May 31, 1934
CHI. SARITA,

I have your letter. It was good that you wrote to me. I am glad
you are undergoing Dr. [Hiralal] Sharma’s treatment. Stick to it.
Don’t think there is anything wrong in staying with Nimu. There is no
need to believe in that superstition. The custom of not having even
water at the daughter’s place was good for those parents who threw
their daughters in the ditch because of greed. They did not, however,
reform their evil practice. Moreover my relations with you are not of
today. They go back to Amritlal’s time. So you should have no
hesitation whatever in staying with Ramdas.
Still, if you can get better treatment by staying with Dr.Sharma,
certainly do so.
Now that you have started writing, keep it up.
Blessings from
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G.N. 11528
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

31

45. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
May 31, 1934
BHAI SHARMA,

Go slow. Dwarkanathji tells me that you have taken up too many
burdens. I think the letter from Surendra too contained a similar
complaint. To perform service to our utmost and to take it as well is
beneficial to all in every way. Keep writing to me. You must regard it
as your dharma to take the requisite amount of milk and other articles
of food.
Draupadi Devi has not so far replied to my letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jeevanke Solah
Varsha, 1932-48, between pp. 68 and 69

46. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
May 31, 1934
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

Your letter. How is it that you reached the hospital and yet the
operation was not performed? I reach Bombay on June 14. How nice
it would be if the operation is performed ! As for your accompanying
me, I have already written to you. Why are you scared of the
operation? Don’t you have enough faith in God?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G. N. 307

32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

47. ‘THE COOLIE PROBLEM OF ASSAM’
Whilst I was touring in Assam, a correspondent sent me his
outpourings under the above heading. From his letter I take the
following :1
I can agree from personal experience with much of what the
writer has to say. The very word ‘coolie’ is a misnomer and reminds
one of what happens in South Africa. Instead of meaning a labourer
or a porter, the word came to be applied in South Africa to designate
the bearer’s nationality, and became a word of reproach. An Indian
merchant, barrister or doctor was known as a coolie merchant, etc. So,
in Assam, the Indian who went from another province to work on the
tea estates remained a coolie even after the termination of his cotract
as a labourer and even though he ceased to be a labourer and became
a land-owner. But being industrious, he has multiplied in Assam and
yet remains in perfect isolation and ostracism. It is a suicidal policy
that keeps him so. He cannot be driven out of Assam. Being grossly
neglected, he has become an economic waste. If these men were
properly taken care of, they would become an asset of first class
importance. It is up to the educated people of Assam to study this
problem and solve it to the benefit of all concerned. It does not
require an outlay of money so much as it requires an outlay of
intelligence and industry.
Harijan, 1-6-1934

48. UNTOUCHABILITY AS IT EXISTS TODAY
The Editor sends me the following from his box. A
correspondent who gives his name and address but prefers to remain
unknown to the readers of Harijan says :
In the Harijan of the 9th March, Gandhiji is reported to have said that
‘there was no warrant in the Shastras for untouchability’. One of the most
prominent pundits who support Mahatmaji’s movement is Mahamahopadhyaya Pramatha Nath Tarkabhushan of Benares Hindu University. He has
1

The extract is not reproduced here. The correspondent had pointed out the
need to remove the indignities suffered by the so-called ‘coolies’ and those belonging
to other Depressed Classes. He had requested Gandhiji to “evolve a scheme of work”
to raise their standard of life and to earn them recognition in society.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

33

published the letter which he wrote to Gandhiji last year quoting scriptures in
support of Gandhiji. The pundit wrote that, although there are texts in support
of untouchability, there are other texts which stated that untouchables could be
made pure by diksha (initiation) and devotion to God. Thus, according to the
pundit, those chandalas who were not initiated nor devoted to God were
untouchables according to the Shastras. Gandhiji’s opinion that there is no
sanction for untouchability is, therefore, not supported by this pundit.
Will you kindly state pundits have told Gandhiji that there is no
sanction for untouchability in the Shastras?
Gandhiji himself wrote before that sanatanists had supplied him with
many texts from the Shastras in support of untouchability, but that he did not
accept the authority of such passages as they were against the fundamental
principles of morality.
Gandhiji’s present statement that there is no sanction for untouchability
in the Shastras does not seem to accord with his previous statement which was
that there is such sanction but he did not accept the authority of such passages
because they were immoral.
Will you kindly explain the apparent inconsistency through the
columns of the Harijan?

I have not verified the quotation from the Harijan of 9th March.
But everybody knows by this time that, whenever I speak on
untouchability, it has reference to untouchability as it is practised
today or known to us today. And I do repeat here, as I have said on a
thousand platforms, that there is no warrant in the Shastras for
untouchability as we practise it today. I well remember Mahamahopadhyaya Pramatha Nath Tarkabhushan’s letter to me. His argument
is an enforcing argument combating the doctrine of ineradicable
untouchability. That letter not only does not controvert1 my proposition but supports it in the sense that no single untouchable need
always remain untouchable. When once it is admitted that an
untouchable can become touchable by simply reciting the
Bhagavata’s twelve-lettered mantra, the citadel of untouchability is
destroyed. For the support of my position, I cite even the sanatanists
themselves, for, they have not as yet produced a single verse in
support of untouchability as it is practised today. Innumerable castes
are at one time enumerated as untouchables in the census report and
1

34

The source has “contraverse”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

at another removed from that list and some new ones are enumerated.
Surely, there is no warrant in the Shastras for accepting census figures
for branding persons as untouchables, and untouchability as we
practise it today has reference only to these several crores of men and
women who are classified as untouchables in census reports. Nor is
there any warrant in the Shastras for the treatment that is meted out to
these people in their respective provinces or districts. I have, indeed,
said that the verses produced by sanatanists in support of
untouchability as they describe it are wholly inconsistent with the
fundamental principles of Hinduism. Therefore, under the canons of
interpretation laid down in the Shastras themselves, such verses must
be repudiated as devoid of authority. There is, therefore, no
inconsistency in my writings or sayings, when I say that there is no
warrant for untouchability as it is practised today. Of course, there is
ample authority in the Shastras for temporary untouchability on
sanitary grounds. That is not an untouchability that is contrary to
reason or to ethics. The untouchability against which I am carrying on
war is an internal taint which is supposed to apply to a man by birth
and of which no amount of expiation can purge a man.
Harijan, 1-6-1934

49. LETTER TO TARA JASWANI
June 1, 1934
CHI. TARA,

May I compliment you for writing to me after three years?
Though you wrote to me after such a long time, you have not given
me an account of the work you did during this period. Have you
collected any money for Harijan work, for which I have undertaken
this tour? If you have not, please do so now. Add your own
contribution to it before sending over the amount. My not going to
Calcutta shouldn’t be an excuse for forgetting either of these things.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 8785

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

35

50. FRAGMENT OF A LETTER1
[Before June 2, 1934]
Why should you feel borken-hearted? Why can’t you follow the
example of Janakraja? He was indifferent when his capital city was
being reduced to ashes, because he had done all he could to save it.
Have you yourself failed anywhere? If not, why worry? Give some
chance to God who has His finger in every pie. And even if you have
failed anywhere, why worry? Like Lacy [sic] of old “Try again”.
From Gujarati: C. W. 7541. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

51. LETTER TO KAMALA NEHRU
June 2, 1934
CHI. KAMALA,

I always look forward to hearing from you. Your letters can
never be a burden to me. My regret is that I am not able to write to
you as often. I invited you to come over because in Patna you were
having to attend meetings night and day. But I do not wish to put you
to the inconvenience of coming here, especially now, when the
inconvenience has been even further increased with the onset of the
rains.
Prabhavati has conveyed to me your question. Who is the person
and from which place? Be that as it may, it is my view that this time we
must swallow the bitter pill. But anyone who sincerely cannot put up
with such a thing should certainly not obey an order of this kind. But
anyone who defies the order must do so on his own responsibility. He
must make it clear that the Congress or swaraj has nothing to do with
such an action on his part, which for him is purely a matter of selfrespect. The same should apply to meetings, etc. I am sure that at the
present juncture, obeying even such obnoxious orders will add to our
strength provided we do it not for fear of imprison-ment or strength
provided we do it not for fear of imprisonment or something else, but
out of a sense of duty.
1
This message was conveyed in a letter dated June 2, 1934 from
Chandrashankar Shukla to K. M. Munshi. The addressee’s name, however, is not
known.

36

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Give me news of mummy. How is Indu? Has she gone to
Kashmir? When will she be going to Santiniketan and what will she
study?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C. W. 10870. Courtesy: Selected Works of
Jawaharlal Nehru

52. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, JAJPUR
June 2, 1934
In the address presented to me you have reminded me that this
is a place of pilgrimage. How nice it would have been if you had also
added that in this place of pilgrimage all the temples have been
thrown open to Harijans. I have repeated several times that in the
temples where Harijans have no right of entry, there are idols no
doubt, but they have not been consecrated.
We call God the saviour of the fallen; we call him Daridranarayana; we call him the Merciful and the Benign. God has thousands
of such epithets that go to prove that He does not belong to any
particular caste. God belongs neither to the Brahmins nor the
Kshatriyas but He belongs to all. But steeped in pride we say,‘God is
for us only and not for others.’ To those who think so I have been
crying myself hoarse that if there is any truth in the Shastras, if there
is any truth in the tenets of the Shastras, a temple where Harijans are
barred entry, has no God but only a stone.
If we fail to see what is obvious and if with the idea of high and
low in our hearts, we segregate the Harijans, the Hindu dharma and
Hindu society are doomed to perish.
From your address, it would appear that a tremendous
propaganda is going on for the removal of untouchability and yet it
cannot be uprooted in our time. With my naked eyes I can see clearly
that, whether we like it or not, untouchability is destined to disappear.
No man, up till now, has succeeded in stopping the wheels of time. If
we willingly own our Harijan brothers and give them all the rights we
enjoy, this shall be deemed as a blessed act in the kingdom of God
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

37

and in the Book of God. I shall explain to you what will be the result
if untouchability is abolished against our wishes and also the result if
it is removed with our consent. If untouchability is removed against
our wishes, it means the destruction of the Hindu dharma. If Hinduism
perishes there will certainly be no untouchable left. But that will not
be for the good of humanity. If however untouchability is removed
with the willing co-operation of the Hindus, with the purification of
and atonement by caste Hindus, it will be something to be proud of
and will be a blessed act. And the Hindu dharma which is on the
decline today will have a renaissance, and it will progress. With the rise
of the Hindu community the concept of brotherhood and fraternity
will prevail not only in India but in the whole world. I have shown you
two ways—one of progress and the other of decline. Now, it is for you
to decide which path you should choose.
A Muslim brother has sent me a letter. He wishes me to give a
reply here itself. The purport of his letter is that, in all that I have
attempted so far, I have only met with failure. He writes, “Then why
have you unnecessarily taken another task on your hands?” He cites
this example: “You took immense trouble to bring about HinduMuslim unity. But it was no use; only there is a little more tension
now.” In answer to this I wish to say only this: I do not accept that I
have failed in my attempts especially for Hindu-Muslim unity. It is
my strong belief that as a result of the efforts that have been made,
though tension appears to have increased due to the prevailing
political conditions unity has on the whole been strengthened. It is
also my unshaken faith that the endeavour to unite the Hindus and the
Muslims will go down in history as a great and worthy cause. But,
even if I concede that all my attempts have failed, still I have no
regrets, because I have conducted these experiments all my life as a
worshipper of truth. Therefore I have no regrets whatever for what I
have done.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 15-6-1934

38

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

53. A LETTER 1
[Before June 3, 1934]
If you will regard my walking tour in villages from day to day
as walking to all villages of India, then there should be visible
participation by all the provinces. There may be walking parties to
villages delivering the message of equality and brotherhood, for
abolition of untouchability means nothing less. These parties can do
the double work, that of speaking in the friendliest manner to the caste
Hindus on the evil of untouchability and distinction of high and low,
collecting from them repentance money and sending this to me in
the form of purses even as they would have done if I had travelled to
them, and the work of delivering the message of peace and
deliverance to the untouchables. What a glorious awakening it would
be if a simultaneous response such as I have adumbrated here is made!
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 3-6-1934

54. A LETTER
[Before June 3, 1934]
I am glad that you are taking up the walking tour in Bengal, if
only for five days. It would be successful if there is a good response.
Of course you will explain to the people the cause of the collection of
the tour. Let them understand that Orissa was in greater need, and that
my tour in Orissa should be taken for touring all over India. At the
same time if I had the opportunity I would certainly tour in Bengal
for three months or more.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 3-6-1934

55. LETTER TO KOTWAL
June 3, 1934
BHAI KOTWAL,

I got your letter.
I understand [what you say] about your food. I see no harm in
your asking for fruit when you are in jail. But I think you cannot go
1

This and the following item appeared in the source as quoted in a statement
by Dr. B. C. Roy and Satis Chandra Das Gupta.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

39

on a fast to press your demand. You have not taken a vow, and cannot
take it now. We should accept and be content with any food that is
given to us in a manner that does not hurt our self-respect, provided it
is such as we can eat. When we go to jail, we entrust our body to the
jailor.
About the extracts which you made while in jail, you can go
right up to the India Office, and, if you wish, take even legal steps.
It might be wise not to get an operation performed on the nose,
unless it seems absolutely necessary, for improvement in eyesight.
The resolution which you intend to move concerning the Indian
States seems altogether bad to me. I see nothing but attachment or
complete lack of thought behind it. Personally, I wouldn’t advise you
to move it.
The second resolution is not as bad as the first, but it is bad
enough. You do not know the history of how that province was
formed. The population also cannot be put as high as you do. The
number of delegates which you have assigned to Ajmer-Merwara also
seems excessive to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3611

56. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
June 4, 1934
CHI. AMALA,

You did well in writing the letters. I want to know you as you are
and not as you would be. I shall love you in spite of your faults. You
have no cause to fear me. You must dismiss from your mind the
thought that I hate you. I hate nobody in the world. You never gave
me any cause for hating you. On the contrary you have given me
many reasons for loving you. You must not therefore let your
imagination run away with you.
I have read your letter to Mira. I think you should go to a cool
place. I could easily send you somewhere. Why should you swear by
German medicine? There are competent doctors enough in
Ahmedabad. Tell Parikshitlal and he will take you to one. You should
be sane in these matters. You will be a cause of great anxiety to me, if
40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you become ill and your body is undermined.
Why do you want to be like Mira? She is not perfect. No one is
perfect. You should strive to be good according to the gifts God has
given you. No two persons are alike in the world. But all can be good
if they choose to.
We shall soon meet. I would like you to be fit when we meet.
And this you will be, if you won’t brood over you illness and take the
necessary measures for getting well.
I enclose herewith some letters to be handed to those concerned.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

57. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
June 4, 1934
‘Civil resistance’ is a wider term, and also indicative of respect.
Civil disobedience is not necessarily an accurate expression of the
attitude indicated in ‘civil resistance’. ‘Civil disobedience’ may also
indicate an attitude of the mind. The term ‘civil disobedience’ was
first used by Thoreau. I didn’t like it because it didn’t suggest all that
I had in mind. Looking for a new phrase, I fixed upon ‘civil
resistance’. The current phrase was ‘passive resistance’. But my way
of resistance or the force which I had in mind was not passive. It was
active, but ‘active’ might also mean violent. The word ‘civil’ suggests
nothing but non-violence. I, therefore, joined it with ‘resistance’.
The pledge taken at the start of the Dandi March certainly did
not mean that I would remain in jail till swaraj was won. Nor is it
always in our hands to be in jail.
If the Yeravda Pact required a change in the Award1 by the
Government, it also required the people to discharge their debt to
Harijans. Because the Government was aware of this condition, it was
by implication bound to give me facilities for fulfilling it. The
Government had accepted a similar argument during my first term of
imprisonment and given me the necessary concession. This
correspondence has been published. How can they go back on it now?
I have had no hand in Jamnalalji’s appointment. But I approve
1

Communal Award

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

41

of it. The post of secretary was not filled because one secretary is out.
If nobody was available, even that post would have had to be filled.
There is no principle involved in such matters, the only criterion being
propriety. What is wrong in the same person being President and
Treasurer?
What you say concerning the Parliamentary Board is correct.
The priest ministers at the wedding, but cannot help the partners to
run their home. If we let ourselves be seen as we are some day we shall
become what we ought to be.
Now nothing till the 14th1 . However, if there is anything special
I will write or ask somebody to write.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, pp. 146-7

58. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
June 4, 1934
Though the limited freedom2 granted to me was conveyed to me
orally by the Superintendent, it was actually a telephone message that
he read out. At that time I accepted it, but within half an hour after he
had left I wrote out and dispatched a letter3 to the Government.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 132

59. FRAGMENT OF A LETTER 4
[Before June 5, 1934]
I should love to give Bengal three months. That can only be in
my next incarnation.
From Gujarati: C. W. 7542. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

1

When Gandhiji was to reach Bombay
For doing Harijan work
3
Vide “Letter to R. V. Martin”, 16-8-1933
4
The message was conveyed in a letter dated June 5, 1934 from
Chandrashankar Shukla to K. M. Munshi. The addressee’s name, however, is not
known.
2

42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

60. LETTER TO BALVANTSINHA
June 4, 1934
BHAI BALVANTSINHA,

I do not see any difference between ‘Bhai’ or ‘Chi.’ or any
other appellation as long as the sentiment is the same. When I do not
know a person well and do not know his age and other particulars I
usually address him as ‘Bhai’. I would like it if Surendra keeps you
with him. Narandas is at Rajkot, you should act as he advises.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1871

61. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
June 4, 1934
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I have your letter. I feel that you should join the family
business. You should earn what you can and enter the field of service
only when you are free from attachment to the family and when the
desire for money ceases and effortless brahmacharya is attained. It is
useless to make any sacrifice because I or someone else so advises.
Only you can have a measure of your own strength, only you can
judge the degree of your attachment. Until you have measured
yourself truly it is your dharma to keep up the domestic links and
retain the family profession. There is no sin in maintaining family
relationship or even in making money. One can also after all render
service by keeping the domestic ties within limits. He also serves who
observes truth, etc., while remaining in his own sphere of work. One
who enters the field of service yet indulges in subtle pleasures,
selfishness and the like renders no service, but only harms the cause
and turns a hypocrite. It is a grave delusion to say that one cannot
preserve truth while earning wealth. There are quite a few people
today who adhere to truth while making money. I think your duty lies
in this for the present, but the first thing you should do is to make
yourself absolutely healthy.
Nothing will be gained by coming to me in my travels. But if
you wish you may join me on my reaching Poona or Ahmedabad.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

43

My advice would be against it. It would be better to busy yourself in
work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2412

62. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
June 4, 1934
CHI. RAMESHWARDAS,

You are in Jamnalalji’s custody and should remain so and do as
he bids. The kandora 1 can be sent by post or with someone who
happens to go there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 168

63. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
June 4, 1934
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,

Your letter and the doctor’s telegram arrived together. It is
excellent that the operation was performed. I think you will have been
discharged by the time I reach Bombay. Have no worry about
anything. I am writing to Chandrakanta 2 and Raje 3 . It is good that
both of them are there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 308

1

A chain for the waist
Daughter and son of Dr. Jawaharlal Rohatagi, a leading Congressman of
Kanpur, who were both working as house-surgeons in the King Edward Memorial
Hospital where the addressee was operated upon
3
ibid
2

44

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

64. TELEGRAM TO RAJENDRA PRASAD 1
[On or before June 5, 1934] 2
WIRE JUST RECEIVED. TELL HIS WIDOW AND BHAGABATI 3 NOT TO WEEP
OVER

THE

FAMILY
YOUR

INEVITABLE.

YET

YOU

INFALLIBLE

GHANSHYAMDAS
THEY

AND

YOU

HAVE
HELP.

BIRLA
OTHERS

HAVE
LOST

LOST

MAHENDRABABU
AND

THE

NOTHING.

MISS

JOIN ME IN

MAINSTAY

GOD
WAS

WAS
HIS

THE
IS

INSTRUMENT.

HARRISON
SENDING

OF
AND

ARE

HERE.

CONDOLENCES.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 5-6-1934

65. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
June 5, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,

It was a good idea of yours to pay all those visits. I understand
what you say regarding Rukhi. City life cannot have any other result
than this. Rukhi could have made her way easier, but she did not have
enough courage. But that was not her fault. Everybody obeys his or
her own nature. One may make whatever changes are possible within
its limits. Anybody who attempts more is bound to fall lower than he
or she was before.
Prabhudas has got what he wanted. He will make his way in life
if his health remains good.
Let Velanbehn follow her own inclination and rise or fall
in consequence. She will come to no harm whatever. If Prema
is released after I have left, I hope she will follow me. When is Lilavati
expected to be released? I feel sometimes that we should now relieve
Anasuyabehn of the burden of Anandi and others. 4 Kanu has proved
his mettle well indeed. I have written to Amala. You do not seem to
have met Amina. Amtussalaam has been operated upon for piles in
Bombay. She is in the King Edward [Memorial] Hospital. Write to
her. It is a painful state of affairs that weavers do not get yarn.
1

In reply to the addressee’s telegram informing Gandhiji of the death of
Mahendra Prasad, addressee’s elder brother
2
The telegram was published under the date-line, “Bhadrak, June 5, 1934”.
3
Addressee’s sister
4
When the Ashram was closed, the younger girls were left in the care of
Anasuyabehn Sarabhai.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

45

Think over the problem of the dairy. The work ought not to be
neglected. Write to Titus and tell him that he should attend things in
right time. He should not spend his time away from the dairy as he
likes. A letter for Chhaganlal is enclosed.
Where is Chimanlal at present? I hope you will be in
Ahmedabad when I go there. If Jamnadas’s health still does not
improve I will not mind his resigning. But who will run the school
afterwards? Jamnadas rarely writes to me. See that he does not decide
anything in haste.
I like Purushottam’s idea of going to Wardha. The rains have
started here and it is not possible now to continue the tour on foot. I
am, therefore, thinking what to do on the remaining days.
It has been decided just now that we should walk more today
and reach Bhadrak, and leave it for Wardha on Friday, and proceed
from there to Bombay on Wednesday.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8401. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

66. LETTER TO DWARKANATH
[June ] 1 5, 1934
CHI. DWARKANATH,

The rains have set in here making it impossible to continue the
tour on foot. It has therefore been decided to spend three days in
Bhadrak before going over to your place. We hope to leave Bhadrak
on Friday and reach there on Saturday. We shall leave from there on
Wednesday. The party would comprise about ten people. I am not
writing separately to Jamnalalji and Ramdas. Please tell Vidya I have
her letter; it is all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3087

1

Not decipherable in the source. However, from the context it is clear that the
letter was written in June. Vide also the preceding item.

46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

67. LETTER TO KANTI GANDHI
June 5, 1934
CHI. KANTI,

Is it proper that you should never write to me? How are you?
What do you read? How do you live? Will you not write to me and tell
me all these things? From there you must write to me a beautiful letter
every week.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 7285. Courtesy: Kanti Gandhi

68. LETTER TO KESHAVJI RAOCHAND AND KANJI MULJI
SIKKA
June 5, 1934
BHAI KESHAVJI RAOCHAND AND BHAI KANJI MULJI SIKKA,

My visit to Calcutta has been put off. But I certainly expect a
purse from the Gujaratis in Calcutta. A contribution of at least Rs.
20,000 is certain from the Marwaris, it may even go up to Rs. 25,000.
I am sending Valjibhai Desai to receive the contribution from the
Gujaratis. I have to leave for Wardha by the Friday train. Please,
therefore, collect what you can and send the amount with Valjibhai.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7466. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

69. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
GARADPUR (UTKAL),

June 7, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I have received no letter from you this time as yet. I myself have
written to you regularly, however. The rains have started here, and so
all touring has stopped. It will soon be time for the morning prayer.
As I am writing this, Satisbabu has arrived with his band of ten,
carrying their luggage and walking a distance of two miles from
Bhadrak Station to this place. They took an hour and three quarters to
walk that distance through the mud.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

47

I am now taking up the letter again after the prayer.
Satisbabu has been touring Bengal on foot. It is too early yet to
assess the results of the walking tour. Personally I am fully satisfied.
All other things seem pale beside this.
Miss Harrison has gone to Bombay. I shall meet her again there.
She is a very good woman indeed. She thinks about nothing else but
this problem. Muriel has toured fairly widely in company with
Jamnalalji. She also will meet me in Bombay.
I have already sent the tour programme to you. Have faith that
what is happening is perfectly all right.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 105

70. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI 1
June 7, 1934
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have said the correct thing to Nariman. We do not need a hotel
that will give shade instead of sunshine. The Reception Committee
should not encroach upon the prayer time without consu-lting me.
They must take me to the Harijan colony unannounced.
I am returning Nariman’s letter. If you are in the Reception
Committee, the outside programmes for me should be kept to the
minimum. Keep this in mind.
The rains have started here. So, the walking tour has become
difficult, and I have had to spend three days in Bhadrak. I shall leave
for Wardha tomorrow (Friday). I shall be there for four days after
which I shall be in Bombay on the appointed date.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

An extract from this letter appears in “ Letter to Mathuradas Trikumji”,
7-6-1934

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

71. SPEECH AT GARADPUR ASHRAM, BHADRAK
[June 7, 1934] 1
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

It was arranged that there would be a meeting on the public road
today at 9 a.m. But I was informed that no meeting could be held on
the public road without a license issued from the Superintendent of
Police. It was our mistake that we did not obtain a license for the
meeting. The S. P. is not here now. He stays at Balasore. His
subordinates here are not empowered to issue a license. So I could not
go to the place of the meeting. Therefore I called you all to this place.
I know law cannot be broken here; because I do not want to break the
law and convene a meeting on the public road. I say all of you should
give up untouchability. We are all sons of one God, then why should
we live aloof from Harijans? We should give all facilities to them
which the caste Hindus enjoy. We should not hold out any distinction
between high and low. The next thing that I have to say is that we have
become idle and idleness should be given up. If we do not give up
idleness we will starve. It is for this reason that some sort of work must
be done. If no other work is available then charkhas should be plied
so that something may be earned. If anyone gets more money by
doing any other work, he should engage himself in such work.
Thirdly, intoxicants should be given up because intoxicants do harm
to us. If you have followed me, then give whatever you can for the
service of Harijans.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 7-6-1934

72. SPEECH TO HARIJAN WORKERS, BHADRAK 2
June 7, 1934
Those who took a direct part in the pilgrimage cannot but have
been struck by the fact that real work lies in the villages. The vast mass
of Harijans live there. Untouchability has its strongest roots there.
Poverty, too, is most rampant in the villages. Therefore the Sangh,
while not neglecting the cities, should send its best workers to the
villages and there do twofold work—serve the Harijans and the
savarnas—the former, by procuring for the young and the old
1
2

From Amrita Bazar Patrika, 8-6-1934
Extracted from “Weekly Letter”

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

49

educational facilities, clean water-supply, admission to temples,
betterment of economic condition, removal of bad habits, e.g.,
carrion-eating, eating and drinking intoxicating drugs and drinks, and
inducing hygienic habits; and the latter, by establishing friendly
contact with them and securing their co-operation to the extent they
would be prepared to give it. In all things there should be no
compulsion or the show of it. Above all, remember that personal
purity of the worker is to count in the end. Those, therefore, whose
character is not above suspicion and weatherproof should not touch
Harijan service, particularly in the villages. The Sangh will have to be
most careful in the selection of workers.1
Gandhiji expressed his satisfaction at the enthusiasm displayed by all sections
of people throughout Utkal including the womenfolk in furtherance of Harijan uplift
movement. Mahatmaji said:

I am returning more convinced than ever before that Harijan
work is far better done by padayatra (tour on foot).
Referring to a query by one among the audience as to whether suspension of
civil disobedience should be interpreted as a verdict of its failure, Gandhiji said:

There is no such work as ‘failure’ in the dictionary of a
satyagrahi. He simply prepares himself according to experience
gained at every step. The progress of a satyagrahi is similar to that of
a mountaineer who has in the course of his march got to retrace his
steps several times before he ascends a few steps.
Replying to another question as to how he expected to get swaraj by
restricting the practice of civil disobedience only to himself, Gandhiji said:

Wait and you will see.
Harijan, 15-6-1934; also The Bombay Chronicle, 7-6-1934

73. NOTES
LIMITATIONS OF PENITENTIAL FASTS
It will be remembered that Shri Sitaram Sastri sometime ago
underwent as unconditional fast by way of penance for the weakness
of a friend who, having promised to open a temple under his charge,
had, under pressure of his friends, gone back upon his promise. Shri
Sastri discussed the fast with me. I promised to set forth the argument
briefly in these columns.
1

50

What follows is reproduced from The Bombay Chronicle.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Fasting with a spiritual purpose behind it is praiseworthy only
under well-defined conditions. It must not be for a selfish end. It must
not be in the nature of violence, as, for instance, it would be, if one
fasted against a sanatanist for not opening a temple when it was well
known that it was against his religious conviction to do so. The
question that Sitaram Sastri had to deal with was of a different nature.
He had to deal with a broken promise of an intimate friend.
Ordinarily such a breach or its imminence is cured by a fast, and the
fast would be advisable, if not obligatory, for those who believe in
fasts as a lawful institution in a non-violent crusade against social or
religious abuse or evil, both of which untouchability is. But in dealing
with the timid, almost emasculated, society such as we have to deal
with, even breaches of promise have to be gently dealt with, especially
when they are made in connection with social matters as distinguished
from individual affairs. Superstition is ingrained in us. Untouchability—itself a poisonous boycott of the extreme type—has filled us
with imaginary horrors of an imaginary boycott. Living in such fears,
mere threat of a social boycott to one for whom life outside his
particular caste is inconceivable is enough to make him withdraw or
break a solemn promise. In such cases, a fast is too drastic a remedy.
Prudence demands abstention from taking promises from such men
and treating lightly promises already made. Such persons require
most sympathetic treatment and gentle handling. A drastic treatment
like that of fasting may, instead of strengthening, actually weaken a
person and, therefore, endanger or injure the very reform for which a
fast is undertaken.
Harijan, 8-6-1934

74. A CAREFUL SPINNER
A Harijan sevak, who is working in a Harijan school and trying
to introduce hand-spinning amongst his pupils and their parents, in
addition to many other things writes:
During the national week I spun more industriously than hitherto and
much more carefully. My speed was 300 yards per hour on an average. Out of
40 tolas of cotton I obtained 37 tolas of yarn of 16 counts. The output was
9,700 rounds—a round is equal to four feet. In cleaning cotton and carding it, I
lost two and a half tolas, and another half tola was lost in spinning. I have
preserved all the waste. This I propose to utilize for filling pillows and the
like. I have seen many spinners whose waste sometimes amounts to as much

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

51

as the wages obtained from spinning for the amount of cotton on which the
waste has been made. You would remember that I spin only during leisure
hours. I shall have spun for myself much more khadi than I need for personal
use. I propose to sell the Purplus and apply the proceeds towards the expenses
of conducting the Harijan school under my charge. My yarn is considered to be
so strong and good that the weavers prefer my yarn to any other.

I know this spinner. He has become what he is by his sincerity
and application. He was no better than the average spinner. But, today,
very few volunteer-spinners would be able to show the record that this
Harijan sevak has been able to show. Wandering through the villages
of Utkal, speaking to the people and coming in closest touch with
them I have a daily demonstration of enormous possibilities of handspinning. The idleness that has crept over the poor villagers is a firstclass tragedy. I see hundreds, and often thousands, hovering round me
all day long doing absolutely nothing. Those who hover round me are
not in any shape or form well-to-do. Their food is of the most meagre
kind. They hardly get milk or ghee. The food consists chiefly of
boiled rice, dhal and oil. The people appear to me to be without
ambition and without hope, and yet they show in their own lives a
remarkable culture which you cannot help noticing. But all that
culture will presently be of no avail to them, if they cannot be induced
to learn the art of profitably utilizing every idle hour. And I come
irresistibly to the conclusion that there is nothing but the spinningwheel to present to the millions for their acceptance and use during
idle hours. Surely, any industry is remunerative which is designed to
give occupation to millions of people.
Harijan, 8-6-1934

75. TELEGRAM TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
BHADRAK,

June 8, 1934
ANAND
C ARE KEWALRAMANI
IRRIGATION
JAHANIA
YOU MAY JOIN
WARDHA
TWO

WARDHA
WEEKS.

OR

BOMBAY.

USELESS

VIDYA 1

COMING

BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives and Anand T. Hingorani
1

52

Addressee’s wife
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

76. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA 1
June 8, 1934
I have your note of the 4th instant.
You enquire about things here. I shall content myself with
giving you just a subjective report of the policy of the management as
I expect detailed report of work done to reach you through Pyarelal
and others from time to time.
My asking you for the expenses of your party has had a
salutary effect and people are more careful in debiting items against
the Bihar Central Relief Committee. But still there is a tendency to mix
up reconstruction work with relief work. They want bridges built—
even pucca ones—out of our funds without first tapping District
Boards, the Government and other sources. Even the wells sunk seem
excessive and they have not yet got over the idea of free doles. It
appears to me,a great deal of the relief work is undertaken with
political motives especially after the A.I.C.C. decisions. The Bihar
Central Relief Committee does not get the impartial and unadulterated
attention of those in charge and the work is not what it should be
because of mixed motives. Middle class relief is an answer to pressure.
As an organization our weak point lies in the absolute control
and discretion vested in the officers in charge at the districts. True, the
Managing Committee sits down in all seriousness to budget. But when
the President, out of the goodness of his heart, is persuaded to give
blank cheques to officers in charge without consulting the Managing
Committee such budgeting becomes a farce and is to no effect. The
work merely reflects the imagination or the lack of imagination of
one man in each district. Dictatorial powers are good in an emergency
but it seems to me in constructive work some control of the executive
is important to co-ordinate effort. The Audit Department, in the
nature of things, is a day after the fair and is subject to executive
discretion generally; while the inspection department becomes an
organization for recording pious opinions.
From a photostat: G.N. 10105

1

Addressee’s name as given in the G.N. register

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

53

77. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
BALASORE,

June 8, 1934
In the course of an exclusive interview with the Associated Press Mr. Gandhi
said that if he had it in his power he would undoubtedly use it in order to bring about a
settlement of the labour strike during his visit to Bombay, but he knew that he had
none. As regards his impressions on the conclusion of his walking tour in Orissa, he
said:

I have always considered Orissa to be the poorest of our
provinces. That impression was strengthened by intimate contact with
the villages visited during the tour. The enforced idleness among
people is appalling. The Harijans in the villages I found to be
exceptionally clean in their habits. Indeed, in some of the villages
their homes appeared to be cleaner than the homes of their fellowvillagers. Intellectually, too, they appeared to me to be in no way
inferior to others in spite of the social handicaps they are living under.
I have nothing but happy memories of the pilgrimage and,
due opportunity coming to me, I should repeat it on a much larger
scale. Utkal co-workers showed great powers of endurance. Their
organizing ability was of no mean order. Twice during nights storms
swept over us. Volunteers proved equal to the emergency and we
were able to pass the nights in more or less comfort.
Our party included girls from Rama Devi’s 1 Ashram. I
marvelled at their capacity for walking bare-footed. Every morning,
as soon as we reached our destination, these girls went out to Harijan
quarters and brought me reports of what they had seen or done. They
never knew what fatigue was And though many of them had been
brought up in the lap of luxury they put up with all the trials of a
march which was by no means a soft job. If the work is continued
with the same enthusiasm and earnestness that were exhibited during
the march and the workers concentrate upon Harijan service in the
villages more than the cities, the result will be startling. I have no
doubt that savarna Hindus’ minds are ready. But, in order to induce
action they require the living touch which could only be supplied by
pure-minded workers working in the villages, not by fits and starts,
but regularly.
1

54

Wife of Gopabandhu Babu and Secretary of the Harijan Sevak Sangh
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

In conclusion, Mr. Gandhi said that these walking tours had not yet taken place in
any other province except Bengal. In his opinion such tours would become more and
more popular as experience grew.1
On Government communique lifting the ban on Congress organizations,
Gandhiji declined to make any comment at present.
On being told that the whole country was waiting for his lead in this matter, he
smilingly replied that the country should know what his lead was.
Amrita Bazar Patrika; also The Bombay Chronicle, 9-6-1934

78. SPEECH AT BALASORE
[June 8, 1934] 2
Mr. Gandhi spoke for about 15 minutes. He began by explaining the reason
for abandoning his tour on foot and said that as he had been drenched by rain for two
nights and as it rained the whole day at a place called Turunga he had to abandon his
walking tour. He then touched on untouchability and said that we are sons of the same
God and as He does not make any distinction between His sons it would be sin for us
if we do so. No distinction should be made between the different castes among the
Hindus, between the caste Hindus and the Harijans, and also between the Hindus and
the non-Hindus, as they are all brothers. It is a sin not to remove this distinction and
a religion which does not obliterate this distinction is doomed to extinction as a
result of this sin. He asked the audience to remove untouchability.
He then touched on the evil of intoxicants and said that the use of intoxicants
deadens one’s intellect and might bring on even insanity. He exhorted the audience
to give up intoxicants.
Concluding, he said that everyone should do some work, as idleness is alwys
bad. He asked the audience to take to spinning by charkha, if they had nothing else to
do, as that will remove Orissa’s poverty.
He then asked for contributions for the Harijan Fund.
From a copy: C.W. 10619. Courtesy: Government of Orissa

79. LETTER TO TARA JASWANI
June 9, 1934
CHI. TARA,

I am writing this in a running train. I received the sum of Rs. 50.
Do what you can there. Sushilabehn spoke to me about you and I was
1
2

What follows is reproduced form The Bombay Chronicle.
From “Weekly Letter” in Harijan, 15-6-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

55

glad to hear what she said. Write to me whenever you wish to.
Natvarlal must have left for Rangoon.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI TARABEHN
C/ O MESSRS KANTILAL MOHANLAL & C O.
37 BURTTOLA S TREET
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8786

80. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
WARDHA,

June 9, 1934
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

I received your letter just now at 10 p. m. There has been a
misunderstanding. While you are in Patna the expenses will be
negligible. My impression was that you ate at the camp. Your going to
Bombay has already been arranged. As to your programme after you
are relieved of the Delhi work, I had asked you but you refused to say
anything. Prabhavati also was not in a position to tell me clearly. I
want to make a villager of you. But today you do not have the
necessary strength. Since you want me to have the onus to deciding
the matter I shall fix Rs. 20 or Rs. 25 per month to be paid to you.
Many co-workers are paid less. I shall allow the same sum for
Prabhavati. I would want Prabhavati to live at Wardha. The three of us
had agreed on this. If now you feel differently Prabhavati will have no
objection if you can let me know what she will be doing in Bihar or
anywhere else. It is also not clear to me whether you wish to have her
with you or just anywhere in Bihar. All this is very delicate. I do not
wish to interfere in any way. When both of you need my advice I like
it because I feel that I can share your life. But I would like it more if
you could each conduct your life according to the wishes of the other.
Only yesterday I was ready to send Prabhavati to you. But she does
not wish to go in this way. Madanmohan says you will be going to
Madras on the 17th. Prabha says: “What would be the use of my
going? Jayaprakash cannot even spare a minute to talk to me.” I do
56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not like all this. I want something definite from both sides. I shall be
reaching Bombay on the 24th. I suggest that you come there. Talk to
Prabha and let me know your joint decision.
I have talked at length with Masani on communism. I have read
your syllabus. I do not like the manifesto that has been issued.1 I have
pointed out its blemishes to Masani. I shall also speak to him when I
can spare the time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

81. SPEECH TO TEXTILE WORKERS, NAGPUR
June 9, 1934
Mahatma Gandhi arrived here by mail en route to Wardha and was greeted by a
large number of textile workers (on strike) at the railway station.
Gandhiji, addressing the gathering, said that he had invited the labour leaders
to Wardha to meet him the next day when he would ascertain the situation from them.
He would then give his advice which he hoped would do good to them.
Gandhiji assured them that though they were labourers of today, he was a
labourer for the last 20 years. Though he practised as a lawyer he always lived with
labourers and lived like them.
Gandhiji was presented with donations amounting to Rs. 50 at the station.

The Bombay Chronicle, 11-6-1934

82. TO MAHAGUJARAT
No one has expressed any disapproval of the pilgrimage on
foot. But there is some discontent in all the provinces. Everyone wants
to take me from one town to another. But I am really tired of
travelling by train and car. We are sprawling in a field at the moment.
We have the sky above and the earth below. We are about fifty persons
here, perhaps more, but not less. We are so far removed from trains
and cars that we hear no sound of them at all. It is no small matter to
come in contact with the villagers and know the Harijans in the
countryside. The Harijans of the village have their meals in our
1

Vide also “Observation on M. R. Masani’s Socialstic Programme”,
29-5-1934
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

57

kitchen every day. At night there are ‘magic lantern’ lectures by
Gopabandhu Babu. Our girls go to the Harijan colony every day. Five
girls from Rama Devi’s Ashram walk in front. They ask for no
amenities. On their own they get up at three in the morning and set
out. They work hard throughout the day. If I live like this I feel that
untouchability would be soon wiped out. Even if this calculation turns
out to be wrong, it can be said about this activity that “no effort
undertaken is lost, there is no fear of failure. Even a little of this
righteous course delivers one from great fear”.1
This is a first-hand experience. But how would [our] colleagues
in other provinces believe it? How would they be convinced of the
maxim that the universe is the reflection of our own selves? Bengal
swallowed a bitter pill. It gave all its time to Utkal. And now I hear that
our colleagues in Bengal are planning pilgrimages on foot in several
places. No such thing is known to be happening anywhere else. Why
not? If such pilgrimages are undertaken in good faith and in a spirit
of sacrifice, how long can untouchability last? But how can such faith
be created among our colleagues ?
Hence, we will have to go round in the other provinces as best as
we can. Camping in one place also seems to be a difficult proposition
but our colleagues must bear with this much at least. Let people from
the whole province come wherever I camp. Let them meet, exchange
ideas and bring purses by way of expiation from their places—I want
copper coins from many, not silver from a few. Untouchability will
not be wiped out with the help of rupees. I have never heard of
anyone’s heart being melted because of money. If an individual’s
donation is the token of his change of heart, it would not help the
Harijans but will help those who consider themselves caste Hindus.
Hence, I expect the people of Gujarat, Kathiawar and Cutch
1. to know that this activity is purely religious;
2. to mix with the people and, facing all opposition, give them
the message of removal of untouchability;
3. to collect individual donations if they are offered by way of
expiation—and not for my sake;
4. to come and see me after cleansing their heart of all the
impurities and freeing yourselves from selfishness and feelings of
hatred and jealousy.
1

58

Bhagavad Gita, II. 40
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

5. Even in Ahmedabad do not insist on taking me round. Let
me sit in one place, wherever it may be. There is a telegram from
Kathiawar full of woes. They demand two days for Kathiawar. Their
demand is justified. Right now I am not able to find any solution. But
something would have been decided by the time this is printed. My
mind prompts me to keep touring in this very place. But I am aware
that it is not necessarily one’s duty to follow one’s inclination. One has to go against
the promptings of the mind too. As Mirabai has said:
By a delicate string the Lord holds me;
He can pull me as He wills.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 10-6-1934

83. MESSAGE TO WAR RESISTERS’ INTERNATIONAL
AS AT WARDHA,

June 10, 1934
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter. Believers in peace and non-violence
dare not look for immediate tangible results. Patience—infinite—is
the characteristic of non-violence, impatience, of violence. Let them
also know that non-violence is not a passive state. Concentration on it
sets free the most active forces in the world.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: G.N. 9751. Also C.W. 6285. Courtesy: Mirabehn

84. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
June 10, 1934
BHAI MUNSHI,

Let us see how much so many of you lawyers collect.
I hope the meeting for swadeshi will not clash with the time for
the meeting of the Parliamentary Board. I will keep myself ready to
answer all the arguments and to explain my plan. But I don’t know
whether I shall be able to convince the people.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

59

Earn as much as you wish without sacrificing truth, but spend on
yourself as if you had nothing of your own.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI K. M. MUNSHI, A DVOCATE
R IDGE R OAD, M ALABAR HILL
BOMBAY
From Gujarati: C. W. 7543. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

85. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
June 11, 1934
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

My congratulations to you on your being assaulted 1 Go on
writing to the officers [about the incident]. Can a protest meeting not
be held in Baroda and Navsari? It was not you but the Harijans who
were assaulted. You should not, therefore, have the slightest hesitation
in taking whatever measures may be necessary.
I understand about Bhavnagar. It must be given two full days,
otherwise the work there cannot be completed. In Ahmedabad a car
will have to be used for all movement. I have not been able to go as
far as renouncing completely the use of a car. But the fact that you
had such fear made me happy.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. P ARIKSHITLA MAJMUDAR
HARIJAN ASHRAM
S ABARMATI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 34001. Also C.W. 115. Courtesy:
Parikshitlal L. Majmudar

1
The addressee, Secretary, Gujarat branch of the Harijan Sevak Sangh, was
mistaken for a Harijan at a village in Baroda State. He was beaten up for drinking
water from a parab, a place on public road to supply water to thirsty people.

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

86. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
June 11, 1934
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

Your letter.
Shall I entrust the Harijanshala to you on a salary of Rs. 25? Or
shall I send you on the same salary to a village for the charkha work?
Will you learn the technique of the charkha? I can also send you to
the Sabarmati Harijan Ashram on Rs. 10 a month. Do you feel
yourself up to it? In these matters I am growing more exacting. In
no other way can untouchability be eradicated or the charkha
established. What more? Ponder over it and let me know.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2413

87. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
WARDHA,

June 12, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got all your letters. But I could get no time at all to reply to
them. Today I woke up at one and started writing.
You have taken up a good job indeed there. We are faced with
such difficult moral problems here that I miss you very much. Since,
however, you have undertaken the present work with my consent, I
can do nothing for some time. You must be permitted to continue
your experiment. I am not quite happy that the place is Rajkot. But
since you yourself see no difficulty in that, I don’t worry. My faith
rests on yours.
I assume that you will see me either in Ahmedabad or
Bhavnagar. Would you like to have Prema or Gangabehn with you
there?
. . . 1 has fallen once again, and this time very low indeed. He
must leave this place now. The final decision will be made today.
Some other moral lapses also have been discovered. I don’t write
about them here for want of time. Vinoba has undertaken a seven1

The name has been omitted.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

61

day fast. It has been decided that Vinoba should live here now, but
that will not be enough. He must have somebody like you to help
him. Can you make any useful suggestion in this connection?
And now about Jamnadas. His complaint is completely
unjustified. But there is no remedy for a suspicious nature. I have
always given him help or advice whenever he sought either. I have
given him advice even without his seeking it. Jamnadas can say that I
have neglected him only if you also can make that complaint. When I
have no doubt as to the correctness of the course he is following and
no advice to give, why need I write unnecessarily? Whenever he asked
me to take him with me on my travels I did so. If he didn’t learn
anything, how could I help that? What work could I give to anybody
who accompanied me only occasionally as he did ?
This time there are so many persons wanting to accompany me
that it is a problem how to take them all. I certainly don’t require all
of them. If, now, Jamnadas also comes, he cannot but be superfluous.
And I, too, would be busy with problems connected with my own
work. This is the position. If you can understand him. [try to advise
him and] guide him properly. If he would let me guide him, I am
ready to do so. I would assign him a village and put it under his sole
charge. Would he go to Phoenix? Can’t he do some work under you?
Way can’t he run the school after you have put it on a sound
foundation? Or why doesn’t he go somewhere to improve his health?
Would he like to go to Almora? Does he know his own mind? Does he
want to marry? You can show this letter to him.
I have been thinking about Sharma. He has decided to adopt a
simple life and live with Ramdas. He wants to take the latter to
Phoenix. Some decision will be taken today. Jamna owes me one
letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8402. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

62

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

88. LETTER TO M. R. MASANI
June 14, 1934
MY DEAR MASANI,

I have read the questions you left with me as also the Congress
Socialist Party’s programme.
I welcome the rise of the Socialist Party in the Congress. But I
can’t say that I like the programme as it appears in the printed
pamphlet. It seems to me to ignore Indian conditions and I do not like
the assumption underlying many of its propositions which go to show
that there is necessarily antagonism between the classes and the
masses or between the labourers and the capitalists, such that they can
never work for mutual good. My own experience covering a fairly
long period is to the contrary. What is necessary is that labourers or
workers should know their rights and should also know how to assert
them. And since there never has been any right without a
corresponding duty, in my opinion a manifesto is incomplete without
emphasizing the necessity of performance of duty and showing what
that duty is.
You would not want me at this stage to examine your
programme clause by clause, but if you so desire and if you do not
mind consulting my convenience, I would appoint for you a time
when I could discuss with you, and those whom you may wish, the
whole of your programme in detail.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 4126. Also C.W. 4884. Courtesy: M. R. Masani

89. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
BOMBAY1 ,

June 14, 1934
SUJNA BHAISHRI,

I got both your letters. Your convenience and wish will be my
wish. I understand your problems. Leave all the arrangements to the
Reception Committee and be content with what you may have to do
1

In the source, this is not in Gandhiji’s handwriting.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

63

to facilitate its work. This will not show that your love for me has
diminished. One is not always in a position to demonstrate one’s love.
More when we meet.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5933. Also C.W. 3249. Conrtesy:
Mahesh P. Pattani

90. INTERVIEW TO MEMBERS OF HARIJAN
SEVAK SANGH1
BOMBAY,

June 14, 1934
The first work done by Gandhiji on arrival was to meet the members 2 of the
Provincial Sangh. Sheth Mathuradas after introducing the members gave a resume of
their work. The Sangh spends well in scholarships and runs three chawls providing
accommodation for nearly 200 families. In answer to the question what more was to
be done by the Sangh, Gandhiji told the members that, whilst he held temple-entry to
be an integral part of the programme, he would like them to concentrate their
attention on the education of the savaarna Hindus as to the scope of the work and the
necessity of removal of the evil. This work should be done by purely voluntary
workers of recognized status. The other thing was extension of constructive work. He
would like to see a decent eating-house run by the Sangh where Harijans could feel
they could go without the slightest restraint. A well-managed eating-house could
become a centre of culture for the Harijans and an object lesson to all showing that
Harijans had eating habits as clean as those of the average savarna Hindus. It was
true that some of them were not cleanly dressed. But they were no more likely to visit
these places than the numerous equally dirtily dressed savarna Hindus. The two
things he mentioned were only by way of illustration. If they would have an
exhaustive census of all the Harijans in Bombay and have a catalogue of their
disabilities due to untouchability, they could prepare a definite programme of work.
Gandhiji expected the Sangh to approach the Bombay Corporation in the many
matters in which it alone could render effective help.3
Mahatma Gandhi, after some discussion, expressed appreciation of the action
1

This and the following item have been extracted from “Weekly Letter”.
Sheth Mathuradas, Dahanukar, Avantikabai Gokhale, Hansa Mehta, V. L.
Mehta, P. Baloo, Narayan Kajoolkar, Dr. Solanki, S. K. Bole, J. K. Mehta and K. L.
Jhaveri.
3
What follows is reproduced from The Bombay Chronicle.
2

64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of the Bombay Board in renting three Improvement Trust chawls and giving them for
the use of Harijans. He also desired that the Local Board should exert its influence
with Hindu landlords to see that they let out their houses for Harijans, and also
persuade Hindu owners of restaurants to remove the bar on Harijans. Mahatmaji asked
the Board to persuade individual Hindus to engage Harijans as domestic servants and
employees in offices. He impressed upon the Board the fact that while everywhere he
found littlle hostility to the cause of removal of untouchability there was everywhere
indifference and inertia. He wanted the Harijan Sangh to fight this inertia. He aslo
promised to give sympathetic consideration in regard to the allocation of the
collections and make his recommendation to the Board.1
In answer to a question, Gandhiji said Harijan work had nothing to do with
politics. The Sangh approached it purely from the religious and the social standpoint.
The Sangh was, therefore, open to all. Indeed, he would like all the offices to be filled
by non-Congressmen, if they would come. Congressmen should take pride in
working under them. This work of mighty reform in Hinduism could not be a
monopoly of any party or group. He was glad to be anble to say that during his tour
he had found in many places that Government were working unstintingly under nonCongressmen.
Harijan, 29-6-1934; also The Bombay Chronicle, 15-6-1934

91. INTERVIEW TO MEMBERS OF GANDHI SEVA SENA
BOMBAY,

June 14, 1934
The next appointement was with the sisters led by Shrimati Gosibehn
Captain. They had a great deal of silent service to their credit. But Gosibehn would
not detain Gandhiji with a recital of those services. She wanted him to speak to the
lukewarm, of whom she said they had their fair share. That gave Gandhiji the
opportunity of speaking to them on the necessity of dealing with the root evil.
What were the weak of body to do? Gandhiji said it was easy enough for such to do
one thing. They could keep a Harijan boy or girl to serve them. Given the change of
heart and willingness to serve, there was limitless scope for all to serve. What were
the women to do where the elders were opposed to the reform? For them no doubt the
difficulty was great. But so was the opportunity for work. They had to commence
with the conversion of their elders, and this they could do by gentleness and
firmness. They must be prepared to suffer for their convictions. Character played a
great part in every movement of reform. Only the pure of heart could touch the hearts
of their neighbours.2
1
The Bombay Provincial Board had requested Gandhiji to get the Central Board
to permit them to retain 75 per cent of the collections made in Bombay instead of 50.
2
What follows is reproduced from The Bombay Chronicle.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

65

Mahatma Gandhi in the course of his address advised women ot take an increasing interest in the work for the uplift of Harijans and spread knowledge about
health, hygiene and cleanliness among the Harijan womenfolk.
Harijan, 29-6-1934; also The Bombay Chronicle, 15-6-1934

92. NOTES
THE ‘J. K. WELL FUND’1
I can easily emphasize the appeal made by Thakkar Bapa,
published in the last issue of the Harijan, asking for donations to a
fund for constructing wells for Harijans. In walking through the Puri
and Cuttack Districts, I have observed scarcity of water almost
everywhere, and the reader can imagine the plight of Harijans when
there is scarcity all over. This is a charity to which all sanatanist
reformers and others can subscribe; and let it be remembered that,
whilst unreasoned prejudice may prevent Harijans from making use of
one of the primary necessities of life, every well constructed for the
use of these will relieve not only their distress but will add to the
general supply of water. All wells constructed for the sake of Harijans
will be available to all who care to make use of them. I hope,
therefore, that there will be a generous response to the appeal made by
Thakkar Bapa.
A R IGHT S TEP

The C. P. Government deserves congratulations for announcing
that henceforth the so-called Depressed Classes are to be known as
Harijans, and criminal tribes as wandering tribes. Both the names
‘Depressed Classes’ and ‘criminal tribes’ were certainly offensive.
And let us hope that the other Governments will copy the good
example set by the C.P. Government.
Harijan, 15-6-1934

93. HARIJAN V. NON-HARIJAN
“Rather than do constructive work among Harijans, will it not
be better to create intense dissatisfaction amongst them with their
condition and thus promote such self-helf as they can generate among
1

A gentleman who wanted to remain anonymous had donated in June 1933 a
sum of Rs. 25,000 to be paid in instalments of Rs. 2,000 per month for constructing
wells for Harijans all over the country. The amount was called under this name after it
was fully paid up.

66

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

themselves? It is no use your trying to convert the savarnas.” This
was one of the questions that was asked at a meeting of workers. As it
is an important question, it is as well to give the gist of the answer
given by me at the meeting. The question betrays ignorance of the
whole scope of the movement. To create dissatisfaction among the
Harijans can bring no immediate relief to them and can only tend to
perpetuate a vicious division amongst Hindus. The object of the
movement is to do away with this utterly unnatural division and to
secure for Harijans the simple justice to which they are entitled at the
hands of savarna Hindus. Thus the movement is one of repentance
and reparation. Hence it is confined, on the one hand, to constructive
work among Harijans and, on the other, to conversion of savarnas by
persuasion, arguments and, above all, by correct conduct on the part
of the reformers. If the latter have gentleness, forbearance and
patience, what is scoffed at as irreligion by sanatanists will presently be
regarded as the essence of religion. Has not Manu said, “Know that to
be dharma which is generally observed by the learned, the good and
those who are free from passion and hate and which is felt in one’s
heart”? If, therefore, the reformers possess the qualities insisted upon
by Manu, there will be no doubt whatsoever that the hearts of the
sanatanists will respond. Whether they do or not, the service rendered
to suppressed humanity by reformers will be a substantial contribution
to human progress and will be its own reward. It will certainly find
honourable mention in God’s eternal book of life.
Another question discussed was, “Do you not think that the
improvement of the condition of starving peasants in more important
than the service of Harijans? Will you not, therefore, form peasant
organizations which will naturally include Harijans in so far as their
economic condition is concerned?”
I wish that what the questioner says were true. Unfortunately, the
betterment of the economic condition of peasants will not necessarily
include the betterment of that of the Harijans. The peasant who is not
a Harijan can rise as high as he likes or opportunity permits him, but
not so the poor suppressed Harijan. The latter cannot own and use
land as freely as the savarna peasant. He cannot command the
labour that he needs. In many places he cannot even buy the seed he
requires. And assume for one moment that the Harijan peasant is able
to better his economic condition equally with the non-Harijan. Even
so, he will still labour under the numerous social disabilities he was
labouring under before. Only, because of the very betterment, he will
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

67

feel them much more keenly than when he was a pauper. Therefore, a
special organization for the service of Harijans is a peremptory want
in order to deal with the special and peculiar disabilities of harijans.
Substantial improvement of these, the lowest strata of society, must
include that of the whole of society. Moreover, the ordinary peasant is
by no means neglected. For instance, the All-India Spinners’
Association is solely engaged in bettering the peasant’s economic
condition by educating him to add a handicraft to husbandry and thus
have an automatic insurance against famine and always a substantial
addition to his scanty income.
Harijan, 15-6-1934

94. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, BOMBAY 1
June 15, 1934
Gandhiji, at the outset, asked his audience if he was sufficiently audible and the
ladies occupying the balconies replied cheerfully they were able to hear him . . .
In the course of his address to them, Gandhiji said that he was glad he was
speaking to women before he would speak to the men, for women were superior to
men in faith and love, and his battle would be more than half won if he could enlist
their whole-hearted support. He hoped that the women of Bombay would rise to the
occasion. Women held the key position in society and it would be a tragedy if they
blocked the path of reform.
Untouchability had its origin not in religion, but in mere pride of race and the
tendency of the strong to keep down the weak. It had persisted so long because
Harijans were cut off from all contact and consigned to the worst places. If, however,
they were allowed freely to mix with all classes of society and to practise all
professions on a

footing of equality, we would in a few years be surprised that they

should ever have been looked down upon.
The reformer’s was an uphill task, as we had imported religion into untouchability. Sacrifice was essential; but service was impossible without sacrifice, and no
sacrifice could be too great to be offered in order to wipe out the deep and longstanding stain of untouchability.
Appealing for funds, Gandhiji hastened to clear any impression in their minds
that he was collecting money always. He was there to ask for the support of the
women of Bombay for the cause of Harijans, which was dearer to him than anything
1

68

The first and last paragraphs are from The Bombay Chronicle.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

else. Before they paid the money, they should realize that they were paying for what
they had done or allowed to be done in the past.
Harijan, 29-6-1934; also The Bombay Chronicle, 16-6-1934

95. INTERVIEW TO B. R. AMBEDKAR
BOMBAY

June 16, 1934
In the afternoon Dr. Ambedkar interviewed Gandhiji along with Dr. Solanki
and other friends1 of his. Gandhiji asked Dr. Ambedkar for a criticism of the work of
the Harijan Sevak Sangh. The worthy Doctor suggested that the Sangh might
economize on education and medical relief, as these were attended to by Government
and there was a risk of duplication of effort in these matters. Again, education, in the
first place, only benefited the individual; whether it would benefit society or not
would depend upon what attitude the educated individual took up towards society. He
would like the Sangh to concentrate on the primary object of securing full civic rights
for Harijans, such as the right to draw water from public wells and to send children to
public schools, without any discrimination being exercised against them. As regards
cases of maltreatment of Harijans by villagers, such as those adduced by Dr.
Ambedkar, Gandhiji said the Sangh was bound to deal with them. In fact, steps had
actually been taken in numerous cases with more or less success. But in future
Gandhiji would be glad if the Doctor was good enough to send him full facts about
every incident of that description. In course of his tour of villages he had noticed that
a change for the better was coming over them, but progress in that direction would be
accelerated if he had the Doctor’s valued co-operation. As regards education, Gandhiji
did not think there was overlapping. In fact, the Sangh was unable to cope with the
whole demand, as the right type of teachers were not readily available.

Harijan, 29-6-1934

1

G. V. Naik, Amritrao Khambe and Baburao Gaekwad

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

69

96. SPEECH AT MEETING OF CONGRESS PARLIAMENTARY
BOARD, BOMBAY
June 16, 1934
1

After his consultation Gandhiji addressed the Board in a speech which is
described as one of the most moving and earnest speeches that he has ever delivered.
The main trend of the speech was that the Congress claimed to stand for the Muslims
as well as the Hindus and the Sikhs and other communities and that, therefore,
nothing should be done that would have the effect of making the Muslims feel that the
Congress had departed from that position.
The majority of the Muslims had accepted the Communal Award. It was their
duty to bring about such a voluntary settlement of the Communal Award as would
satisfy all communities. They should not go to a third party to secure a modification
of the Award. So long, however, as a voluntary settlement was not brought about, it
would be betrayal of the Muslims to shake their confidence in the Congress by taking
up a position of uncompromising opposition to their view of the Communal Award.

The Bombay Chronicle, 17-6-1934

97. SPEECH AT AZAD MAIDAN, BOMBAY2
June 16, 1934
I am thankful to you who have taken the trouble to attend this
meeting, the continuous downpour of rain notwithstanding. But,
fortun-ately, it has ceased to rain just at this moment, and let me
deliver briefly my message to you before it recommences.
I must confess it was with great hesitation that I decided to come
to Bombay. For one thing, the labourers in the local mills are at
present on strike. I call myself a labourer and, ever since I was in
1

With M. M. Malaviya who, along with M. S. Aney and some other members,
had been pleading for the rejection of the Communal Award by the Parliamentary
Board which met in Mani Bhuvan on June 15 and 16. The nationalist muslims had
been supporting the view of the Ranchi Conference, that the Award should be neither
accepted nor rejected, until an agreement was brought about between Hindus, Muslims
and Sikhs. The Board, therefore, sought Gandhiji’s advice. The Congress Working
Committee, which met in Mani Bhuvan on June 17 at the parliamentary Board’s
request, accepted Gandhiji’s view. For the Working Committee Resolution, vide
“Letter from N. C. Kelkar”, 22-6-1934
2
This appeared under the title “At the Maidan” with the following introductory
note by Valji G. Desai : “On 16th instant, punctually at the advertised time, Gandhiji
came in spite of rain to address the public meeting. Sheth Mathuradas [Vissanji,
Chairman Harijan Sevak Sangh] presided. The following is the substance of his
speech.”

70

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

South Africa, I have tried to live a labourer’s life, with considerable
success. You can, therefore, easily realize how deeply I sympathize
with workers in their distress. My sympathy is, if possible, all the
greater, because there are large numbers of Harijans among them. I
believe I have some ability as a peacemaker in industrial disputes, but
I am sorry I cannot use it in the present case for reasons I need not
explain here. Of course, I have no direct contact with labour here and
less, perhaps, with their leaders. Then, again, trade in Bombay has not
yet emerged out of the valley of depression, and only recently you
have made a handsome contribution to the Bihar Relief Fund.
I cannot set much store by your purse of Rs. 39,000 which, as
the Chairman has said, might go up to Rs. 50,000. You have always
showered upon me your love as well as your gold. But there is an
essential difference between this purse and the funds you have raised
on other occasions. Your Harijan purse is part of your penance for
our maltreatment of Harijans. If the payment is not a token of such
penance, it is absolutely worthless in my estimation. And if it is
penance, you give to the utmost of your ability. Indeed, I know of a
friend who has given up certain necessary articles of food ever since
my fast1 and has thus been able regularly to remit two rupees and
four annas every month. This two rupees is more valuable than Rs.
2,000 of a wealthy person. Even a cowrie honestly acquired and
sincerely given is a pearl beyond price.
I am certain that we shall be blotted out of the Book of Life, if
we do not completely destroy untouchability while still there is time. I
do not know of a sin more heinous than that in the whole catalogue of
sins, for it is practised in the name of religion. It is one thing to fall
because we are weak; it is another thing altogether to fall and to
imagine at the same time that we are rising. How can we dare to treat
our brothers, every whit as good as ourselves, as untouchables by
birth? You must have heard about Shri Parikshitlal, the indefatigable
Harijan servant, who drank water at a parab and then went to Harijan
quarters. For this he was severely beaten by a Hindu constable in
Baroda State.2 This shows you cannot distinguish between a Harijan
and a non-Harijan. It also shows that, if you are a Harijan, you are
done for. You may not expect justice. You have no right even to
1
From May 8 to 29, 1933, undertaken “for the purification of self and
associates”; vide “Statement of Fast”, 30-4-1933
2
Vide also “Letter to Parikshitlal L. Majmudar”, 11-6-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

71

quench your thirst. What a hue and cry would have been raised, if a
political worker had been lathi-charged by the police? But neither we
here nor the people in Baroda State seem to have raised their voice
against the treatment accorded to Shri Parikshitlal.
It will not do to say that Harijans eat carrion, drink liquor and
have dirty habits. What else can we expect if we segregate them and
kick them at every step? We keep them in places unfit even for cattle,
and then affect surprise if they develop any bad habits. But are we
prepared to consider them as part and parcel of our society if they
shed all evil habits? The fact is we must bear with them and try to
improve them. My heart wept within me when I observed the housing
conditions of the Harijan employees of Bombay Municipality.
Bombay is beautiful, indeed, but wherein does its beauty consist—in
Malabar Hill or in the Kachrapatti at Mahalakshmi? I tell you we can
live in equanimity on the Ridge only after decent housing conditions
have been secured for these Harijans. And the expenditure involved in
this modest programme is a mere flea-bite for a Municipality, which
counts its income in crores, and for the citizens of no mean city who
once gave away 43 lakhs of rupees in a single month. I beseech you
to have a look at the plague-spots in Bombay and to move the
Municipality to deal with them at once. How would you like to live
near a sewer even for a single day?
If you go to Walpakhadi, you will have an opportunity of seeing
what a change for the better can be brought about by a handful of
workers like Shri Purushottamdas, Shri Morarji Sheth and Shri
Sopariwala. Even their work is not perfect, but it looms large in our
horizon, as there is little like it besides. It is easy to criticize workers
and to say, for instance, that the members of the Provincial Board sit
in armchairs all day long and should, therefore, be driven out of
office. We love to criticize, but we do not know how to galvanize our
organizations to activity. We never offer them our services, and
without thus offering our services we have no right to pass mere
destructive criticism. I freely admit that there is much room for
improvement in the Sangh’s work. But they are working honestly and
to the best of their capacity. We must appreciate their work, and then
suggest fresh lines of activity, such as, for example, establishment of
an eating-house where Harijans would be served with respect in
common with the rest of the citizens. I may say in passing that for
people thus to sit in a line at dinner is not inter-dining. I therefore
hope that everyone of you will co-operate with the Sangh and thus
72

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

increase its capacity for usefulness. And you must not say that you are
unfit to render service. If only you have love for the cause, everything
else will be easy. 1
Harijan, 29-6-1934

98. TELEGRAM TO PURUSHOTTAMDAS TANDON 2
[On or after June 16, 1934 ] 3
IF
IS

CONGRESS
NO

MEN

LEGAL

BAR

ELECT

YOU

AGAINST

KNOWING

HOLDING

YOUR

VIEWS

THERE

OFFICE.

The Bombay Chronicle, 26-6-1934

99. TELEGRAM TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
[On or before June 17, 1934 ] 4
JUST

READ

YOU

WILL

SAD
BEAR

NEWS 5 .
THE

SUCH

WAS GOD’S

LOSS

WILL I

KNOW

BRAVELY.

The Hindu, 18-6-1934

100. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
June 17, 1934
CHI. AMTUSSALAAM,

Have patience. If possible, I will certainly take you to Poona
with me. But patience you should have.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 309
1
At the conclusion of the meeting, Gandhiji auctioned several articles which
were presented to him.
2
The telegram was in reply to the addressee’s dated June 16, 1934, which
read : “Regarding the Working Committee resolution expecting the Congress workers
to render assistance to the Parliamentary Board kindly wire opinion whether those
Congressmen who refuse to take part in elections should remain on Congress
executive bodies.”
3
ibid
4
The telegram was published under the date-line, “Coimbatore, June 17,
1934”.
5
Of the death of addressee’s wife

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

73

101. INTERVIEW TO ALL-INDIA SWADESHI
LEAGUE DEPUTATION 1
BOMBAY,

[June 17, 1934 ] 2
During the last few months, Mr. Gandhi has been approached by several
workers in swadeshi for a comprehensive definition of ‘swadeshi’ for their guidance.
In trying to prepare an exhaustive definition and in the course of discussion with coworkers in the extreme South, he discovered that such a definition was almost
impossible—it was a spirit that was growing and undergoing variations daily. He
suggested the following workable formula for the guidance of the All-India Swadeshi
League and kindred organizations:

“For purposes of the All-India Swadeshi League, swadeshi covers useful articles manufactured in India through small industries
which are in need of popular education for their support and which
will accept the guidance of the All-India Swadeshi League in
regulating prices and in the matter of wages and welfare of labour
under their control. Swadeshi will, therefore, exclude articles
manufactured through large and organized industries which are in no
need of services of the All-India Swadeshi League and which can or
do command State aid.”
My formula as stated clearly is for the guidance of the Swadeshi
League. It does not purport to cover the whole field of swadeshi. It is
only by way of suggestion to the League to restrict the scope of its
work to the encouragement and propagation of minor, particularly
home industries to the exclusion of major organized ones. The object
of making this suggestion is not to decry major industries or to ignore
the benefit those industries have bestowed and in future may bestow
on the country. But a body like the Swadeshi League need not
become self-appointed advertising agents of those industries as it has
hitherto been. They have ample resources at their command and they
are well able to take care of themselves. The spirit of swadeshi has
been sufficiently generated and it helps them without any effort of
swadeshi organizations. These, if they are to be useful, have to
concentrate their attention on the struggling industries. Any attempt to
1

It consisted of Lalubhai Samaldas, K. M. Munshi, Mrs. Raiji, J. A. D.
Naoroji, S. A. Brelvi, Vaikunth L. Mehta, B. G. Kher, Maganlal, Purushottamdas and
Dhirajlal Modi.
2
From The Bombay Chronicle

74

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

advertise the wares of large organized industries can only result in
sending up the prices. This will be unjust to the consumer. It is a waste
of effort to bring into being a philanthropic organization to help a
successful business organization. We may not delude ourselves by the
wish and belief that our efforts have helped the growth and
advancement of those industries. It will be cheap self-satisfaction not
substantiated by facts. I recall a conversation I had with Fazalbhai in
1920, when I was on the eve of launching movement for swadeshi. He
characteristically said to me: ‘If you Congressmen become advertising
agents of ours, you will do no good to the country except to put a
premium on our wares and raise the prices of our manufacturers.’ His
argument was sound. But he was nonplussed when I informed him
that our object was to encourage hand-spun and hand-woven khadi
which had been woefully neglected and which needed to be revived if
starving unemployed millions were to be served. But khaddar is not
the only such struggling industry. I therefore suggest you direct your
attention and efforts to all small-scale minor unorganized industries
that are today in need of public support. They may be wiped out if no
effort is made in their behalf. Some of these are being pushed back
by large-scale industries which flood the markets with their
manufactures. It is these that cry for your help.
Take the sugar industry. The largest major industry next to
textile is that of the manufacture of sugar. It stands in no need of our
assistance. Sugar factories are fast multiplying. Popular agencies have
done little to help the growth of this industry. It is indebted for its
growth to favourable legislation. And today the industry is so
prosperous and expanding that production of jaggery is becoming a
thing of the past. It is admittedly superior to refined sugar in its
nutritive value. It is this very valuable cottage industry that cries out
for your help. This, by itself, furnishes a large scope for research and
substantial help. We have to investigate ways and means of keeping it
alive. This is but an illustration of what I mean. I have no doubt in my
mind that we add to national wealth, if we help small-scale industries. I
have no doubt also that true swadeshi consists in encouraging and
reviving these home industries. That alone can help the dumb
millions. It also provides an outlet for creative faculties and
resourcefulness of the people. It can usefully employ hundreds of
youths in the country who are in need of employment. It may harness
all the energy that at present runs to waste. I do not want anyone of
those who are engaged in more remunerative occupations to leave
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

75

them and take to minor industries just as I did with regard to the
spinning-wheel. I would ask only those who suffer from
unemployment and penury to take to some of these industries and
add a little to their slender resources.
It will thus be seen that the change in activity that I have
suggested to you does in no way conflict with the interests of major
industries. I want to say only this much: Treat your national servants
well, restrict your activities to minor industries and let major ones help
themselves as they are doing today. Minor industries, I conceive, will
not replace major ones but will supplement them. Of large industries, I
even aspire to induce owners to take interest in this work, which is
purely humanitarian. I am a well-wisher of the mill-owners, too, and
they will bear me out when I say that I have not failed to help them
when I could.
The Hindu, 26-7-1934; also The Bombay Chronicle, 18-6-1934

102. LETTER TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA1
June 18, 1934
BHAI SAHEB,

I was deeply pained by what Jamnalalji told me today. What you
have not done throughout your life, how will you do it today? This is
not possible. Please give up the idea [of resigning] and listen to your
friend. There can be no untoward result at all. Please come over to
Poona. We shall talk over the matter there.
Yours,

MOHANDAS

[From Hindi]
Reminiscences of Gandhiji, p. 209

1

Abul Kalam Azad, Dr. B. C. Roy and Jamnalal Bajaj met Gandhiji early in the
morning in connection with the reported intention of M. S. Aney and M. M.
Malaviya to resign from the Congress as a protest against the Working Committee’s
resolution on the Communal Award (vide Appendix II). Gandhiji, who was observing
silence, gave them this and the following letter to be delivered to the addressees.

76

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

103. LETTER TO M. S. ANEY
June 18, 1934
1

DEAR BAPUJI ANEY ,

You dare not resign. And in any case not without a proper fight
with me. I would undertake to prove to you that by remaining in both
the Committees you will do no violence to your principle.2
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Reminiscences of Gandhiji, p. 209

104. SILENCE DAY NOTES 3
June 18, 1934
It is painful, but if it must happen it must be endured. The
Congress will survive the shock.
I am quite clear in my mind that the elections must be faced.
Such a big organization as the Congress cannot allow its fate to be
decided by purely personal considerations. I anticipate no untoward
results, if we regulate our work resolutely, calmly and honestly.
I am certain that nothing else can be done now. I cannot
measure the amount of damage that it will do to the country if we
retrace our steps now. Whatever it is, we cannot put a stop to this at this
stage. 4
You, the members of the Parliamentary Board, who are here (in
Bombay) may meet once again, and if you arrive at the conclusion
that if these two resignations stand, it would be impossible to proceed
with the election work, you may advise the Working Committee
accordingly. I am firm in my opinion expressed to you; but it has no
value, because I have not to run the elections.
Reminiscences of Gandhiji, pp. 209-10
1

Popularly known as Loknayak Bapuji Aney
Vide also the preceding item.
3
According to the source, these were written after Abul Kalam Azad, Dr. B. C.
Roy and Jamnalal Bajaj had reported to Gandhiji at about 10.30 a.m. that Aney and
Madan Mohan Malaviya were not prepared to withdraw their resignations; vide also
the two preceding items.
4
The source has this paragraph in Hindi. According to Chandrashankar
Shukla, what follows was written when “Bhulabhai Desai, who had just dropped in,
strongly supported the plea of the other three leaders”.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

77

105. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
June 18, 1934
CHI. JAMNA,

I got your letter. I didn’t get the previous one. But Prithuraj tells
me that it was given to me. You have not said in your letter how you
are faring. I cannot write more just now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 885. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

106. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
BOMBAY,

June 18, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letters. But how could I get the time to reply to them
immediately?
Jamnalalji’s dissatisfaction with Keshu is increasing. The latter
has not arrived here yet. I can’t say what he will do. Tell Santok as
much as you think advisable. I will write more when I get time.
We shall talk about Wardha, etc., when you come and see me at
some place. A letter for Jamnadas is enclosed. It is difficult to know
how to please him. If you can bring him along with you, do so. I
think he will listen to you.
I will have a further talk with Dr. Sharma when he comes to
Poona. Amtussalaam has been operated upon for piles. She is in Dr.
Mehta’s hospital. I met Amina and Qureshi. Qureshi will come to
Ahmedabad.
I will speak to Mathuradas Sheth or write to him afterwards.
Manilal will not pay the subscription. It is about clearance time now,
and so I don’t write more.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8403. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

107. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
June 18, 1934
CHI. VIDYA,

I hope you are keeping your promise. You should never cry but
should always be smiling, should work hard and not worry about
marrying. You should tell yourself that you will marry when God
sends a suitable young man. One who is always absorbed in work is
never troubled by other thoughts. Write to me from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 9586. Courtesy: Ravindra R. Patel

108. TELEGRAM TO HIRALAL SHARMA1
P OONA,

June 20, 1934
S HARMA
C ARE, “S HREE”
BOMBAY
FIVE

MORNING

PARNAKUTI.

BAPU
From a facsimile: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha, 1932-48,
facing p. 73

109. LETTER TO MIRABEHN 2
June 20, 1934
CHI. MIRA,

What a parting! It was a chilly parting. But I know that I shall
1

The addressee had sought an appointment with Gandhiji on June 21, 1934,
to discuss with him Ramdas’s treatment.
2
In Bapu’s Letters to Mira, Mirabehn explains : “I accompanied Bapu
throughout the whole of the Central and South Indian part of the tour. By the time we
had come to North again as far as Bombay, an inner urge came to me that I should go
to England and speak of Bapu and his message to the people, specially of the working
classes. I went straight to Bapu and told him. He said I should go and, within five
days, I was on a ship sailing to Europe. The following letter is the first Bapu wrote to
me after my departure.”
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

79

never have deeper or richer yet unselfish affection bestowed upon me.
That very affection has embarrassed me. But that is a passing phase.
May God keep you and bless your effort. You will stay out as long as
necessary and return as soon as you can.
Give my love to the sage and his sister1 . You will not fail to see
2
Efy . My love to her and all the other friends.
I hope your things came in quite in time.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6286. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9752

110 . LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
June 21, 1934
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I could read your letter only this morning. You may certainly
live with Krishnan Nair at the Ashram. One learns by doing. There is
no need at present to join Vinoba. No time to write more. Are you
keeping well?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2414

111. SPEECH AT MAHILA ASHRAM, POONA 3
June 21, 1934
At the Ashram Gandhiji was garlanded by Harijan girls and, in the course of his
address to the girls, he said that he owed his first acquaintance with Professor Karve
and the great work he was doing for the women of India to the late Mr. Gokhale, who
desired him to see for himself what one man could do in the cause of women’s
progress. Since then his ship had long sailed on troubled waters, with the result that
he could pay them a second visit only after about 20 years, and that, too, by accident.
He did not have enough time even for his immediate work, but still he was glad to be
in their midst. He hoped that the girls, when they grew up, would so regulate their
lives as to be worthy of the great sacrifices of the Karves in their interest. With such
an example before them, they dare not lead lives of luxury and self-indulgence. There

1
2
3

80

Romain Rolland and Madeleine Rolland
Efy Aristarchi
This and the following item have been extracted from “Weekly Letter”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

was an old saying in Sanskrit that learning is not learning, if it does not lead to
deliverance from yet become popular, though necessary. They could not serve the
nation properly without a working knowledge of the national language. And they
could easily acquire a mastery over Hindi, as it was closely akin to Marathi as well as
to other languages of North India. He would, therefore, expect the girls to spend
themselves in the service of their less fortunate sisters.
He was sorry to note that Hindi was only optional and not compulsory in a
national institution such as the Women’s University. He would suggest that they
should have English optional and Hindi compulsory, for all girls would take up
English as a matter of course owing to the prevalent fashion, but they would not so
readily take up Hindi. When he himself was a student at school, his head master had
made physical culture, which was then unpopular, compulsory, with a penalty of one
anna for a day’s absence from the gymnasium, which he had once to pay.1 The same
rule applied to Hindi, which had not

112. SPEECH AT STUDENTS’ MEETING, POONA2
June 21, 1934
Gandhiji gave them his impressions of the Harijan quarters he had visited and
advised them to go there with brooms, baskets and spades and give those places a
thorough spring-cleaning. Then, again, they could draw up maps of localities and
take a census of the Harijan population. They could help the Harijans to improve their
houses by raising the height of the walls where necessary. They could teach the
children as well as the adults, not making a fetish of the three R’s, but attending to
sanitation, hygiene and abstinence from liquor, in the first instance.

Harijan, 6-7-1934

113. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 22, 1934
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter and postcard. God be with you. I am in the
midst of appointments without break. God be with you.
Love from us all.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6287. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9753

1

Vide “An Autobiography”
In their address the students had expressed their willingness to render Harijan
service and asked Gandhiji to guide them in the matter.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

81

114. LETTER TO RAJENDRA PRASAD
June 22, 1934
BHAI RAJENDRA PRASAD,

I had your letter from Jiradei. Not a day passes when we do not
think of you. I hope you are composed now. How much time do you
need to resolve your domestic affairs?1 What about the expenses?
Where will Janardan 2 live now? Write to me about all this. I hope the
relief work is going on.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Hindi: C. W. 9716. Courtesy: Dr. Rajendra Prasad

115. INTERVIEW TO NATIONAL EDUCATION WORKERS 3
P OONA,

June 22, 1934
In the course of his conversation Mr. Gandhi said that institutions that are
under ban by the Government should not try to get the ban lifted by applying to the
Government or by other means. He further emphasized that as municipal and local
bodies were semi-Governmental, help from such bodies should not be taken for
national education.
Asked if Harijans, while getting the benefits of national education from
Congress organization, should also receive education from Government schools, Mr.
Gandhi said that as long as we are not considering Harijans as part of our society we
cannot apply the same rules of national education to them. They can adopt all means
to get education either at national schools or Government schools.
Questioned if the objects of national education should be to produce village
workers in contra-distinction to producing self-supporting national-minded workers,
Mr. Gandhi said that the attention of workers should be directed to the
creation of village workers as opposed to city workers. That should be the primary
object of national education. Mr. Gandhi opined that primary education was most
needed in the system of national education. He approved of the ideal of an All-India
1

The addressee’s elder brother Mahendra Prasad who had been in charge of all
domestic responsibilities had died earlier in the month; vide “Telegram to Rejendra
Prasad”, 5-6-1934
2
Son of Mahendra Prasad
3
Arranged under the auspices of the Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapith; a
questionnaire was presented to Gandhiji by the workers.

82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

National Education Board, but said that the time was not yet ripe for such measures,
but it depended on workers to prove its utility and for bringing such a proposal before
the next Wroking Committee meeting. Mr. Gandhi emphasized the need for public
education as part of national education.

The Hindu, 23-6-1934

116. LETTER TO AMBUJAMMAL
June 23, 1934
CHI. AMBUJAM,

I have your two letters. I get very little time for writing letters.
Hence I am not able to answer your letters promptly. I hope all aftereffects of the fever have disappeared now. I think I have already
acknowledged receipt of the Ramayana. You should stop worrying.
Become an expert in Hindi.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
What is the difference between Amma and Ammal? In Hindi we
say Parvatibai, or devi or behn. What is the usage in Tamil?
From the Hindi original: Ambujammal Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

117. SPEECH AT MEETING TO COMMEMORATE
THE PROPHET’S DEATH 1
P OONA,

June 23, 1934
My friendship with the Mussalmans does not date from
yesterday but from the time when I was a young man fifty years ago.
My first visit to South Africa was in connection with the affairs of a
Mussalman firm in that country. And there I had the privilege of
coming into intimate touch with Muslim friends, for years together. In
India too, you know, what close association there was between the Ali
Brothers and myself. And although Maulana Shaukat Ali and I have
1

Held under the auspices of Anjuman-i-Fide-e-Islam. Gandhiji spoke in Hindi

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

83

appeared to have been estranged from each other, he knows that he
has me always in his pocket.
Such being my relations with Mussalmans, I felt it to be my duty
to study the life of the Prophet. I had tried to do this in South Africa
but then I did not know sufficiently. In India imprisonment brought
me good luck and thus I had the opportunity to read Maulana
Shibli’s biography of the Prophet which the late Hakim Saheb
Ajmalkhan was good enough to send me at my request. At the same
time I also read the volume on companions of the Prophet. I had read
English works on Islam and the Prophet.
These studies led me to the conclusion that the Koran and the
Bible were sacred books for me and not alone the Vedas and the Gita.
Hazrat Mahomed was a great Prophet and so was Jesus Christ. From
my reading I received the impression that the Prophet was a seeker of
Truth. He was godfearing. In this I know I am not telling you
anything new. I am only describing to you how I was impressed by
his life. He suffered endless persecution. He was brave and feared no
man but God alone. He did what he considered to be right in scorn of
consequences. He was never found to say one thing and do another.
He acted as he felt. If there was a change in his opinion, the next day
he responded to the change without counting the cost and regardless
of popular censure or opposition.
The Prophet was a Fakir. He had renounced everything. He
could have commanded wealth if he had so desired. Even as you
would, I shed tears of joy when I read of the privations he, his family
and companions suffered voluntarily. How can a Truth-seeker like me
help respecting one whose mind was constantly fixed on God, who
ever walked in God’s fear and who had boundless compassion for
mankind ?
You all read the Koran. But how few put into practice what you
read? You will perhaps retort that, if you do not live up to the precepts
of the Koran, nor do the Hindus act according to the precepts of the
Gita, and you will be right. It only comes to this that if both the
communities followed the teachings of their respective faiths,
communal quarrels would be a thing of the past. But at present some
men in both communities appear to have taken leave of their senses,
and are absorbed in slinging mud at one another. I will not have
addressed this meeting in vain, if a single Mussalman will thereby
come to a true understanding of the situation, and instead of picking
holes learns to love other communities as well as his own.
The Hindu, 29-6-1934
84

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

118. LETTER TO CHARU PROBHA SEN GUPTA
June 24, 1934
DEAR CHARU PROBHA,

You should live where you think best. Your son has come to a
wise decision. Living honourably is to live on one’s own body labour.
That is or should be our ideal. We can only go near it as much as we
can.
Love.
BAPU
S HRI C HARU P ROBHA S EN
R AJBARI, B ENGAL
From a photostat: G. N. 8707. Also C. W. 1493. Courtesy: A. K. Sen

119. LETTER TO BEHCHARDAS J. DOSHI
June 24, 1934
BHAI BEHCHARDAS,

I don’t remember having received your previous postcard.
There is no plan about my staying in Delhi. But do see me when I
pass that way.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 1341

120. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[June 24, 1934 ] 1
I should certainly be very happy if Father and Mother come and
see me at Wadhwan. But that will be night time. Why should we give
them that trouble? I get their blessings whenever I need them, and I
am content with that. However, if their love for me draws them to
Wadhwan by all means let them come.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8404. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi
1

This message was conveyed in a letter dated June 24, 1934 from Prabhavati
to Narandas Gandhi.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

85

121. LETTER TO KRISHNADAS JAJU
June 24, 1934
BHAI JAJUJI,

I have your sweet letter.
In courtship there is necessarily some mental unchastity. In
order to avoid this and the risk of an unsuitable choice being made in
an impure state of mind, I have been placing on the parents the
responsibility of making preliminary enquiries and selection. So far
there has been no disadvantage in this method. Two sons of mine got
married when they were around thirty. The brides of both were
chosen by me in the first instance. And in the case of Devdas the
initial choice was certainly his but as soon as the idea came to him he
voluntarily confided in [me] and Rajagopalachari and made a proper
and successful effort to satisfy us. When marriages are contracted by
adults the fear of courtship is always there. This is a part of dharma
itself and dharma literally means the choice between good and evil
that a man has to make every moment. Your question implies another,
that of co-education. I have doubts about girls and boys studying
together, I have not yet formed any decisive opinion. As our
experiment is only in its primary stage mistakes are bound to occur
and imperfections there are. But the experiment is worth a trial. On
the whole it appears to be worth while though we have had quite a few
bitter experiences too. If you have anything more to ask in this
connection, do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 3148

86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

122. SPEECH AT DISTRICT LOCAL BOARD MEETING,
POONA1
June 24, 1934
2

Gandhiji congratulated the Board on their work, but wanted them to insist on
quality. He was confident that the economic distress among Harijans and insanitation
in Harijan quarters would speedily vanish, if only Local Boards and Municipalities
satisfactorily discharged their duties towards Harijans. They must see that the Harijan
children were properly taught in the preparatory schools, and teaching in their case
meant at first not the three R’s so much as keeping their persons and clothes clean.
They would do well to institute prizes to be won by teachers who best attended to their
Harijan pupils. Then, again, Harijans were often not allowed to draw water from
public wells, though they were legally entitled to do so. Wherever such was the case,
they must help them to exercise their undoubted rights and, in the mean while, not
leave them without water but construct special wells for them.

Harijan, 6-7-1934

123. INTERVIEW TO HARIJAN WORKERS
P OONA,

June 24, 1934
Gandhiji was with over 100 workers for one and a half hours and answered all
sorts of questions with his usual patience. The central point of his answers was that
the workers should settle in the villages and work both among savarna Hindus and
Harijans.
A Harijan asked if it was right to encourage Harijan boys to become B. A. s or
M. A.s, when unemployment was rife among graduates, and whether it would not be
better if they took to technical education. Gandhiji replied that they could hardly
expect Harijans to go in for industrial education before it had successfully appealed to
the savarnas. And it was possible that, even if mere academic training was now no
good for savarnas, it had its own value for Harijans. For instance, he had long
thought Dr. Ambedkar to be a Brahmin. He was equal in intelligence and ability to the
tallest among us. Such distinction had its undoubted use for Harijans. Gandhiji
himself fully believed in industrial education and wished the numerous Harijan
students would turn their attention to it. Harijan Sevak Sanghs could not force
This and the following two items have been extracted from ‘‘Weekly Letter’’.
The District Local Board presented Gandhiji with an address in which they
had given an account of the Harijan service they were rendering.
1
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

87

Harijans to such education. They had to encourage the academical side by side with the
industrial. It was for the Harijans to preach the gospel of industrial training. He hoped
Harijans would study the life and work of Booker T. Washington1 , whom he looked
upon as one of the great men of the world, and draw their inspiration from it.
As regards housing Harijans, Gandhiji said that perhaps there was not much to
do in the case of village Harijans, and, as for city-dwelling Harijans, it was the duty of
Municipalities to provide housing facilities for them; it was too big a proposition for
the Harijan Sevak Sangh. The Municipalities if they were efficient and mindful of
their duty, could solve the problem with very little expenditure.
On being asked how Harijans could assert their right to draw water from public
wells, Gandhiji said they should, if necessary, seek police aid and the protection of
courts of law for the purpose.

Harijan, 6-7-1934

124. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, POONA
June 24, 1934
The public meeting in the evening was a remarkable function. Deputations
from the various districts of Maharashtra presented Gandhiji with their respective
purses, and then Gandhiji asked Shri Shankarrao Lavate, the well-known veteran
public worker of Poona, who had come as a representative of the sanatanist
opposition, to address the meeting. Shri Lavate said that he and his sanatanist
colleagues desired removal of untouchability no less than Gandhiji himself, but they
objected to legislation affecting the Hindu community as a whole being passed with
the help of the votes of the Government as well as other communities.
Gandhiji congratulated Shri Lavate on his courtesy and extreme moderation
and was sorry that the audience should have betryaed any impatience while he was
addressing them, whereas etiquette required that they should hear speakers patiently
and not interrupt them while they were speaking. Shri Lavate was a seasoned public
worker. When he came to Poona in 1915, he was told that, if there was any true
servant of the public in Poona, it was certainly Shri Lavate. When he saw him, he was
put in mind of the rishis of old. Everyone was aware of his services in the cause of
prohibition. His regard for him was as profound as ever, though for the moment he
happened to be arrayed in opposition to himself, and he was not so simple as not to
give due consideration to the views of men like Shri Lavate. But he was afraid that
Shri Lavate was labouring under a misunderstanding. In the course of the present tour,
he had not only not canvassed votes for the Temple-entry Bill, but he had hardly ever
referred to it at all, for he believed it was a technical problem which should be left for
1

1856-1915; American Negro educator who was born a slave; founded the
Tuskegee Institute for the training of Negroes in trades and professions.

88

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the lawyers to grapple with. He was certain that it was their duty to secure the passage
of the Bill, as untouchability could not be abolished without flinging the temples
open to Harijans. But he did not want the Bill to be placed on the statute book, unless
a majority of the Hindu members of the Assembly were in favour of it. It would be
sheer violence to get the Bill passed with the help of the Muslim or Christian votes.
He assured Shri Lavate and the other sanatanist friends that their fears were
groundless. He would be very glad, indeed, if the sanatanists in Poona could join the
movement. Savarna Hindus in villages have been reported to compel Harijans to eat
carrion and carry dead cattle against their will, and assault them if they dared to
exercise their common right of drawing water from public wells. Why could not all
join hands in dealing with such violent conduct? Not one shastri had quoted a single
verse in support of such untouchability. He claimed to follow the Shastras as he
knew them. He ever asked God to give him courage to die for Truth as he knew it. It
was, therefore, that he called himself a sanatanist.

Harijan, 6-7-1934

125. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
‘‘PARNAKUTI’’, P OONA,

[On or before June 25, 1934] 1
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I tried my best but couldn’t write to you during the whole of the
last week. Hoping that I would be able to write, I kept back even the
girls’ letters.
Even today I am writing under great pressure. If I had sufficient
time, I would fill pages. But now please be satisfied with what I can
give.
I will go on doing all I can for Chandubhai. I will leave nothing
undone. I am going to Gujarat only because it was necessary to tour
it. Since I am going, I must collect for the Harijan Fund. You must
have read about the decision I have announced. Merely watch for the
present what is happening. Who knows what is for good and what for
ill? All that we can hope for is that we shall always do what we think is
for the best. I think what is happening is really for the best.
I hear that you have not been keeping well for some time, Do
everything possible and improve your health. If necessary, ask for
outside doctors to be called in. As you know, even a mother doesn’t
serve unless the child asks for what it wants. Ask for anything which
you are entitled to and get the nostrils cured.
I am afraid you may not have liked the resolution which was
1

The source has ‘‘June 27’’. But Gandhiji had left Poona on June 25.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

89

passed this time. I see nothing but good in it. Big Brother1 came and
saw me. Let us see what happens now. There is such an infinite
number of dust particles in the air that nobody can cleanse the air of
them all. We may do the best we can and not worry about the result.
Cling to the principle that it is futile, even harmful, to think from there
about what is happening outside and let not your peace of mind be
disturbed.
Khurshedbehn and two other ladies are here. The former
suffered much (in jail). Her health is better now. She is pining to go to
the Frontier Province.
The assault on Parikshit is not a trivial matter for me. That there
has been hardly any protest against it seems more terrible to me than
the fact of the assault itself.
Ba has joined me. Her health is fairly good. She is quite happy.
Kanti is with Devdas. He is studying. His aspirations are noble
indeed.
Velanbehn and Anandi are with me. My party has become quite
a large one these days. I am thinking now whom I can send away.
Bablo is with Jivanji.
. . . 2 has turned out to be a worthless man. He has again been
guilty of the same kind of lapse, but he doesn’t seem to have realized
its seriousness. I have now advised him to go to Rajkot. Narandas will
stay there for the present. . .3 should stay there and do what he can. He
has forfeited Jamnalalji’s trust. He doesn’t seem even to have kept the
accounts properly.
Radha (Gandhi) has joined Prof. Karve’s school. I didn’t know
about this at all. She arranged the business herself. She came and saw
me yesterday. I couldn’t give her much time, though. Here also I get
very little free time.
Swami is here. Rajaji also. Jamnalal left for Bombay only
yesterday . . . . was fairly seriously ill in Abu and is here now. He has
come to discuss the arrangements with me. Swami will have to return
to Bihar.
You must have read the news about Mirabehn. There is nothing
more behind it. She suddenly felt that she herself should go and do
something. I consented and she left. 4 Her personality had become
suppressed under me. I hope she will regain her former independence
1

Madan Mohan Malaviya

2

The names are omitted in the source.
ibid
4
Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 20-6-1934
3

90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of character. She has gone only for three or four months. She had
been to [Bombay] to acquaint Maxwell1 with the condition of
ordinary prisoners—to describe her own experiences.
I met Ambalal Sarabhai. Saraladevi has benefited considerably.
This is enough for today. I wrote this letter in the morning in
‘Parnakuti’. We are now going to Bhamburda.2
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarai]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 106-8

126. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
[On before or June 25,] 3 1934
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

What more can I have to write about after such a long letter
from Ba? Since you two like the name Arun kumar, my approval also
may be assumed. From the long list sent by Nanabhai, Govind’ seems
worth selecting. I don’t have time, either, to write more.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have to reply to one question by you two. My point was that,
since civil disobedience has been suspended, you should prepare
yourselves for it thoroughly and keep yourselves ready to join it
whenever it is revived. You can sacrifice yourselves in it only if you
cultivate austerity, simplicity, self-control, etc.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4821

127. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
June 25, 1934
CHI. RAMDAS

Sharma must have arrived there. He will therefore tell you
everything. If you wish to leave that place, there is no room for
choice. Chorwad is the only choice left. Teethal is out of the question.
1

Home Secretary, Government of Bombay
A locality in Poona, now known as Shivajinagar
3
Vide ‘‘Letter to Nanabhai I. Mashruwala’’, 25-6-1934
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

91

By all means call the girl baby ‘Usha’ You surely know that
‘Okha’ 1 is the same as ‘Usha’. If she brings you luck, we will say a
thousand times that it is good she has come. Has Vinoba regained
strength? How is Monoharsinh? How is Devaki who was bitten not by
a snake but a scorpion? How is Nimu? How is Sarita?
Blessings from
BAPU

S HRI R AMDAS GANDHI
C HARKHA S ANGHA OFFICE
WARDHA
C.P.
From the Gujarati original : Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy : Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

128. LETTER TO PREMI JAIRAMDAS
June 25, 1934
DEAR PREMI,

If you want congratulations for having passed your examination
you can have them. Why will you only see me at the station? Surely
Father will go with me to Karachi. Then why not you? What about
your Hindi?
Love.
BAPU
S HRI P REMIBEHN JAIRAMDAS
MARKET R OAD, H YDERABAD
S IND
From the original: C. W. 9247. Courtesy: Jairamdas Doulatram

129. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
June 25, 1934
BHAI NANABHAI,

I had received your letter. I selected ‘Govind’ from the list of
names which you had sent. But I cannot press for its acceptance. I
1

A character in the Shrimad Bhagavat Puran, whose name ‘Usha’ was
corrupted into ‘Okha” by medieval story tellers. She was a daughter of Banasur and,
having seen Shri Krishna’s grandson, Aniruddha in a dream, fell in love with him and
persuaded her friend Chitralekha, to abduct him from Dwarka and bring him to her
palace. Aniruddha was discovered in the palace by Usha’s father and in the war which
followed, Banasur was defeated by Shri Krishna.

92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have written to Manilal and Sushila and sent the suggestion to them.
I would be happy to hear that you are improving.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 6691. Also C. W. 4336. Courtesy:
Kanubhai N. Mashruwala

130. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
June 25, 1934
CHI. RAIHANA,

I am in a hurry today, and so I am writing in Gujarati. I have
taken an extract from your letter for Harijan. I hope Harivadan and
Hamida have now regained their balance of mind. Jail is not meant for
those who find jail life a pleasure. One must be able to live the same
kind of life outside also and to devote oneself to constructive work. I
hope you are very well. My regards to Father and Mother. Saroj sees
me every day.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 9649

131. LETTER TO KASHI PRASAD DIXIIT
June 25, 1934
BHAI KASHIPRASAD,

I have your letter. How can I pass judgment without hearing the
other side? I have never found Tandonji1 being deliberately unjust to
anyone.
Blessings from

M. K. GANDHI
From the Hindi original: C.W. 3070. Courtesy: Kashi Prasad Dixit. Also G.N.
5847

1

Purushottamdas Tandon

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

93

132. STATEMENT ON BOMB INCIDENT1
P OONA,

June 25, 1934
I have had so many narrow escapes in my life that this newest
one does not surprise me. God be thanked that no one was fatally
injured by the bomb, and I hope that those who were more or less
seriously injured, will be soon discharged from hospital.2
I cannot believe that any sane sanatanist could ever encourage
the insane act that was perpetrated this evening. But I would like
sanatanist friends to control the language that is being used by
speakers and writers claiming to speak on their behalf. The sorrowful
incident has undoubtedly advanced the Harijan cause. It is easy to see
that causes prosper by the martyrdom of those who stand for them. I
am not aching for martyrdom, but if it comes in my way in the
prosecution of what I consider to be the supreme duty in defence of
the faith I hold in common with millions of Hindus, I shall have well
earned it, and it will be possible for the historian of the future to say
that the vow I had taken before Harijans that I would, if need be, die in
the attempt to remove untouchability was literally fulfilled.
Let those who grudge me what yet remains to me of this earthly
existence know that it is the easiest thing to do away with my body.
Why then put in jeopardy many innocent lives in order to take mine
which they hold to be sinful? What would the world have said of us if
the bomb had dropped on me and the party, which included my wife
and three girls, who are as dear to me as daughters and are entrusted
to me by their parents? I am sure that no harm to them could have
been intended by the bomb-thrower.
I have nothing but deep pity for the unknown thrower of the
bomb. If I had my way and if the bomb-thrower was known, I should
certainly ask for his discharge, even as I did in South Africa in the
case of those who successfully assaulted me.3 Let the reformers not be
incensed against the bomb-thrower or those who may be behind him.
1

A bomb was thrown on what the assailant believed was the car carrying
Gandhiji on his way to the Municipal Building. Gandhiji arrived at 7.30 p.m. little
knowing what had occurred. When informed of the incident, he received the news
calmly and agreed to the suggestion that the programme should be carried out.
Accordingly the address was presented and Gandhiji left the hall at 8.30 p.m. This
appeared under the title ‘‘Providence Again’’.
2
This paragraph has been reproduced from The Hindu, 26-6-1934.
3
Vide “My Reward”

94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

What I should like them to do is to redouble their efforts to rid the
country of the deadly evil of untouchability.
Harijan, 29-6-1934

133. APPEAL FOR FUNDS FOR DR. DINSHAW MEHTA
June 26, 1934
I have had the kindest service from Shri Dinshaw Mehta and his
staff during my 21 days’ fast1 and after. It was all voluntary labour. I
believe him to be a sincere lover of his profession. He has passion for
naturopathy. Being myself a believer in natural and simple remedies I
am deeply interested in his experiments. He is at present in financial
difficulty. The friend who has hitherto supported him liberally is
unable to do so much longer. His minimum expenses are in round
figure Rs. 3,000 per month. His loss is half that amount. He therefore
wishes to make public appeal for funds. If the help forthcoming is
large enough he would use the fund as an endowment. He keeps
accounts which are open to inspection.
I gladly support the appeal and hope that it will meet with
success.
From a microfilm: Courtesy:
Hingorani

National Archives of India and Anand T.

134. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA2
BOMBAY,

June 26, 1934
No amount of violence intended to be done to me can possibly
stop me from pursuing action which I consider to be wholly good.
Gandhiji was quite unperturbed by last night’s bomb incident in Poona, and
dictated the interview to the Associated Press in his usual manner, cracking jokes
frequently. He continued :

After all, what is happening in the case of untouchability is but a
repetition of history. No reform worth the name has ever been
accomplished without the reformer holding his life as a stake for his
or her cause. If the Moloch of untouchability takes one life, it may be
regarded as easy satisfaction. An agelong evil masquerading in the
name of virtue cannot be removed without an adequate measure of
1
2

From May 8 to 28, 1933
Held in the morning on his arrival from Poona en route to Ahmedabad

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

95

sacrifice. I am a believer in the all-powerfulness of God. So long as
He wants me in the present body for the cause, He will protect me
from all harm, and when it has no use for Him not all the protection
that earthly power can give me will be of the slightest avail.
Q. Do you think the opposition of sanatanists put up against the idea of
presenting an address to you and the throwing of the bomb are indications that
sanatanists are taking to violence?
GANDHIJI: I am not going to say that sanatanists indulge in
violence because one person parading in the name of sanatanists
wanted to do violence. I am not yet persuaded that sanatanists have
organized themselves to oppose my activities by resorting to actual
physical violence.
Q. Do you think activities carried on in Poona, Bihar and Orissa are an
indication that sanatanist opposition to your anti-untouchability campaign is taking
the shape of violence ?
GANDHIJI: I am quite willing to admit that the activities that are
carried on in Poona and elsewhere have influenced some excitable
youths against me. When I returned to India in 1915, I had
prophesied that if the bomb found a habitation in this land, no matter
what the cause was, it would not be restricted to that cause alone. That
prophecy has more than once proved to be true. I would like further,
at this juncture, to drive the truth home that if we are following
violence in thought and word, it must some day or other assume
concrete form, and it is not capable of being restricted to what one
may call a good cause alone.
It is absolutely wrong to say that if the motive is pure, the means
are justified whatever they be. For realizing pure end means must be
pure too.1
Replying to a question as to what he thought was the reaction to the Working
Committee resolution on the Communal Award and the subsequent events, he said :

I do not fear any split in Congress ranks.
Beyond this cryptic remark, the Mahatma refused to be drawn into any further
discussion about the political situation.
The Hindu, 26-6-1934; also Harijanbandhu, 1-7-1934

1

96

This paragraph has been translated from Harijanbandhu, 1-7-1934.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

135. SPEECH AT BARODA1
June 26, 1934
Gandhiji, addressing the huge gathering, thanked the public of Baroda for
presenting the purse of Rs. 1,000 for Harijan uplift.

I would rather wish that the Baroda people should contribute
first to the fund of the distressed peasants of Gujarat started by Dr.
Chandulal Desai and others and then as a bounden duty to remove the
slur of untouchability, they should contribute to the Harijan Fund. I
regret that I cannot stay here, tired and exhausted. The Maharaja
Saheb Gaekwar has done a good deal for the uplift of Harijans and it
is a slur on the Baroda public that the Secretary of the Gujarat Harijan
Sevak Sangh Mr. Parikshitlal Majmudar is roughly handled by the
police of a small village of the State. I would urge all present to
remove the slur of untouchability.
The Bombay Chronicle, 28-6-1934

136. MESSAGE TO THE PUNJAB
[Before June 27, 1934] 2
I hope the people of the Punjab will generously subscribe to the
Harijan purse.
The Bombay Chronicle, 29-6-1934

137. DISCUSSION WITH HARIJAN WORKERS3
AHMEDABAD,

June 27, 1934
Every worker placed before Gandhiji the work done so far in one’s own
district. They also acquainted Gandhiji with manifold difficulties that beset their path
in doing Harijan work, especially in villages. They also told him that digging wells
for Harijans was a great problem and suggested that some special fund should be
collected for the purpose.
Gandhiji did not like that a special fund should be collected for digging wells.
They must scrutinize each application for a well, for it was their duty to give them
water and all facilities possible. They must also accept whatever help was given them
by sanatanists in any form. Their sole duty ought to make Harijans self-contained.
Gandhiji said that they must work in villages and incessant propaganda would remove
1

Organized by the local Harijan Sevak Sangh, the meeting was held at the
railway station.
2
The message was published under the date-line, ‘‘Lahore, June 27’’.
3
Of Gujarat and Kathiawar
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

97

whatever obstacles lay in their way.
In reply to a question Gandhiji said that if the Harijan work of a particular
village was not done by the Harijan Sevak Sangh or by its members actively, they
must do it themselves, even as Government do the work of a Municipality if the latter
does not do its function properly.

The number of reformers is daily increasing and the heart of
people is also undergoing change towards their treatment to Harijans.
Sjt. Parikshitlal Majmudar . . . narrated the difficulties they were
experiencing in their work of organizing wells for Harijans and the problems
of collecting funds.
Gandhiji said that if they were earnest in their work, they could easily
get funds.
In replying to a question of Sjt. Thakkar Bapa that organizing separate
wells for Harijans was considered by some people as tantamount to
perpetuating untouchability, Gandhiji said that it was not necessarily so, but
in any case they cannot allow Harijans to die for want of water.

The Bombay Chronicle, 28-6-1934

138. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, AHMEDABAD1
June 27, 1934
It is an auspicious thing for me that my public work in
Ahmedabad in the Harijan cause begins with a women’s meeting. At
many women’s meetings and some men’s meetings I have said,
whenever I thought necessary, that not only in India but all over the
world, religion has been and will be safeguarded by women. It was
not, and is not, my intention to say that women have safeguarded
religion by writing big treatises or delivering lectures. They have
rather safeguarded religion by their actions. No religion has been
propagated through lectures or books. We regard certain books as
religious books; but they are a propagation of the thoughts and deeds
of virtuous men and women. A work that is not backed by virtuous
conduct, however beautiful the thoughts may be, cannot make a
religious treatise. Nor can it bring us the peace that the scriptures do.
When a confirmed liar says, ‘Speak the truth’, he fails to make any
impression, although no one may have known that he ever uttered a
lie. But the act of a person who is persistent in his virtuous ways is
bound to bear fruit even if he is completely silent about it. If a live
seed is sown in fertile soil, it is bound to sprout. The same is true
about the words in religious books. I have said after due thought that
1

98

Held in the Krishna Cinema under the auspices of sevn women’s associations
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

women have done most to safeguard religion. Women’s capacity for
sacrifice, suffering and patience cannot be found in man. This can be
attributed to many causes. It is unnecessary to go into them here. But
the world believes what I have said. That is why I am happy that my
work here has begun with this function.
If you are convinced that untouchability is a social sin, you must
strive hard to free yourself from that sin. It is not enough that
someone like me should go round and collect funds. Behind my
effort is the hope that I should be able to appeal to the hearts of
women. It is only when this happens that I would be able to complete
my work. The work would be partly done if I can appeal to the hearts
of men. I went to give my condolences to Lady Lakshmibai in
Bombay. What condolences could I give to her? I stressed only one
point. I told her: ‘Give up your mourning and come out of the
house. Mourning will bring no credit, but Harijan work will bring
credit to your widowhood.’
Lakshmibai has worked for the eradication of untouchability.
So, she told me: ‘‘You men may say anything. But can you do
anything if we are obstinate ?’’ I had to plead guilty. ‘‘I know it by
experience’’—she added: ‘‘What would you do if a woman does not
obey you—a husband or father? We women know only to say no.
And, are you men going to be in the house for all the twenty-four
hours? You may instruct us to do something and go out; but how
would you know later if we did not carry it out ?’’ What she said was
absolutely true. That is why I say that my work can be carried out
only if I appeal to the hearts of women. Men tell me: ‘‘We do wish to
give up untouchability. But to you wish to create domestic quarrels?
We are willing to have Harijans in our houses. But what can we do if
those who are in the house for all the twenty-four hours would not
allow them ?’’ So, if women realize that untouchability is a sin and
has to be wiped out, men would not be able to hold fast to it. It is
beyond the powers of men. This is the experience of most men.
That is why I want to firmly impress upon you women, that let
any number of Brahmins and astrologers talk to you, you should
firmly bear in mind that if you are good mothers, you would not
discriminate between one child and another. On the contrary, you
would shower more affection on a dull, stupid and crippled child. I
have never known a mother who would cast off a stupid child and
lavish her affection on an intelligent child. Such a mother, if there is
one, should be scorned. At least I would do that. A mother is bound to
show more affection for her handicapped child. If we men and
women who are images of clay have such sense of justice regarding
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

99

our children and pay more attention to the crippled, how would God
who has created us, who is our Father, who is Father of all fathers, who
is the Father of theuniverse, the Creator of the entire living world, have
a different sense of justice? My reason does not accept that it is God’s
will that the Harijans should be boycotted, that they should not be
allowed to take water from wells and tanks, that they should not be
allowed to enter temples, and that temples would be defiled if they
entered them, and any fruit or bread, it touched by them, should be
thrown away. This is sheer superstition. We do not find such a thing in
Islam or Christianity. Only Hinduism has specialized in regarding
these people as worse than animals. We give good water and food to
cows and buffaloes, but to these people we give only our left-over
food, and that too, we throw at them from a distance for fear of
touching them. We do not feel ashamed of doing so. We believe that
those people are born to be so treated.
This is such an obvious thing that we can easily see it if we wish
to. Those who consider themselves sanatanists do not let us step in at
all. They tell us that the untouchables are untouchables by birth and
we would incur sin by touching them. I do not wish to say that such a
thing is not to be found anywhere else in the world. Such a thing
exists even in America; but there is no pretence of religion about it.
My complaint against the Hindu men and women is that they indulge
in such a thing in the name of religion. If you tell me that it is
adharma to touch a Harijan, I would ask, ‘From where did you get the
idea ?’ I have not come across a single shastri who has established on
the testimony of the Shastras that untouchability as practised today
ever existed before. I have studied our scriputures fairly well and have
found in them no mention of untouchability as it is practised today. I
do not wish to discuss what sort of untouchability has a place in the
Shastras. I say that this untouchability of today should be wiped out.
Once we realize that it is sheer injustice, it is adharma, we shall be able
to bring about her quickly all the reforms we desire.
I have dealt with these things to indicate what I expect from you.
You must study this subject. Do whatever is not beyond your capacity.
Serving the Harijan when the time arises is within the capacity of
everyone. It is not enough to give money for them. We must believe
that they are not untouchables but are just like us. Had they been
untouchables by birth, instead of two eyes they would be having three
eyes or one ear instead of two, or God would have put some such
mark on them. But God has not given them any such mark. If there is
100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a Harijan girl in our midst, we would not be able to make her out at
first sight from others.
Anyone who does not consider untouchability a sin need not
put even a cowrie into this bag. He who considers it a sin
should give whatever he can and make expiation. We would know
that a particular lady has put a coin in the bag and the following
day we would take some service from her. You have shown your
sympathy by parting with a coin. It may as well be said that you have
given your co-operation. Later when you meet women in your
neighbourhood they would perhaps abuse you and be rude to you,
but face it and tell them that what they are doing is not dharma but
adharma.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 15-7-1934

139. LETTER TO GULABCHAND JAIN
June 28, 1934
BHAI GULABCHAND ,

What you have written is true.
The only remedy is that those who violate the rule should wear
khadi or the rule itself should be scrapped.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 7742

140. DISCUSSION WITH GUJARAT SWADESHI SANGH
WORKERS1
AHMEDABAD,

June 28, 1934
For the purpose of this Institution (All-India Swadeshi Sangh),
swadeshi shall cover useful articles wholly manufactured in this
country, through small industries which require for their existence
continuous education of public opinion in their favour, and which will
accept directions issued by the Board of this institution, as to the price
of articles manufactured by them, and wages and welfare of the labour
under their control. Such swadeshi will, therefore, exclude articles
1

At the Harijan Ashram (Satyagraha Ashram), Sabarmati

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

101

manufactured through large and organized industries which are able
to take care of themselves and which can command State protection
without popular aid.1
Explaining his definition Gandhiji said that his definition was such as required
no change. He said that the lines on which swadeshi movement is conducted at
present has made us voluntary agents of big manufactures, and this has resulted in
their neglecting home industries.
Gandhiji was therefore of the opinion that big manufactures do not require any
stimulus from them and his definition was framed with a view to removing
unemployment.
In reply to a question whether raw material which could not be procured from
India should be imported or not, Gandhiji replied in the affirmative and said he would
certainly ask to import such raw materials as are not available in India.

The Bombay Chronicle, 30-6-1934

141. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
June 29, 1934
CHI. MIRA,

Nothing more beyond sending you a cart-load of love. Butow I
am sorry to tell you has just now proved a broken reed.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6288. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9754

142. SPEECH AT MILL-HANDS’ MEETING,
AHMEDABAD
June 29, 1934
After a long time I have been able to meet you in such large
numbers and for this I am grateful to God and consider myself
fortunate. I thank you for the address which has just been read out
and for the purse of Rs. 5001 for the Harijan work. You have stated
the truth [in your address] that you are quite well off compared to
1
The source had reported : ‘‘This definition was found by some of the workers
as not entirely practicable, and the Gujarat Swadeshi Sangh suggest a change in the
definition which should be : ‘Goods which are manufactured in India in all its stages,
and under the direction of the Management with labour and capital 75 per cent Indian,
with Indian material as far as possible, shall be considered as swadeshi. But in
manufacture of goods, yarn—cotton, silk and woollen—should necessarily be
Indian.’’’ Vide also pp. 87-9.

102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

other Harijans. You have some money and gradually you are getting
more and more educational facilities. There are other Harijans who
are considered lower than those who have contributed to this fund
which means that there exists untouchability within untouchability. I
congratulate you on admitting that you have given this money as an
atonement for that sin. But please do not you believe that having
atoned and having given this purse, you have acquired a right to
consider yourselves superior and regard other Harijans as lower than
you. There are some people who are found atoning for their sins in
this manner. There are many who believe that once they visit the
temple and offer rice, betel-nut and money, they are entitled to
commit sins. There are also people who believe that sins can be
committed and atoned for daily just as clothes get dirty every day and
are washed daily. It is therefore wrong if you have given these five
thousand rupees as a passport for committing sin. One who makes
atonement should not consider others lower than himself. I will show
you an easy way of putting this in practice. One must consider oneself
lowest [in the world], that is to say that there can be no one lower than
oneself. We are ultimately bound to suffer degradation if we consider
ourselves higher than others and this would mean that we have not
done away with untouchability. Those who have given money should
make their atonement complete by removing the feeling of high and
low among the sub-castes like sweepers, scavengers, tanners, etc. The
caste Hindus who consider themselves higher than others, are also
responsible. It is because they preached untouchability that it has
spread to every home. It is only when we ourselves get rid of the
feelings of high and low, that we shall be able to do away with
whatever ill-feeling there is between the various communities and
religions. The reasons for the bitterness among the Hindus, Muslims,
Parsis, Christians, etc., are not to be found outside, but can be traced to
the feeling of high and low and the sense of exclusiveness prevailing
among them. The leaves of a tree, even though separate, are all the
same. They are not different; similarly, even if we differed in our
thoughts and beliefs, different views do not matter if there is no
exclusiveness, no feeling of high and low. The campaign for the
ending of untouchability is intended to bring this home to all.
Here, the trade union workers have been working very hard for
your sake. They think about your comforts night and day. I do not
find anywhere else the activities which I find in Ahmedabad. It is true
that I have not stayed long in other places. No sooner I reach a place
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

103

than I leave it for another. I have not been able to identify myself with
activities elsewhere as I have been able to do with yours. It is possible
that your activities appear great to me because I know all about them.
I believe that the labour-welfare activity in Ahmedabad is the best of
all. But do you take any advantage of it? If not, it is as good as wasted.
I have just returned from Kalyangram. The houses there are beautiful
and clean. Their alleys and courtyards are also clean. I have never
stayed in a house cleaner than theirs; nor do I stay in one. I had not
expected more than what I found. [But if you are not careful] you will
undo all that has been done. If, in spite of living in good houses, we
neglected our body, our soul which dwells in it for all the twenty-four
hours is sure to be ruined. And then, what use can we make of solid
brick-houses? For a long time I have had a quarrel with you over
giving up liquor. Yet, all of you have not given it up. If we look at the
history of the liquor-shops, it would be known that the most frequent
visitors are the industrial workers. They spend too much and then face
financial difficulties. They spend money to lose their senses. A
drunkard behaves like a mad man, he becomes a lunatic. You must
therefore get over this thing.
Many Harijans eat carrion. Here you cannot justify it. Here you
get ghee, milk and vegetables. In spite of that you eat carrion. How
shameful it is ! Nowhere in the world can one eat carrion and yet be
considered civilized. You are considered civilized. The ancient Hindu
dharma is yours. How can you be so barbaric? It is not proper for you
to squander money. You must educate your children. You have a long
way to go. You and your children must eat nourishing food. Children
cannot do without milk. You should not fee satisfied by giving them
gruel. Children can never be brought up that way. Use your money
where the need is real. You would be rewarded. The children would be
healthy and strong, they would be good and would earn more. They
would be happy themselves and so would you be. You would have
added to the wealth of India and the world. Learn to make different
kinds of [useful] things. Who would then dare to insult you by
looking upon you as Harijans, or untouchables? I have said that all
troubles would be ended if the Harijans really become men of God,
acquire qualities befitting their name. A person like me would have to
qualify himself to become a Harijan. Let the caste Hindus also
become Harijans. In this yajna of purification the caste Hindus have
to be reformed. They have to do penance. You too have a
contribution to make. You have to get rid of your bad habits. Keep
your houses clean. Sunshine and light are necessary both for body
and mind. Do not pollute the air. Keep your houses, courtyards and
alleys clean. I was glad to see that you have planted trees in front of
104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

your houses. These houses will be yours ultimately. You acquire more
and more ownership over the houses with every payment of periodical
rent. If you save money and pay rent, the houses will be yours after
a specified time—there is a scheme to that effect.
I congratulate you on presenting a hand-written address to me.
A printed sheet has been distributed here which you must read. The
communist friends have criticized me in it. I can only say that it is
written out of misunderstanding. If those on whose behalf this leaflet
has been issued examine it, they would find that what is stated there is
not correct. It says that I am a friend of capitalists. But my activities
do not include the exploitation of labourers by capitalists. I have
become a labourer ever since my stay in South Africa . . . .1
The first question of this friend is: What did I do when the
labourers at Bombay, Sholapur, Kanpur and other places were in
trouble? What did I do when there was firing on the workers in
Bombay? I must reply to this question. I am not God. I am a labourer
like you. Regarding your question as to what I did for the labourers I
can only say that I employed a part of my capacity for the benefit of
labourers. If I possess greater powers as a human being, I am willing
to put them to use. Previously in Bombay I had a talk with the
workers. I did that even this time. On the occasion to which this friend
has referred, I had prevailed upon the labourers who had come and
told me of their requirements that I must at least know why they
needed money. I can only advise them. I have no power to carry out
all my wishes. I must know the cause of the strike. If the workers are
suffering due to some fault of theirs, the remedy is that they should
set their own house in order. All my life I have done nothing without
knowing why. I do not have any money of my own. I have to ask
others for it. Hence, I must know the purpose for which money is
needed. I have tried to reach the workers everywhere. I have talked to
workers who have come to me. Even at Nagpur where the strike was
going on, labour leaders met me.
This friend has asked me what I had done about the
Government action in the matter. I do not say anything on the
activities of the Government. You would certainly not expect me to
break my vow. For this year I have chalked out for myself the
1

At this point the writer of the leaflet was permitted to speak and he said that
Gandhiji had done nothing for the workers when they had gone on strike at Bombay,
Sholapur, Kanpur, etc. All that Gandhiji tried to do was to isolate labourers from
Harijans.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

105

programme of Harijan work. That is why I talk about the Harijan
work, and that too, without criticizing Government policies. I must
abide by the pledge I have taken. The pledge has not been taken
keeping you or the Government as witness but with God as witness. I
am like a person inside a prison. And so, I can pursue one activity
alone. Except on this I must observe silence. I am now doing the work
which I could have done from the prison. That is the reason why I do
not wish to say anything about the Government policies. If I did that I
would be violating my pledge.
I cannot spare enough time from Harijan work to read
newspapers or study other activities. I have no quarrel with the
communists. At the most I can have a difference of opinion.
Nevertheless, I wish I can explain to them my view and win them over.
Wherever there is a difference of opinion, they are welcome to have
their own view. Similarly, they have to permit me to have mine. May
be, they will win me over some day. I have been serving the working
class for the past fifty years. Throughout I have had only one aim.
Though I have associations and friendship with the capitalists, I work
in the interest of the working class. I believe the workers would gain
nothing by liquidating the capitalists. It is not my intention to
persuade the workers to follow the path of the capitalists. In a sense,
even the workers are capitalists. Why should they believe that money
alone and not labour is an asset. Capital is formed only through the
working class. Money has no value in the desert of Sahara. One
cannot get water there without one’s own labour. There a labourer is a
capitalist. The workers are as good as capitalists if they are organized
and are intelligent. Capital consists in money for one and labour for
the other. People do not know how to use and accumulate capital.
Crores of rupees lying scattered in several places will not make capital.
It becomes capital only when it is pooled together and invested
intelligently. The same applies to labour. A union of a lakh of
workers who have intelligently come together can do much than
accumulated wealth. Those who realize this, will not be envious of
capital in the form of money. They would ensure that the capital is
properly utilized. At the moment there is rivalry between the two
kinds of capital. Both the workers and the moneyed people are
capitalists. Those people have organized themselves, whereas you have
not been able to do so. Those people are clever and intelligent. When
the workers are better organized and more self-sacrificing, their power
would grow. You are not conscious of your strength and therefore
you are oppressed. This causes harm to you and to the world at large.
I wish well to the workers. I believe that the workers can gain
nothing for themselves by liquidating the capitalists.
106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If the capitalists are liquidated, we would be liquidated too. Both
should unite in amity. We would need gold and silver bricks too. The
important thing is that we should know how to put all these to good
use. This is the conflict between the proper and the improper use of
capital. Both the classes will benefit if we learn how to make good use
of capital. I cannot change this view of mine, for it is based on my
experience of fifty years. You may do whatever you think is right, and
in your interest.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 15-7-1934

143. SPEECH TO JYOTI SANGH 1 MEMBERS, AHMEDABAD
June 29, 1934
Asked for advice as to what the little girls in front of him should do, Gandhiji
said that they must see the labourers’ chawl in the Gujarat Cotton Mills and
understand the life of labourers. They must enter into the Harijans’ lives and reject
sweets and finery for themselves, at least until the latter had sufficient food and decent
clothing. Let the girls go into that dark world as light-bearers.
He would suggest that they must put on khadi, which was the only real
swadeshi cloth. They must use things manufactured by millions and not by half a
dozen people. And they must take to spinning, for, if millions of girls did it only for
half an hour every day, they would add considerably to the wealth of the nation. They
need not wait for others to do this service, but must make a beginning themselves, in
the faith that their numbers would swell later into thousands and millions.
Harijans constituted the lowest strata or the foundation of society, and if they
were neglected, society would topple down like a house of cards. On the other hand, if
the foundation was well attended to, they need not worry much about the
superstructure.
He was glad to note that the association was mainly run by women, typifying
their desire not to accept any inferior or slavish position for women. He hoped they
had no intention of importing into India the movement for making women absolutely
independent of men, which was out of keeping with Indian culture and was bound to do
us untold harm. Socially men and women were inseparable members, one of another,
supplying one another’s deficiencies. Women were dubbed the ‘weaker vessel’, being
physically weaker than men, but spiritually they were superior to men. Men were
proud of their brute force, but women need not mind their inferiority in that respect. A
1

An association of women started by Mridula Sarabhai and run mainly by
women with a view to creating interest in public life among women and giving them
training in home industries and crafts so as to increase their earning capacity. The
speech is extracted from ‘‘Weekly Letter’’.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

107

muscular body and a great soul went ill together. They must not confound real health
with crude physical development. Women’s inferiority complex only prevented them
from going out alone fearlessly even at midnight, which they could do if they had the
same fire of purity burning in their hearts as Sita had. If they realized this, they would
concerntrate on exercising their souls more than bodies and cultivate soul-force and
courage rather than learn to use the dagger or the revolver, which would only furnish
their enemy with a weapon. No one on earth could suppress anyone else. Oneself was
one’s best friend or worst enemy. He would certainly like them to take physical
exercise, but his point was that it was useless in the absence of moral courage.

Harijan, 13-7-1934

144. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, AHMEDABAD
June 29, 1934
You have been able to collect from Ahmedabad nearly Rs.
32,000 for Harijan work. Out of this amount you have given me a
hundi for Rs. 25,000. The accounts of the money received from other
parts of Gujarat were read out to me. I have also heard that 1,289 pice
have been received from Balubhai’s school. The significance of that
collection is that one girl student took an independent stand and said,
‘‘I shall not give even a pie.’’ No one has spoken ill of that girl, nor
criticized her. I would like to send my congratulations to that girl. I
would not like to have even a single pice from those people who are
not willing to regard untouchability as a sin and end it. Eradication of
untouchability means change of heart on the part of the caste Hindus.
If we can bring about that change of heart from this place by just
praying to God, no money would be needed at all. And if it is needed
it should come to us right at our doorstep. That is the law of nature or
God. To bring it about we have to strive so hard and a person like me
in old age has to go about from place to place—all this means that my
capacity to pray is limited. I would have been able sitting at home to
convert the hearts of the caste Hindus, had my capacity to pray or in
other words my personal purity been so great. But that is a state of
perfection. We human beings are all imperfect. Hence, we have got to
make efforts according to our capacity. In such an effort lies the key
for attaining the state of perfection. We may be eager but not able to
reach that state. That is why I have to influence you as best as I can by
going round, giving talks and awakening your religious sense. Only
that money which you have given under such influence, or by way of
expiation, would bear fruit. It would serve no purpose if the caste
108

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Hindus have given the money for my imagined political services or
out of a sense of obligation to the fund-raiser. Even a lakh of rupees
given that way would bring no result. That is exactly why I
congratulated that girl who did not contribute her pice. For the same
reason I congratulate those who have not given money. Those who
give me money even while cherishing the idea of untouchability in
their hearts would be deceiving me. I would expect work from the
people who give money and what a sad plight it would be if I don’t
get it !
This brings me to the contribution for the farmers. When the
question came before me I sent word that I must go to Gujarat, and, if
I did, I must raise the fund for Harijans. Contributions would be
accepted only from those who give in a spirit of atonement. The
persons seeking expiation will no doubt fulfil the other moral
obligations which may come to them. Funds are urgently needed for
the farmers. This obligation will not be always there. It is
apaddharma 1 and an urgent one. First contribute for them as much as
you can and then give to the Harijan fund. Let it be just a pice, I
would be satisfied with it. If we covert the pice thus collected into
rupees it would be a big amount. Such a contribution would be more
valuable than this sum of Rs. 32,000. There is no limit to the Harijan
Fund. If given in the spirit of atonement a crore of rupees would be
welcome and equally so crores of pice. Otherwise, even a billion of
rupees would be of no use.
Why should I not complain against Ahmedabad? I had settled in
Ahmedabad. I have drunk deep of the affection of the citizens of
Ahmedabad. And so, however much you do, I would always feel it is
not enough. How wonderful it would be if all the mill-owners of
Ahmedabad consider themselves the insurers for anyhing that may
happen in Gujarat and they would donate generously for any worthy
cause or institution? From where would they give that money? If they
decide to do so out of their earnings, we will never be in difficulty.
The well-to-do people should never say that because there are many
funds, they could not contribute to all of them. One can only wait for
the auspicious day when the call comes. I do not know what is the
mill-owners’ contribution to this purse. I do not want to run them
down. They do give but I want to squeeze more out of them. Though
a fallen city now, Bombay has kept its reputation alive. Those who
1

Duty at the time of an emergency

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

109

cannot get money from any place, get it from Bombay. The credit
goes mainly to the Parsi community. Why should Ahmedabad not
earn such a reputation? Why can’t its pursestrings be loosened for the
deserving? God will replenish the amount. That is what I wish to tell
the mill-owners and the rich.
I cannot help mentioning a couple of things I noticed in the
Harijan colony yesterday. What did I see there? On the one side, due
to the efforts of the people of Ahmedabad, I saw a good chawl like
Pritampara and on the other I saw the slums—which would beat the
slums of Bombay and Poona. How strange that these things can persist
in Ahmedabad after so much work has been done here? Ahmedabad
is the city of Sardar. How can such a thing be allowed in Sardar’s
Ahmedabad? It is in the hands of the mill-owners. No human being
can live in the chawl I visited, even then how do these labourers live?
They do not live there like human beings but like animals, and even
that at the cost of their health. He who lives at the cost of this health
does not lead a human life. One who lives like a human being grows
in his mind and soul. Harijans are not doing that. I appeal to the millowners, the Municipality and the citizens that they should not tolerate
such conditions even for a moment. You will say that it is easier said
than done. From the testimony of modern history we can say that
there is nothing which cannot be attained by human effort. I cannot
cite all the instances, but one I must. In the city of Johannesbeurg in
South Africa, the plague broke out in the Location where our people
were staying. Promptly the Location was locked up, police watchmen
were posted and people were removed to a place thirteen miles away.
There in a couple of days they set up a tented village on beautiful
land, and all people were accommodated in it. The condition of that
Location was better than this chawl. And yet, while describing it, I had
called it hell. If that was hell, what I saw yesterday was a greater hell.
After removing the people thirteen miles away from that Location,
setting up shops there and providing other conveniences, the Location
was destroyed and all the things were burnt. Compensation was given
to those whose belongings were burnt. I had even complained that the
compensation was very little. Please do not tell me, ‘Johannesburg is a
mine of gold and where does Ahmedabad stand in comparison with it
?’ There are so many mills in Ahmedabad and the chawls I am
speaking of belong to these mills. Money spent in it would be
rewarded. We must resolve that the Harijans by whose labour we are
able to maintain cleanliness in the houses and palaces leading a life of
luxury should have at least for them not slums but well-ventilated and
well-lit houses which are conducive to health. If enough citizens
resolve, this work can be done in a week. I have told you how it can be
110

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

done. There are so many men and women volunteers here. Doctors
like Dr. Hariprasad have worked hard for the Ahmedabad
Municipality. Even though he is in Ootacamund, he is thinking of this
same problem. Balubhai has already told you this. He wrote to me
too: ‘I feel sorry that I am not there right now. I am going to do at
least this much work.’ He has now become the Chairman of the
Sanitation Committee. Hence, I have now a right to demand work
from him. Ahmedabad would be committing a great crime if we
cannot keep the Harijans in good condition in spite of the favourable
circumstances. In 1915 I went round with Mr. Ewbank to see these
chawls. There is some improvement since then but it is just a drop in
the ocean. There should not be a single person in Ahmedabad who
would lose his health by living in unhealthy surroundings. If we can
reach the most downtrodden classes of the society, we shall be able to
reach the others.
There are some here who are considered expert sanatanists.
There would be none among them who would say that he hesitates to
do this work. I would not ask a single pice for this purse from those
sanatanists who do not regard untouchability as a sin. But it does not
mean that I would not take their money for the houses of the Harijans.
If I take money from the Parsis, Muslims and Christians, why not from
the sanatanists? I would not take any money for this purse from those
Hindus who do not give it in the spirit of atonement but let them at
least build chawls for the Harijans. Our scriptures do not tell us to
keep the Harijans in the condition of animals. The scriptures give no
evidence of the untouchability we observe today. A certain type of
untouchability is observed all over the world. We should not touch a
dirty man. But we have turned six crores of men into slaves. We have
considered them untouchables by birth. Where is the evidence for it in
the sacred books? It is the dharma of all of us, the Hindus, Muslims,
Christians and Parsis to see that no one in Ahmedabad is forced to live
in unhealthy conditions. Go and visit for yourselves the places which I
have seen. You will have to hold your handkerchiefs to your noses.
You will have first-hand knowledge of the pitiable conditions in which
the Harijans are living. I fail to understand how we have borne it so
long. Do take up this matter in right earnest and deal with it
immediately.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 15-7-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

111

145. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
June 30, 1934
MY DEAR CHILD,

Though I often get up at 2 a.m. I do not overtake my correspondence. There is just time to send you a card of love on your
birthday. I know I owe the box spinning-wheel to the children. My
love and kisses to them. Mira felt the impulse all of a sudden and
went.
Love.
BAPU
S HRI ESTHER MENON
BOURNE END
KODAIKANAL
S. INDIA
From a photostat: No. 129. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also My
Dear Child, p. 106

146. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
S ABARMATI,

June 30, 1934
DEAR HARIBHAUJI,

Bapuji has received your letter. He wants me to write: ‘Shri
Chaitanya Muni will not be able to change his guise before me.’1
Yours,
CHANDRASHANKER
From the Hindi original: Haribhau Upadhyaya Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

1

112

Vide also “Answers to Correspondents”, 8-10-1933,
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

147. SPEECH AT MEETING OF CONGRESS SOCIALISTS,
AHMEDABAD1
June 30, 1934
Gandhiji was questioned why he welcomed the formation of the Socialist Party
within the Congress while objecting to its programme. Gandhiji replied that on
examining the programme he found that certain items of the programme could be
modified.
Regarding the question of class struggle, Gandhiji agreed that in the present
stage of society class struggle did exist. If class struggle implied violence it was
certainly against the Congress creed.
Socialists retorted that they did accept non-violence out of political expediency.
Gandhiji had no objection to such an idea of non-violent class struggle, and he
would support Congressmen participating in such a struggle.
Regarding the well-known Gandhiji-Jawahar correspondence2 they had
fundam-ental difference between them. His agreement to a certain extent with the idea
of divesting of vested interests did not mean confiscation of property.
Regarding the recent Bombay resolution of the Working Committee, Gandhiji
said that it did not refer to bona-fide non-violent socialists, but to those who talk
about violently overthrowing the present capitalist order and confiscation of
property.
Gandhiji admitted that the State must regulate the use of property in a wise and
just manner. He visualized a State where such private profiteering inequities could not
exist. Their programme should be educative and organizing of masses. Regarding
their duties and rights and privileges, if this meant development of class
consciousness Gandhiji would not fight shy of the term, if masses organize and take
charge of State for the attainment of the socialism he had in view. He would welcome
such a consummation.
Gandhiji believed in true democracy based on functional adult franchise.

I would certainly be glad if Congress socialists gather strength
and take over charge of the Congress.
The Bombay Chronicle, 1-7-1934

1

At the Harijan Ashram, Sabarmati
Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 14-9-1933 and “Letter from Jawaharlal
Nehru”, 13-9-1933
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

113

148. LETTER TO S. D. SAKLATWALA
BHAVNAGAR,

July 1, 1934
DEAR MR. SAKLATWALA,

I thank you for your prompt reply dated 19th ultimo. Constant
pressure of work has delayed acknowledgment. In the circumstances
you mention, I shall not trouble you for further information at
present.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI S. D. S AKLATWALA
C/ O MESSRS TATA AND S ONS
BOMBAY HOUSE
BOMBAY FORT
Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

149. DISCUSSION WITH KATHIAWAR YOUTHS1
BHAVNAGAR,

July 1, 1934
Asked why he had not put up in Harijan Ashram, Gandhiji said he was at
present out to convert savarna Hindus, and it was his duty not only to accept but even
seek their invitations.
One of the young men questioned the propriety of Gandhiji taking such a large
party with him on tour. Gandhiji is careful of the pennies and he is still more careful
of the pounds. When he throws letters into the waste-paper basket, he is careful to
save the pins and the blank half-sheets. And he is naturally still more punctilious
when expenditure of large sums of money is in question. He said some members of the
party were travelling at their own expense, and the rest had their expenses paid by a
friend. No charge whatever was made on the Harijan funds. Being a born teacher, he
carried some friends with him to be trained as apprentices. He required the assistance
of others in his own work, while still others were like the blind teats of the goat,
which also he tried to milk as best he might. A Kathiawari Bania as he was, he might
fairly be expected to account to himself for every pie he spent.
Referring to a description of himself in another question as a defeated General,
Gandhiji said he did not know what it was to be defeated.
Questioned if he was opposed to veth (forced labour) and, if yes, what should
be done to get it abolished, Gandhiji said his whole life had been dedicated to the
1

114

This and the following item are extracted from ‘‘Weekly Letter’’.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

purpose of doing away with veth—first in the family, then in South Africa and later
on in the mother country. If veth was imposed on the poor, servants of the public
must take it upon themselves.
Another question related to the menace of artificial methods of birth-control
which has now invaded India. Gandhiji said that the national physique was half ruined
as it was, and its ruin would be complete if they were foolish enough to copy such
questionable practices.
Did they stand to lose anything if religion was destroyed, was one more poser.
Gandhiji answered that religion was the foundation upon which the world edifice was
supported, and it would be dashed to the ground if the foundation was undermined.
The last question was whether they should not abolish the institution of the
States. Gandhiji said that as a satyagrahi he sought not to destroy but to transumute
them into
instruments of service. There was nothing intrinsically bad about the
institution itself. 1
Replying to other questions Gandhiji said that he had already established
institutions wherein youths could work, but it was not his fault if they allowed
themselves to die and that Kathiawari youths merely wanted to talk and did not want
to do serious work. If they were not satisfied with his programme of khadi and
untouchability, he said they could better start new programmes and new institutions.

I want to fight a non-violent battle. If you are interested you
work with me or else find out a new programme for yourselves.
In answer to other questions, Gandhiji said he never believed that he was
defeated in his fight. Had they ever heard a defeated man being welcomed in such a way
and travelling at this old age for Harijan work with such zeal?

Harijan, 20-7-1934; also The Bombay Chronicle, 3-7-1934

150. SPEECH TO HARIJANS, BHAVNAGAR
June 1, 1934
In the afternoon Gandhiji visited the Vankarvas near Ruvapari. This quarter is
far from the city, so that the vankars 2 do not receive adequate police protection and
are put to considerable inconvenience in the pursuit of their occupations, as well as in
their dealings with the city. It has long been under contemplation to remove this
quarter to a more commodious site, and it may be hoped that the matter would be
expedited, and the removal carried out at an early date. The vankars should also be
invested with occupancy rights in the land they built upon, so that they might no
1
2

What follows is reproduced from The Bombay Chronicle.
Weavers

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

115

longer be liable to be shifted from place to place. If a good locality is selected for
Harijan quarters, Harijans will learn to observe the laws of cleanliness, as they will
come in close with the savarnas. But the Harijans, too, owe a duty to themselves. If
they give up liquor and carrion and keep their person, clothes and sorroundings clean,
they will help the reformer to break down the barrier which now divides them from the
rest of the community.

Harijan, 20-7-1934

151. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, BHAVNAGAR1
July 1, 1934
I thank you for the purse that you have given for Harijan work
on behalf of Kathiawar. We have so very little faith in Harijan work,
and especially in such work among Kathiawaris, that even the resolve
to collect Rs. 25,000 seemed very big to you. You thought you would
hardly be able to collect that much and, if you fell short, a few of you
would add three or four thousand each and thus you hoped to collect
Rs. 30,000 in all. That seems a very big amount to you and that is why
you have applauded it. I am not much impressed. You must have
thought poorly of the contributions from other cities of Kathiawar
when the figures were read out to you. Only Rs. 203 from Wankaner?
And that too was not from all the people. Only two or three persons
had contributed that sum. The same is the case with Morvi. There are
so many first-class States in Kathiawar, and innumerable other States
too. Nor are kathiawaris beggers. They are an enterprising people and
are spread out in many parts. But those who approach them for
contributions do so with diffidence, and, therefore, the others also feel
disinclined to give. We rarely come across people who offer
contributions on their own. What is Rs. 30,000 compared to the
importance of Harijan work? It is true that even if we had collected
three lakhs, money alone would not have been enough for eradicating
untouchability. For that the hearts of caste Hindus have to be touched.
Only then would that demon perish. Those who look upon
untouchability as God cannot but worship it. It will perish in no time
if the hearts of such people change. Its end is bound to come even in
spite of them, but Hindu dharma or caste Hindus will not get credit for
1

This a”Notes” sub-title Communal Representation” peared under the title
‘‘Limits of Untouchability’’.

116

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

it. When Harijans themselves are so awakened that they would not
tolerate their present condition even for a moment, untouchability is
bound to disappear. But we shall not get credit for that. We have,
therefore, to accomplish the Herculean task of humbly reasoning with
those who worship untouchability and convincing them that it is no
God but a demon. If we can do this much, we shall progress in our
aim. Wherever I go, I meet sanatanists and try to reason with them. I
know that there are sanatanists in Bhavnagar too. There is nothing
surprising in this. Can there be any place without sanatanists? I knew
something about the sanatanists of Bhavnagar because a leaflet was
published by them and some literature was sent to me too. I always tell
the sanatanists to think over what I say. I will come to that point later.
At the moment I wish to put forward the sanatanists’ case before the
reformers. If the latter believe that they are superior to the sanatanists
because they had awakened while the sanatanists were still sunk in
darkness, they would not be able to melt their hearts. I have good
reason for saying this, if or sanatanists have complained to me. They
ask me: ‘‘Why should we come to you? If we came, reformist
newspapers would hold us up for ridicule. They would distort what we
might have said and put into our mouths statements we had never
made. And if we do not come, we stand condemned. They will then
say: ‘See, they did not go. How could they go when they had no case
?’’ It is not that all news-papers are doing this, but there is some truth
in what these people say. Some newspapers do misrepresent them.
Reformers may feel, having cited a few verses from the Manusmriti,
that they had scored a victory over the sanatanists, but victory cannot
be won in this way. As we increasingly realize the greatness of the
task, we should become ever more humble and should even feel
greater respect for the sanatanists. Why feel respect for them, you will
ask. A great many of them are hypocrites, and do evil in the name of
religion. I have already referred to this at some places. But hypocrisy
will always go on in the world. But neither I nor the reformers believe
that every sanatanist is a hypocrite. Many of the sanatanists sincerely
believe that untouchability as it is practised today should continue,
otherwise there would be confusion of varnas. It is difficult for people
to give up things which they have been practising for a long time.
This is true of untouchability. Moreover, we have practised it as
dharma. Hence I request the reformers not to malign sanatanists.
Argue your case with them, but do not forsake gentleness, moderation
and humility while doing so.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

117

I want to put one important and simple point before the
sanatanists. The sanatanist shastris have not been able to reply to my
argument that untouchability in its modern form has no sanction in
any Hindu Shastra. No one has justified it. Many sanatanists forget
this term ‘modern’. I had once occasion to discuss the problem with
very learned shastris. They intentionally asked me about this word
‘modern’. I said that some sort of untouchability was practised all the
world over and that we, too, had been observing it. We may not touch
a dirty person or a man who was smelling of liquor. How can we
touch him? If we tried, the foul smell from his mouth would throw us
reeling back several feet away. This sort of untouchability can be
practised even as between mother and son. But this modern form of
untouchability is a demon with not twenty but a thousand arms. It
keeps far away from us five to six crores of people. If you ask what
this modern untouchability is, I would reply, if the President of your
Municipality and Pattanisaheb would forgive me, that it is what we see
in the Bhangi quarters of Bhavnagar. New quarters for them were to
be built within three years. But Pattanisaheb told the Municipality
today to demolish the old quarters and build new ones immediately,
and offered Rs. 30,000 for the purpose. The President has agreed. I
should not, therefore, criticize them. If, however, you wish to see
modern untouchability, visit those quarters tomorrow morning. Go a
little further also. You need not go anywhere outside Bhavnagar. Visit
the weavers’ quarters and see how they live. They were born
untouchables and will remain so till their death ! If in this State a
weaver’s son wants to study, he can do so and join a school or college.
The State may even give him free education or the Harijan Sevak
Sangh may help him, and after completing his studies he may be
appointed a judge. But he would still remain an untouchable ! We
would go to him for justice, but we would take a bath if he happened
to touch us. We deal out such perverted justice to six crores in the
name of untouchability. Shall I show you still further what modern
untouchability means? The Manusmriti does not define an
‘untouchable’. Or let us say the Government’s Census Report is our
Manusmriti in this respect. You have decided those born untouchables
will remain so all their life. But the Census Report says that there can
be a change in their status. Every ten years when the census is made, a
great many people cease to be untouchables and many others become
untouchables. This is modern untouchability!
There may be some sanatanists here in this meeting. If they do
118

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not know the Shastras, let them go to others learned in them and tell
them that I want them to show me if there is any sanction for modern
untouchability in the Shastras. I do not say this out of pride. I have
studied the Shastras and have found in them no sanction for
untouchability. I am not a pandit. My knowledge of Sanskrit is very
limited. I have to take the help of translations and commentaries. I,
therefore, do not claim to be learned in the Shastras. I cannot argue
about their meanings. When I was asked to do so, I replied that I was a
simple man and could not argue about the meanings of the Shastras,
and that it was for them to explain them to me. I claim to be a votary
of truth, and I wish to die trying to discover it, and pray to God to give
me such strength. Such a man is telling you that you have no sanction
for this modern form of untouchability in the Shastras. If anyone can
show the contrary and if I feel that it is true, then I would readily
admit it. I have written and explained a number of times how I
interpret the meaning of the Shastras. If a teacher is not able to know
the limitations of a student, or a man of knowledge those of an
inquirer, then no heartbond can be established between them.
Sanatanists, therefore, should understand my limitations.
I have explained to the reformers how they should be gentle and
humble towards the sanatanists, and I have asked the latter to
understand what I am doing. There is also the bug-bear of templeentry. I have not thrown open any temple without the consent of the
public, and that too of the temple-going public. I did not include the
votes of Arya Samajists, Harijans and those who did not believe in
temples. I counted the votes only of those who visited temples with
sincere faith and threw open the temples only after ascertaining their
support. I have thrown open many temples in that manner and have
received no complaints for having done so. I see nothing wrong in
throwing open temples thus. So far as it lies in my power, I would not
let a temple be thrown open if people going to that particular temple
did not wish it and at present reformers do listen to me. I do not want
even the Temple-entry Bill which has been introduced in the Central
Legislative Assembly if the Hindu members of the Assembly do not
accept it. I do not want the Bill to be passed forcibly. I consider
myself a sanatanists. I want to get the Bill passed in a manner
consistent with this claim. I do not take votes about the Bill in public
meetings because it involves subtleties of Shastras and law. The
common man cannot understand them. It is such a complicated matter
that only lawyers and shastris can understand it. I believe I possess the
ability to simplify a complicated problem and explain it to the
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

119

common man, but I do not find it possible to do so in the case of this
Bill. That is why I have not taken votes in any meeting regarding the
pros and cons of the Bill. Of course the common man can decide
whether or not such a Bill should be passed. Representatives of the
Hindu community had, on behalf of the community, taken a pledge in
Bombay in September 1932 that henceforth they would not recognize
the practice of untouchability in Hindu society. It was also stated in
that resolution that Harijans had equal rights with the caste Hindus in
regard to the use of wells and dharmashalas and access to public
institutions, including public temples. It was further stated in it that
when we got power in our hands we would pass legislation to this
effect and would do so even now if it was possible. The reference to
legislation was made because it is not possible to progress in this
matter without changing the law. We have got to remove the obstacle
that is lying like a mountain in our way. Still I want to clear the
misunderstanding that prevails regarding this Bill. A charge has been
levelled against me concerning it and by no less a person than Lavate,
a public worker and yogi has been serving the people for many years.
He said in a public meeting in Poona that I wanted to get the Bill
passed with the help of the votes of Muslims and Christians. I laughed
at this and wondered how a man like Lavate could believe such a
thing. He had just believed what he was told. I opened his eyes and
told him that what he believed was not true, and that the conditions
regarding the Bill had been published in Harijan.1
And now one last point. You have recounted in your statement
what work you had done. It is all right so long as we do not go too
closely into it. There is nothing to feel proud of, if we take all the
work done in Kathiawar into account. If you want compliments for
the work done, I will pay them, but with reservation. You have
achieved nothing great. How is it that an enterprising people like the
Kathiawaris are so lethargic in this work? the enterprising among you
do not observe untouchability. Then why are they so negligent about
this work? I saw today a woman who was walking with the help of
crutches in place of one leg. In reply to my question, she said that the
leg had got a gangrene and had to be amputated, and that if that had
not been done the gangrene would have spread to the whole body.
Untouchability is a gangrenous limb of Hindu society and if measures
are not taken to remove it the society would become crippled. And a
crippled society cannot go on like that, so that it will ultimately perish.
1

120

Vide “Notes” sub-title Communal Representation”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Can dharma be preserved if we cut off one of its limbs? All the limbs
of dharma are inseparable from one another. Just as, if one brick is
removed from an arch, the whole of it will collapse, so also if one limb
of dharma perishes, if one brick from the structure gets loose and
falls, the whole will collapse. We are so much engrossed in other
things that we do not see how backward our Hindu society is. I for
one see that. But let no one deduce from this that I want Hindus to
become superior to Muslims. I have said several times that if the
Hindus do this much self-purification, then they will get whatever they
want and we will be able to end the enmity which exists between
Hindus, Muslims, Christians and Parsis. So wonderful a thing is this. It
is life-giving and not life-destroying. But this will be possible only if
all Harijan workers are pure. If their hearts have not become pure and
they have not become selfless, they will not be able to serve dharma. If
such workers arise in Kathiawar, the tiger or, say, the demon of
untouchability that flourishes here, is bound to perish.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 8-7-1934

152. LETTER TO N. C. KELKAR1
July 2, 1934
DEAR MR. KELKAR 2 ,

The unusual demand upon my time is my excuse for delay in
replying to your letter of 22nd June last.
Instead of dealing directly with the points raised by you I
propose to define my own policy regarding the Indian States.
The policy of non-interference in the affairs of the States that
the Congress has followed is wise and sound.
The States are independent entities under the British law. That
part of India which is described as British has no more power to shape
the policy of the States than it has, say, that of Afghanistan or Ceylon.
I wish it were otherwise but I recognize my importance in the
matter. India of the States is undoubtedly an integral part of
geographical India. But that carries us no further than where we stand
today. Portuguese and French India are also an integral part of
geographical India but we are powerless to shape the course of events
there. We enrol members from the States in the Congress. We receive
1

The letter was in reply to the addressee’s dated June 22, 1934; vide
“Resolution on White Paper and Communal Award”
2
President, All-India States’ People’s Conference
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

121

considerable assistance from them. It is not want of appreciation or
will that compels our non-interference. It is our helplessness.
It is my conviction that any attempt on the part of the Congress
at interference can only damage the cause of the people in the States.
But there is nothing to prevent us from urging the States to
adopt a certain policy.
I am of opinion that whatever we are able to accomplish in
British India is bound to affect the States.
I would like the States to grant autonomy to their subjects and
would like the Princes to regard themselves as, and be in fact, trustees
for the people over whom they rule, drawing for themselves only a
small and definite percentage of the income. I have certainly not lost
hope that the Princes will deem it a pride to become real trustees of
their people. I do not seek to destroy their status. I believe in the
conversion of individuals and societies.
What I said at the Round Table was in the nature of an appeal
made to the Princes. It certainly did not imply that whether they
listened to the appeal or not, the Congress would enter the federation.
I had no authority to bind the Congress to any such thing. The
Congress entering the federation had to depend upon many other
circumstances beyond the attitude of the Princes. If ever federation
comes, it will surely depend on mutual adjustment.
I hope I have covered all the points you have raised. If I have
not, please write to me again. I have written this under great pressure
of work.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI N. C. KELKAR
‘‘KESARI’’ OFFICE
P OONA C ITY
From a photostat: C. W. 3118. Courtesy: Kashinath N. Kelkar

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

153. LETTER TO D. V. GOKHALE
July 2, 1934
DEAR MR. GOKHALE,

I thank you for your letter. I do hope that Mr. Bhopatkar 1 has
no trace left of the scratches and other injuries received by him.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
MR. D. V. GOKHALE
568 NARAYAN P ETH
P OONA 2
From a photostat: G. N. 6105; also C. W. 9713

154. LETTER TO A. S. M. MOFAKHER
AS AT WARDHA,

July 2, 1934
DEAR FRIEND,

Intense pressure of work has prevented me from replying earlier
to your letter of 17th ultimo.
I have carefully read the articles of association. I have grave
doubts as to the success of the movement. It will not touch the
terrorists nor those who are in silent sympathy with them. General
principles of non-violence have no appeal for them. We must not
expect to succeed without probing and dealing with the cause of
terrorism.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI A. S. M. M OFAKHER, B. L.
B. A. T. V. HEADQUARTERS
21 T ANTI BAGAN R OAD
C ALCUTTA
Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
Lakshman Balwant Bhopatkar, Advocate and Municipal Councillor, Poona,
who had sustained injuries during the bomb explosion at Poona on June 25, 1934;
vide “Statement on Bomb Incident”, 25-6-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

123

155. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
BHAVNAGAR,

July 2, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

For the first time, I saw signs of some erasures in your letter.
These are found in your list of visitors.
There was a wire today saying that the women prisoners in
Sabarmati jail have been released. Mani, therefore, must have been
released. Some men prisoners also have been released from that jail.
Some still remain behind.
As for the attempt on my life, I don’t think it is worth writing
about. Something of the sort was bound to happen for one cause or
another. I am glad that it happened on account of my Harijan work.
When some means have been used for one end, it is bound to be used
for another end also. unconnected with the first. But, then, does
anything happen unless God wills it?
I am writing this letter from Bhavnagar. You know the state of
affairs here. One great difficulty is that the workers cannot work as a
team. But the collection will be quite good, about Rs. 30,000.
Durga and others are coming to see me tomorrow.
I don’t think there will be any difficulty regarding the
cultivators. Please don’t worry in the least.
Being hard pressed for time, I can’t write long letters to you.
But I have asked others in the party to write to you.
Did I write to you about Amtussalaam having been operated
upon for piles? She has now been discharged from the hospital.
Meherally1 is in a hospital. How is your health?
Ramdas has been suffering. He needs a lot of money for
medicines, etc. How can I let him accept such a large amount as gift? I
hardened my heart, therefore, and wrote to him today saying that he
must not accept more than Rs. 100 every month, no matter whether he
lived or died in consequence. Keshu is in Rajkot for the present.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 108-9

1

124

Yusuf Meherally, socialist leader of Bombay
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

156. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
July 2, 1934
CHI. VASUMATI,

I have your letter. I will inquire about the ink. I have not been
able to get it so far. Anyone can make ink, but there are many
difficulties in making ink of good quality. Hardly anybody succeeds.
You may go to the Harijan Ashram whenever you like after discussing
the matter with Parikshitlal. Remember October, however. Don’t go
even during the last week of that month.
Blessings from
BAPU

S HRI VASUMATIBEHN
DAULATRAM KASHIRAM C O.
KHAN MAHOMAD KASAMBHAI BUILDING
KARLEWADI, T HAKURDWAR, B OMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 9388. Also C. W. 633. Courtesy:
Vasumati Pandit

157. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
July 2, 1934
CHI. SHARMA,

I have your clear letter. I have no objection to your going to
Khurja. I understand now your remark to Ramdas that you would
look after the expenses. I suppose it meant that I had undertaken the
responsibility of that expense. Quite correct if it did. There should be
one more proviso that the expenditure should be within limits.The
letter from Ramdas gives me to understand that the minimum amount
required would be Rs. 300 a month. The expenditure is too high in
my view. After all we have to take the requisite sum from Jamnalalji.
How can I burden him or anyone else to this extent? It would be
better that Ramdas goes away to South Africa. He will, somehow or
other, get well there. You too may go if you can obtain the passport. It
should also be understood about nature cure that it is practicable even
for the poor. It is very painful for me to write all this but I see no
alternative. The affection between you and Ramdas is a test for you
too, while I am of course not exempt from. it.
My opinion is crystallizing into this, that you should remain at
Wardha and manage everything within a limited amount. The
expenses on Ramdas and Nirmala should not exceed Rs. 100 and the
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

125

same goes for you too. Whatever is possible within this limit should be
done. Do not do anything through ignorant attachment. Ramdas will
become all right when his future is settled. Others in similar
circumstances have been cured thus; Ramdas too will be cured. In all
this your decision and judgement are essential as Ramdas is placing
more and more confidence in you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha,
1932-48, between pp. 76 and 77

158. LETTER TO U. RAJAGOPALA KRISHNAIYYA
July 2, 1934
BHAI KRISHNAIYYA,

Here are the replies to your queries :
1. There is no doubt that a union of dharma and artha is
possible for an individual, the society and the nation. But it is almost
impossible to say when it might be achieved.
2. My writings about non-attachment to the result are an
outcome of personal experience not on one occasion but many. Even
a hard-working yet hungry farmer can attain self-realization. The wise
men go to the length of saying that self-realization though not
impossible is certainly very hard to achieve for the man endowed with
the three assets, that of wealth, health and intellect.
3. An all-pervading, conscious Power fills our universe which we
call God. We have to offer to it worship. Even the fact that that power
does not fulfil all our desires should cause us no concern.
4. The Gita cannot be interpreted as one pleases, it has to be
interpreted in accordance with rules of grammar, etc.
5. The meaning of being transformed into God is clear enough.
It means a son is not content till he becomes like his father.
MOHANDAS GANDHI
From Hindi: C. W. 9238. Courtesy: U. Rajagopala Krishnaiyya

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

159. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, BHAVNAGAR1
July 3, 1934
Kathiawar should be ashamed, if foreign cloth entered its limits.
If you sincerely work, you can supply khaddar not only to Kathiawar
but to the whole of India. It is a shame, that possessing excellent
opportunity of growing cotton, you give two crores to foreign
countries for your clothing.
The Bombay Chronicle, 4-7-1934

160. SPEECH ON STATE GOSHALA, BHAVNAGAR2
July 3, 1934
Before taking leave of Bhavnagar I cannot but make a passing
reference to the State goshala, which I had the privilege to visit in
company with my old friend, Swami Anand. The goshala has a fine
herd of Gir cattle, and it has a four-year-old bull which, according to
the Maharajasaheb, no mean judge of cattle, is the finest animal of the
kind he had seen in Kathiawar. The State is doing very good service
by maintaining this farm, but I hope it will not rest content with it, but
also chalk out and work out a policy of cattle improvement in villages
by placing a studbull in each village, castrating all other bulls whatever
and, in the case of people letting loose a bull on religious grounds,
insisting that it shall be first-class animal and, if it is not, stopping the
dedication altogether.
Harijan, 20-7-1934

161. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
July 5, 1934
CHI. AMALA,

This is just to send you my love. I hope you are well and
cheerful.
Love.
BAPU
S HRI AMALABEHN
HARIJAN ASHRAM
S ABARMATI
Spiegal Papers: Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
1
The meeting was held in the morning. Ramjibhai of the Khadi Department,
Kathiawar, submitted a report on progress of khadi in Kathiawar.
2
This speech is extracted from ‘‘Weekly Letter’’

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

127

162. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
July 5, 1934
CHI. MRIDULA,

I had received your letter. I am surprised that even you have
been led into an error. You must have read the letter addressed to
Bhogilal. To say that swadeshi today is a fraud is not to condemn the
people engaged in that work. It is a warning to them. I had even given
the history of swadeshi in that conversation. I have often said that
cow-protection today is a fraud and that is my belief. And yet many
pure-hearted persons are engaged in that activity. Even my colleagues
in the field are in it. I do not consider them knaves. I have shown the
way to genuine cow-protection as against spurious cow-protection.
You must be aware of it. I have referred to the cow-protection
societies as cow-devouring societies in Hind Swaraj. Today also I
think the same about them. But I know that many men and women
engaged in that fraudulent activity are extremely purehearted. It is the
same about the swadeshi fraud of today. You and other colleagues are
not knaves but have been innocently entangled in it. It is my attempt
to redeem them from it. The result is my new concept of swadeshi.
Have you understood the point now? If you have understood, remove the pain
of those who have been hurt by my words.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11190. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

163. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, AJMER1
July 5, 1934
Gandhiji reached Ajmer at night on the 4th, and on the 5th he addressed a
women’s meeting the first thing in the morning. He said he would not make any
elaborate argument before them. Everyone would agree that we are subject to the law
of love. As Tulsidas put it, mercy is the root of religion. Untouchability must be
abolished if only because it was opposed to the law of love and to the spirit of mercy.
How could they swear by love and at the sametime consign a large class of their
fellowmen to insanitary surroundings, prevent them from drawing water at wells,
compel them to drink water spoilt by cattle and assault them if they tried to assert
their common right over public wells? So also, if quite a number of dirty savarna
children could attend the public schools with impunity, was it right to exclude
1

128

This and the two following items are extracted from ‘‘Weekly Letter’’.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Harijans even when they were clean? To consider others as lower than ourselves was a
species of pride, which Tulsidas called the root of sin, and pride goes before
destruction.

Harijan, 20-7-1934

164. INTERVIEW TO HARIJAN SEVAKS
AJMER,

July 5, 1934
In the course of his conversation with Harijan servants, Gandhiji carefully
defined the conditions of Harijan service. He wanted the workers to serve the Harijans
in all sincerity. This service was its own reward, and it had no selfish or political
motive behind it whatever. Their sole aim was the purification of religion. There was
no room in the movement for those who approached the question from a political
standpoint, and they must leave it at the earliest opportunity, as their continuance in
it was fraught with great injury to the cause. They could never hope to convert
savarna Hindus, if they cherished any political aims. They alone should participate
in the movement who accepted the principles of truth and non-violence and who
believed in temples as in integral feature of Hinduism.

Harijan, 20-7-1934

165. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, AJMER
July 5, 1934
Gandhiji said that the Pandit was perfectly entitled to attend the meeting with
the black-flaggers and record his protest against the movement. 1 Whoever had
assaulted him had exhibited gross incivility. Black flags could do them no harm, but
the assault on the Pandit had certainly damaged the cause they had all at heart. The
Pandit’s assailant had committed a great sin in the eyes of God as well as man.
Sanatanists and reformers had occasionally come to blows before, but the Ajmer
assault was unpardonable, as he had made himself responsible for the Pandit’s safety.
Untouchability could never be abolished by violent methods, which would only
recoil on their own heads. He would consider what penance he should undergo as
reparation for the untoward incident,2 for people ought to know the conditions on
which he could invite their co-operation. Reformers might no assault others, but
should suffer assaults without retaliation, as thus only could hearts be moved and
1

Lalnath had met Gandhiji in the afternoon and took his permission to speak
at the meeting. He, however, reached the place before Gandhiji had arrived there and
staged a black-flag demonstration, which led to a scuffle and assault on the sanatanist
leader.
2
Gandhiji decided to undergo a week’s fast from August 7; vide ‘‘Statement on
Fast’’, 6-8-1934
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

129

untouchability abolished. He was confident that religion could not be served or saved
by violence, untruth or anger, but only by self-denial, self-restraint and selfsuffering. He could not bear with violence even in politics; much less could be brook
it in religion.
Gandhiji then called upon the Pandit to speak and asked the audience to accord
him a patient hearing. When he had spoken for a couple of minutes, members of the
public interrupted him. Upon this Gandhiji said that it was an exhibition of gross
discourtesy. Some of them and already committed one incivility in molesting him,
and they were committing another in refusing to hear him. If they were not here
prepared to hear the Pandit, it meant that they were not prepared to hear him either. He
never claimed infallibility for himself. On the other hand, he had confessed to
Himalayan blunders. If he could say with impunity that untouchability was a sin, the
Pandit had an equal right to assert that the movement directed against untouchability
was irreligious in his opinion. If they cried ‘shame’ when the Pandit expressed his
honest opinion, the shame was not his but theirs. They must not thus betray
intolerance, which was but a form of violence. A man who did not listen to opponents
could never be capable of truly religious conduct. Harijan service was a religious
movement in which there was no room for intolerance or physical violence.
Supposing some violence was offered to him and it was even of a fatal character,
would they lose their senses and indulge in orgies of violence? If so, he would have
lived his life before them in vain. They would kill the great movement, whereas if
they restrained themselves untouchability would die with him.

Harijan, 20-7-1934.

166. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
AJMER,

July 5, 1934
CHI. MIRA,

I am still working against time. Therefore you may not expect a
long letter from me. Chandrashankar is writing to you fully. He will
describe to you the sad incident1 that took place today.
I have several statements about prison treatment. But I have not
been able to examine them. Hence there is delay in sending them to
Mr. Maxwell.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6289. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9755

1

130

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

167. LETTER TO G. G. JOG
[On or before July 6, 1934]1
Gandhiji in the course of a communication to Mr. G. G. Jog2 , regarding khadi
hundi and Gandhi Purse controversy started in the Press, 3 says that he feels that he
cannot issue any statement without knowing the full facts and the local
circumstances.

The statement4 issued by you explaining the facts seems to be
enough. It may sometimes be good to pay attention to what appears in
the newspapers.
The Bombay Chronicle, 8-7-1934

168. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
July 6, 1934
MY DEAR MALKANI,

You should pardon me. Though I met Jamnalalji, I forgot all
about you. I must now write to him. This I am doing.
I hope to write about the J. K. fund.
You are wrong in resenting Thakkar Bapa’s wire or letter
whatever it was. If he thought that you and he could not be spared
from the office at the same time, he should have the right to do so
without incurring the risk of being misunderstood. There is no
question here of ordering one about. As to his travelling with me and
thus making it impossible for you to do so, except for Sind, it is
inevitable. For the Punjab, U. P. or Bengal his presence is necessary. I
should have been at sea in Gujarat without his5 preceding me. He was
1

The letter was published under the date-line, ‘‘Cawnpore, July 6’’ 1934.
A prominent Congress Worker of Kanpur
3
Various newspapers referring to Gandhiji’s visit to Kanpur had stated that
Kanpur workers resented the action of the All-India Spinners’ Association in selling
khadi hundis, as it was apprehended that it would injure the cause of collection of
Harijan Fund.
4
The source had reported that according to D. Majumdar, Secretary of the U. P.
Congress, a statement was issued by the Kanpur Spinners’ Association, which inter
alia read : ‘‘. . . khadi work is not against Harijan work. . . .In the case of organizing
the sale of khadi by means of khadi hundis the question of raising funds does not
arise at all. The Spinner’s Association has not appealed for any subscription from the
people of Kanpur. They have only been approached to purchase khadi and show
respect to Gandhiji. . . .’’
5
The source has ‘‘him’’.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

131

equally necessary in Kathiawar. We workers must have a tough hide.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 906

169. LETTER TO MAHADEV DESAI
AJMER,

July 6, 1934
CHI. MAHADEV,

I rose at 2.30 today. After writing the diary, I am writing this. I
am fairly exhausted now. I don’t like the discussions and the
meetings. I feel the lack of sleep all the time. The correspondence has
piled up. I attend to as many letter as I can.
Durga and the other women came and saw me at Bhavnagar.
She and Velanbehn are waiting for you. It will be better, therefore, to
go and see them before joining me. Bablo is at Dihan. I can’t think
what should be done about all of them. But come to a decision only
after meeting me.
As we shall be meeting in a very few days now, I don’t write
more. What Chandrashankar has written to you is enough.
Take care of your health after you leave.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

170. SPEECH AT HYDERABAD1
July 7, 1934
I see more ladies here, and I know they are religious. My
message to you is that if you want to protect your religion, you should
discard untouchability, clean your minds and take all human beings as
equal. If it is not done you will be sinners and will destroy your
religion.
1

At Homestead Hall, which was mainly occupied by women while the rest
remained outside the hall. A purse of Rs. 3,188 was presented by Jairamdas
Doulatram. Gandhiji could not address the people outside the hall due to noise and
rush.

132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I got one gold bangle from a lady at Mirani. 1 Now you also
show your sign of love for the movement, by giving ornaments and
money. I have finished my work and now you should do yours.
The Hindustan Times, 8-7-1934

171. SPEECH IN REPLY TO MUNICIPAL ADDRESS2 , KARACHI
[July 7, 1934] 3
In his speeches here, Mahatmaji congratulated the

Karachi city on

maintaining cordial relations between Hindus and Muslims and also for having done a
lot for the uplift of Harijans, but he hoped that the Karachi Municipality will still do
its best for Harijans and set an example in this respect to other municipalities of
India. He was, however, not satisfied with the unhealthy quarters in which at some
places Harijans were living and he urged the city fathers and the people to see that not
a single Harijan was housed in Karachi in any quarters in which they themselves
would not consent to live.
He also urged them to purge their hearts of distinctions of high and low,
untouchable and touchable, or of their being Hindus, Mahomedans, Christians or
Parsis, etc., and until that was done India would not attain her salvation. By doing
this, not only India but the whole world would be benefited.
Mahatmaji also emphasized that a noble cause like that of the removal of
untouchability would not be carried out by the use of force. It could only be achieved
by self-purification and penance and he urged the Harijan workers to realize their
responsibilities in this direction. He also urged people to show respect towards
sanatanists who might differ from them.

The Bombay Chronicle, 13-7-1934

172. LETTER TO BALUKAKA KANITKAR
July 8, 1934
DEAR BALUKAKA,

I have gone through your letter. You won’t find me talking
about civil disobedience. I am occupied in talking about the
1
2
3

Gandhiji had alighted at Mirani, five miles from Hyderabad station.
Presented by Jamshed Mehta, Mayor of Karachi
The speech is extacted from ‘‘Weekly Letter’’ in Harijan, 27-7-1934.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

133

constructive programme you like so much. Do therefore work away at
it for all you are worth.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI BALUKAKA KANITKAR
341 S ADASHIV P ETH
P OONA C ITY 2
From a photostat: C. W. 962. Courtesy: G. N. Kanitkar

173. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
July 8, 1934
DEAR DAUGHTER AMTUSSALAAM,1

I have your letter. Coming to me for improving your health
may not be practicable, but you can certainly come after you get
all right. Write to me what the Doctor says. Come when you
are able to move about and can have normal food. The
earliest you can come is at Kanpur, but the best course would be to
come to Wardha on the 5th. I shall be reaching Kanpur on the 23rd,
Benares on the 26th and Wardha on the 5th.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 310

174. SPEECH AT CONGRESS WORKERS’ MEETING, KARACHI
July 8, 1934
On Sunday morning Mahatma Gandhi had a heart-to-heart talk with the Sind
Congressites in Khaliqdina Hall. Gandhiji referred to the socialists’ allegations that
the programme chalked out by the Working Committee was mild and ineffective. He
rebutted it saying that khadi, Hindu-Muslim unity, untouchability, and peasants’ reorganization were sufficiently dynamic work. If the workers took them in right
earnest there could be no need for civil resistance and going to jail. He advised the
people not to change the programme which was sufficiently dynamic and truly
socialistic.
Speaking on Communal Award, he said the Congress could neither accept it, as

1

134

The superscription is in Urdu in the source.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the Muslims desired, nor reject as Hindus and Sikhs wanted. He felt, therefore, the
Working Committee’s resolution was the wisest.

The Tribune, 11-7-1934

175. SPEECH TO SIND HARIJAN WORKERS, KARACHI1
July 8, 1934
At Karachi, on the 8th instant, Gandhiji met the Harijan workers of Sind, who
complained that Kabulis who had lent money to Harijans harassed them a good deal
and refused to accept payment even when their exorbitant claim as regards the
principal and the interest was admitted in full. Gandhiji advised that, in dealing with
these money-lenders, they should seek the good offices of godfearing Mussalmans in
the first instance. But their main work lay in so educating the Harijans that they
would cease to borrow money altogether for unproductive purposes and give up vices
like drink and gambling. And when they did borrow, six per cent was the maximum
interest they should pay. In Tharparkar, there are about 5,000 Bhils and Meghwads,
the original inhabitants and peasant proprietors of the district, who are fast losing
their lands and being reduced to the status of landless labourers and stand badly in
need of legislative protection. Gandhiji said they might try to get such legislation
passed, but meanwhile a band of earnest workers must bury themselves in the heart of
this backward tract and dedicate their lives to its service.

Harijan, 27-7-1934

176. SPEECH TO BUSINESSMEN, KARACHI 2
July 8, 1934
The Chariman has rightly observed that of late I have very little
time for activities not directly connected with Harijan work; or, I may
be said to have no time at all. It is also ture that after such an extensive
tour and the experience of walking in Utkal, I find myself rather
exhausted mentally. Now I am only hoping that the month of July
will pass off without trouble so that I can rest my mind a little. In this
frame of mind I was not inclined in the beginning to accept the
Chairman’s invitation to visit this place. But I could not decline the
invitation when I came to know that the Chairman of this Association
is also the Chairman of the Harijan Sevak Sangh here, and carries on
the Sangh’s activities admirably well.
1
2

The speech is extracted from ‘‘Weekly Letter”.
This appeared under the title “To the Businessmen of Karachi”.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

135

As it is, I have always had good relations with everyone in India,
including businessmen and other rich people. I have been constantly
receiving financial help from them for the poor in the country, for
Daridranarayana, for Harijans and others. But I feel it is necessary to
make it clear that although I am friendly with the princes, officers,
business men and the rich, I never forget that I am a representative of
the workers. It is my constant prayer to God that I may not, in any
way disgrace myself as representative of workers, and, I may not ask
anything for myself from the rich class. I believe that I have led fifty
years of my public life in this spirit.
I do believe that businessmen, the wealthy men and princes are
inseparable limbs of India. My duty does not demand that I should
destroy one of these limbs in order to serve Daridranarayana. My
experience of many years has strengthened my belief that even if it is
possible to liquidate these classes, Daridranarayana is not going to
benefit by it. What I desire and what is uppermost in my thoughts and
dreams is that I should help as much as is possible in bringing about
unity among all these classes, and devote my utmost energy to this
cause. It is also my experience that so far I have not by such activities
harmed Daridranarayana. I have seen that when I approach the poor,
they accept me as one of them and shower affection on me. And even
now, I shall do for them whatever is possible.
Having laid the foundation-stone of this building1 , I take it that
you would not turn me away empty-handed whenever I approach you
for the much needed help for the Daridranarayana. I presume that,
as representatives of the Indian business community, you would not
resort to dubious trade practices, would not exploit Daridranarayana
and would see that their rights are not violated at your hands. I expect
that you would not indulge in any trade which may harm Daridranarayana. I know that all businessmen in India do not carry on their
business in this spirit. I also knowthat all the rich people do not use
their wealth as if it really belonged to the poor. In spite of that I am
sure the number of rich persons who desire to be the trustees of their
wealth is increasing. They are striving hard and also succeeding in
their efforts. If we treat these rich people with decency, they would
fulfil the expectations we have of them. What benevolence would not
teach them today, selfishness would teach them tomorrow. Experience
shows that altruism and self-interest can be blended in trade. Genuine
1

136

For the Karachi Indian Merchants’ Association
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

artha1 is that alone which includes paramartha2 . This is the teaching
of all the religions of the world. Religion has only come into existence
to teach us that we human beings who are eddying in life’s current
should find solace in serving each other and while doing so satisfy our
physical needs within limits. I know of no religion which says that
God has given right to man to indulge in physical pleasure in utter
selfishness. History reveals that any individual or society that lives
only for indulging in pleasure in destroyed. The world does not even
remember them. But it constantly remembers, exalts and immortalizes
those who devote their lives to the service of humanity.
In conclusion, I pray to God that this Merchants’ Association
may continue to do such noble deeds which would serve the best
interest of every Indian. It would do good not only to Hindus
and Muslims but the whole of India which includes the Daridranarayana as well as others. You have pledged that this Association is
open to everyone who calls himself an Indian and accepts India as his
country. I hope that this beautiful city which is small but well on the
way to becoming another Bombay and may compete with Bombay in
the near future—will have no place for jealousy and enmity.
Competition is not a bad thing by itself. That is the basis of trade. It is
all right to progress through competition, but there should not be
mutual jealousy and quarrels.If you succeed in avoiding these things,
I am sure that your Association would become an ideal organization
for the country.
You have yourself mentioned that because of the efforts of your
Mayor you have received land and other help. He is the son of a
wealthy man, but an outsider who comes to Karachi and meets him
would regard him not as a rich man but a fakir. In the entire history
of municipalities I have never come across an instance where one
person is elected Mayor year after year. It is not too much to entertain
great hopes from a city who has a fakir for its Mayor.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 29-7-1934

1
2

Wealth
The supreme good

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

137

177. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, KARACHI
July 8, 1934
At the public meeting in the evening, 30,000 people, including 5,000 ladies,
had turned up to hear Gandhiji, but they were rather disappointed, as the loudspeakers
failed and Swami Krishnanand1 had to take their place as a human substitute. Referring
to the Harijan quarters he had inspected, Gandhiji said he was deeply pained to see the
chawls in Ranchhod lines, and he expected the Municipality to see that they no
longer disfigured the fair face of the city of Karachi. Besides this, there were three
more places which peremptorily demanded improvement. It did not redound to
Karachi’s credit that a single Harijan within its limits should be compelled to live in a
house which the tallest of its citizens would not gladly occupy. The citizens,
therefore, should continuously press this matter upon the Municipality’s attention
until the remedy suited to each case was applied.2
A band of sincere workers armed with prayer and purity as weapons
was what was needed for the work. No caste distinctions should ever exist. He desired
unity between communities wherein lay India’s salvation. He

requested the public

to nurse no grievance against sanatanists. Love, persuasion and no force should be
applied in converting them to his viewpoint. He expressed his inability to make a
long speech amidst the din of the unruly mob.

Harijan, 27-7-1934; also The Tribune, 11-7-1934

1

Secretary, Karachi District Congress Committee
This paragraph is extracted from “Weekly Letter”. What follows is reproduced
from The Tribune. The Bombay Chronicle, 9-7-1934, had reported : “Coaxing a small
child. . .Gandhiji quietly removed its ornaments from its neck, while he struggled
with an old woman. . . to part with her ring when one of the bidders. . . gave a fiftyrupee note towards the price of an article which was . . .for Rs. 15. . .Gandhiji. .
.resolutely refused to part with the balance much to the merriment of the crowd.”
2

138

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

178. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
KARACHI,

July 9, 1934
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
NEW DELHI
ALARM
DAYS

UNJUSTIFIED.
FAST

WARDHA

FROM

REGARDING

NECESSARY.

TAKING

FIFTH

OR

EVERY

CARE.

PROPOSE

SIXTH

AUGUST

DATE

ASSAULT

ANNOUNCEMENT

LALNATH.
SHOULD

BE

HOLD

TAKING
AFTER

THIS

MADE

SEVEN

REACHED

ABSOLUTELY
NOW.

WIRE

APPROVAL.1

BAPU
From the original: C. W. 7962. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

179. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
July 9, 1934
MY DEAR MALKANI,

I have your letter. You can certainly help Butow if you feel
impelled thereto. He is not likely to get any money from his people. I
wonder if he has told you that he has been taking money from friends
at different places. He does not seem to regret what he has done. After
all there is no moral obligation to support him. He should be told to
leave India if he cannot find an honourable livelihood. But you may
take a different view. You should then enforce it. I must not stand
between you and your generosity.
If you do not mind Thakkar Bapa’s decision 2 , you should not
mind his mannerism. It should be enough for you and me to know
that he has a heart of gold and is always actuated by the best of
motives. He felt that either you or he had to be at the centre.
We meet soon even though for a few brief moments.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 907
1

The addressee’s reply telegram read : “Personally hold such a long fast
unwarranted. Will give unnecessary shock to country which hope Lalnath does not
desire. Request showing this telegram to Lalnath. Hope you will agree reducing period
of fast. Step rather drastic. Finally your discretion” (Birla Papers).
2
Vide “Letter to N. R. Malkani”, 6-7-1934
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

139

180. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
July 9, 1934
CHI. AMALA,

I have your letter. You must not be so thin-skinned. And why
should you mind what a mere youngster says? He may say what he
likes. You should simply ignore what is useless and take in what is
useful. Puratan is a good young man. You should take in good part
what he says.1 In one thing you are decidedly wrong, i.e., in imposing
your will upon the children. You can only make them do things that
they do willingly. Your ten years’ bad practice cannot become good
by prescription. But I cannot have you to impose things on children,
nor will I impose anything on you. If you are finding life irksome
there, tell me what you will have me to do. You have to settle down to
something. Think hard and guide me.
Love.
BAPU

[ PS .]
Yes, I have been taking milk for the last four days.
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

181. LETTER TO PURATAN J. BUCH
July 9, 1934
CHI. PURATAN,

What did you find in Amalabehn’s letter which seemed
shameful to you? Whenever you see any cause, you should tell and
correct her. When you think it your duty to intervene, you should do
so. If you are convinced that she is a good lady, you should bear with
her and use her services. She has many good qualities, which you
should make use of. She is foolish, of course. If she were not, she
would not cling to me, for she has had to bear many hard blows from
me.
Write to me in detail.
How is Totaramji? Has Hariprasad left? Exert your best to see
that the atmosphere there does not become impure.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9170
1

140

Vide also the following item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

182. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
July 9, 1934
BHAI FULCHAND,

It is good that you reminded me. I had completely forgotten
about the matter and would have done nothing about it. I am writing
today, right now.
Blessings from

BAPU

[ PS .]
I am not replying separately to Mistry.
S JT. F ULCHAND KASTURCHAND S HAH
KELVANI MANDAL
WADHWAN C ITY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9196. Also C.W. 2849. Courtesy:
Fulchand K. Shah

183. LETTER TO KANTI GANDHI
July 9, 1934
CHI. KANTI,

I had your two letters. I would certainly wish to give you
whatever help I can in your studies. But I think it would be advisable
to wait and see what Rajaji does from Madras. I shall be meeting him
in Benares at any rate. I will have a talk with him then. But I am also
writing to him today. If you wish to join the Jamia, you may do even
that. You will get there the subjects which you wish to study and also
come into contact with Muslim students. Or you can stay in Kashi.
Anandshankarbhai1 is there, as also ‘Sundaram’ 2 . There is Nagardas,
too, besides many others. The equipment is all that can be desired. At
least I have these two institutions in my mind. If you wish to stay at
1
Anandshankar Bapubhai Dhruva (1869-1942), Sanskrit scholar and Gujarati
writer; Pro-Vice-Chancellor, Benares Hindu University
2
Tribhuvan Purushotamdas Luhar, a Gujarati poet

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

141

Rajkot under Narandas’s care, that also will be possible. I have no fear
about you. I don’t look upon yu as a mere child. If you wish to
discuss the problem with me, you can travel with me for a few stations
from Delhi. That may perhaps be the best opportunity for talking the
matter over. But it is possible that somebody else may join from Delhi
with whom it may be necessary [for me] to engage in conversation.
Think over it. Ba certainly worries about you.
Yes, Ramdas, one may say, is fairly ill.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7286. Courtesy: Kanti Gandhi

184. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
July 9, 1934
DEAR DAUGHTER RAIHANA, 1

I got your letter. I have replied to Dahyabhai. Since he is
your brother, wouldn’t I have forfeited my privilege of being a
father to you if I didn’t see him even when I went to Mehsana? A
letter for Hamida is enclosed. Since you will be reading it, I don’t
write anything about the matter here.
I felt unhappy that you could not come to Mehsana, but your
reason for not coming was correct.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 9648

185. LETTER TO RAMA DEVI CHOWDHRY
July 9, 1934
CHI. RAMA DEVI,

I have your letter. The scheme you have sent me about village
activities is good. It will be fine if it is put into practice. I may state
only this much for daughter, mother and elder sisters2 that instruction
1

The superscription is in Urdu in the source.
Presumably addressee’s daughter, herself and other women working for
Harijan uplift
2

142

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should be imparted in the following order, firstly hygiene, secondly
manual labour, then cottage industry followed by Hindi alphabet.
Teaching of mother tongue is not essential. Annapurna 1 and others
are well, I trust.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI R AMA DEVI
C HANDNI C HOWK
C UTTACK, O RISSA
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2788

186. LETTER TO AMBUJAMMAL
July 9, 1934
CHI. AMBUJAM,

I have your letter. Today is my silence-day. We are all in
Karachi, in a house facing the sea. The air is very good.
Bombs and other things are only apparent causes of death.
Death must arrive at the appointed hour. And I am convinced that no
man will ever die until he has played his allotted part in the world.
Why then should we be distressed over a bomb-throwing? Yes, we
should have compassion for the person who throws the bomb and we
should try to reform him.2
I hope your health is perfecly normal now. Harijan welfare,
Hindi and khadi are the three activities open to you and nobody can
have any objection to that.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Ambujammal Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

1

Addressee’s daughter
For Gandhiji’s statement on the bomb incident of June 25, vide “Statement
on bomb Incident”, 25-6-1934
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

143

187. STATEMENT ON FAST 1
[July 10, 1934 ] 2
Inquiry made by me into the unfortunate incident at Ajmer
resulting in the cut received by Pandit Lalnath on the head shows that
the black-flag demonstration enraged those who saw the
processionists, and, according to Pandit Lalnath, the public, which
included volunteers, seized the flags and trampled them under foot. A
scuffle ensued in which Pandit Lalnath received the injury mentioned.
Happily, none of the other demonstrators received injuries worth the
name. But the guilt is enhanced by the fact that those in charge of the
volunteers had specific insturctions to see that the black-flag
demonstrators were fully protected from molestation by the public. It
is no answer in defence that Pandit Lalnath and his party came in
advance of the time appointed. In my opinion, responsible men
should have been posted at all points to afford protection to the
demonstrators, and notices should have been put up at the meeting
ground, warning the public against interfering with them in any shape
or form.
That precaution was not taken and the pledge given to Pandit
Lalnath, that he and his party would be free from molestation when
they made the demonstration, was broken. The pledge was given by
me in the full faith that the captain of the volunteers was willing and
able to carry it out. I have no doubt he was a willing partner to the
pledge. That he was unable to redeem the pledge was quite clear. But
there can be no doubt that the final responsibility rests with me.
Indeed, no pledge was necessary. In a movement claimed to be purely
religious, non-violence on the part of the public sympathizing with the
movement must be presumed. If I mentioned the pledge, I have done
so to enhance the magnitude of the guilt and demonstrate the greater
necessity of public penance on my part. Pandit Lalnath always warned
me that my persistence in the movement must result in widespread
violence on the part of the symapthizing public. I did not share his
fear, nor do I share it now, in spite of his ability to show stray cases of
violence done to black-flag demonstrators.
But it is necessary for me to emphasize the fact that the
movement, which is purely religious, admits of no violence on the part
1
2

144

This appeared under the title “Gandhiji’s Impending Fast”.
Associated Press of India released the statement from Karachi on this date.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of reformers even in spite of provocations. The movement can only
succeed by appealing to reason and touching the hearts of the
opponents. This is possible only through the purity and penance of
reformers. After much searching of the heart, I have decided to
impose upon myself a fast of seven days, to commence on Tuesday
noon August 7th, i.e., two days after my reaching Wardha, which I
expect to do on the 5th of August next. This is the least penance I owe
to Pandit Lalnath and those sanatanists whom he represents. God
willing, the Harijan tour will finish at Benares on the 2nd of August
next. It is, perhaps, fitting that the end will be signalized by a
penitential fast. May it cover all errors, conscious or unconscious, of
omission or commission, of me and my co-workers. The movement
will not end with the fast. Let it open a new and cleaner
chapter in
this struggle for the emancipation of nearly fifty million human
beings from thraldom imposed in the sacred name of religion. Let it
also be a warning to those who are in, or will join, the movement that
they must approach it with clean hands and hearts free from untruth
and violence in thought, word and deed. I hope no one will feel
tempted to imitate the fast. The cause will be best served by greater
dedication.
Harijan, 13-7-1934

188. TELEGRAM TO NATARAJAN
July 10, 1934
NATARAJAN
BANDRA (BOMBAY)
THANKS

WIRE.

OVERLOOKING

READ
AJMER

STATEMENT 1 .

CAUSE

TOO

GREAT

FOR

NEGLECT DUTY.

GANDHI
Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

145

189. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
July 10, 1934
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
NEW DELHI
YOUR

DEVDAS

SEVEN

DAYS

WIRES.1
MEETS

READ
CASE.

STATEMENT.
FRIENDS

HERE

NOTHING

LESS

THAN

AGREE.

BAPU
Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

190. TELEGRAM TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
KARACHI,

July 10, 1934
DECISION

ALREADY

MADE

BECAUSE

INEVITABLE.

READ

STATEMENT 2 .

[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 147

191. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
July 10, 1934
CHI. MIRA,

You will understand the coming fast. The incident calls for the
penance becuase there was a clear breach of pledge.3 Nothing on earth
is so serious perhaps as breach of safety. If I had greater capacity I
would have taken a longer fast. You must not be disturbed. You
should go on with your appointed task4 , unmoved. Share this with the
other friends.
Love to all.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6290. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9756

1

For the addressee’s telegram, vide “Telegram to G. D. Birla”, 9-7-1934
Vide “Statement on Fast”, 10-7-1934
3
Vide “Speech at Public Meeting, Ajmer”, 5-7-1934 and, “Statement on Fast”,
10-7-1934
4
Vide footnote 1, “Letter to Mirabehn”, 20-6-1934
2

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

192. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
July 10, 1934
I see nothing wrong in Rajaji’s standing on the same platform
with Bhulabhai. But it is best that, even though doing all this, he
should not join the Board or enter the Assembly. I would dissuade
even those who are not confirmed non-co-operators from entering the
Assembly. There will be too many who will be wanting to go. All of
them will not make a good show there, nor can all get elected.
We may assume that Rajaji and Rajendrababu, when they
consider it desirable to join the Board or enter the Assembly, will
[surely] do so. They are always free to do it. On the other hand, those
like you who wish to keep themselves completely out are free to do
that too. [You may be sure that] nobody will be criticized on that
ground. And even if there is some criticism, you should not mind it.
In this age now, we ought to shed all fear and not to pay too much
attention to what others do or think. People may follow me in my
intellectual experiments as long as they appeal to them. My spiritual
experiments require faith. People may follow them, as far as their faith
can lead them. Let nobody force his reason or his heart to follow me.
As you will be reading in the papers about my impending fast, I
don’t write more about it here. Its necessity should be self-evident.
I got your wire. My health will survive the ordeal. I will come
through if I don’t have to carry too heavy a burden from day to day.
Having reached dinner time, why should I have a breakfast ? 1 Have
faith.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, pp. 148-9

193. INTERVIEW TO HARIJAN LEADERS 2
KARACHI,

July 10, 1934
Early in the morning on the 10th, a number of prominent Harijans met
Gandhiji, represented their grievances to him and sought his advice on many points.
As regards Municipal and other elections, Gandhiji said that there never should be a
1

A Gujarati saying which means : ‘Having reached the goal, why should I go

2

This is extracted from “Weekly Letter”.

back ?’

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

147

contest between one Harijan and another. Harijans should consult among themselves
and select as many worthy candidates as there were seats, and these should have a
walk-over. It would do them no good if these seats, instead of furnishing
opportunities for service, were looked upon as conferring privilege.
With reference to the demand put forward by some Hairjans for the
reservation of a certain percentage of posts in services, Gandhiji said they
would perhaps be surprised to hear that there were hardly a few lakhs of
Government posts in the whole of India. Out of these few how many could
after all
be held by Harijans, and what would that mean to five crores of Harijans? Gandhiji,
therefore, advised the Harijans to leave these percentages severely alone and trust
merit to command attention.

Harijan, 27-7-1934

194. SPEECH AT DAYARAM JETHAMAL SIND COLLEGE,
KARACHI1
July 10, 1934
This is not my first contact with you. My contact with students
has always been intimate whether they are students of Sind or any
other province. This kind of relationship exists since I returned from
South Africa. Therefore I have confidence, based on my experience,
that I have a place in the hearts of the students. Whenever I am asked,
‘How many children do you have?’ I reply, “Innumerable, and they
keep on increasing daily”; there is no fall in the number. Some of
them die; but many more are born. Some betray me and some even
run away from me. If I count the number of those who are born, it
will outnumber the total of those who have run away from me, who
have betrayed me and who are dead. Such boys and girls are first
born out of their mothers’ wombs and as they have faith come to me
and, having transformed their lives, are reborn.
It was for this reason that I could not decline your invitation.
You should know that at the moment my mental and physical
condition is such that I would not accept any invitation. A girl in this
city is on her death-bed. She wished that I should call on her. To her
grandmother, who came with the request, I had to say “If I come to
see your child, [I must go and see other] sons and daughters of mine
who are ill; how can I manage to see all of them? If I call on one, how
1

148

This appeared under the title : “To the Students of Karachi”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

can I turn down the request of another ?” I have still not been able to
find a way out of this dilemma. I hardened my heart and argued to
myself, ‘After all I would not be able to save her by going there. And
so I will not go.’ Nursing the sick has been my habit but I hardened
my feelings and restrained myself. If it was difficult for me to call on
that girl, then it was equally difficult to come here. It is beyond my
physical and mental strength these days to go about from place to
place. Normally money tempts me; but lately I have become free to
great extent even from that temptation. I am indifferent whether I get
money or not. I shall certainly carry on this work even if I do not get
money. For, this activity is after all carried on not by me but by God.
It is beyond the power of a single individual to bring about a change
of heart in millions of caste Hindus. Man cannot acquire such power
even by self-purification or penance. By these means he merely
becomes an instrument in the hands of God. He can do nothing more.
I am experiencing this every day and every moment, and that makes
me more and more humble. The world alone can say whether or not
there is humility in my words and actions. But I am humble and my
humility goes on increasing, because I know and realize my mental,
physical and spiritual limitations.
With this introduction I would like to tell the students, boys and
girls, that humility is the primary thing to be acquired. One who is not
humble cannot put one’s learning to proper use. What does it matter
if he has obtained double first class or has stood first? One does not
achieve everything by just passing an examination. It is possible that it
may help in securing a good job or a good marriage alliance. But, if
learning is to be put to proper use, if it is to be used only for the sake
of service, one should acquire more and more humility every day. No
service is possible without it. I know quite a few students who are
proud of their B. A. Hons. or engineering degrees. The villagers
would not even bother to look at them. They would say: “How are we
concerned with degrees? How are you going to share our troubles ?”
Nowhere in the 7,00,000 Indian villages would one find an instance of
someone winning the affection of the villagers because he possessed
high academic degrees. Man should not use his intelligence and
spiritual power to earn his livelihood and sustain himself. For that
purpose God has provided him with hands and legs, and with these he
should do some common labour and earn his bread. Can learning be
used for earning thousands of rupees? In the past even lawyers
rendered their services free of charge. This practice is prevalent even
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

149

today. A barrister cannot file a suit for his fees, for, his is supposed to
be a profession of service. The same is true of vaids. To which student,
boy or girl, can I say that the wealth of learning is meant for service?
And that too in Sind? Here they try to imitate the Sahibs and the
Parsis. When I saw the girls during my first visit to Sind I wondered
how there were so many Parsi girls around. Later on I came to know
that they belonged to the Amil class. I had come in contact with the
Sindhis in South Africa. But I had no occasion to know Sindhi women
since they never brought their women with them. I saw Sindhi women
only when I came to Sind. I was familiar with the name ‘bhai-bandh’.
But I was rather scared by the name ‘Amil’. I wondered what kind of
people they would be. When I saw the Amils I found them exactly like
the Sahibs. Let no one be under the impression that I am running
down the Sahibs. It is only proper Sahibs should appear like Sahibs. If
others try to imitate the Sahibs they would meet the fate of the
jackdaw who posed as a peacock in Aesop’s Fables. A crow is all
right as it is but appears ridiculous when it forgets itself and imitates
someone else. Thus, how nice would it be if we confine ourselves to
the Indian way of living. It was not Dadabhai but Lord Curzon who
said that the annual per capita income in India was Rs. 40. This
average includes the income of the millionaires also. This means that
30 million have no income at all. They sustain themselves by begging
and eat only the crumbs of bread they get. How should we live in a
country which is so poor? We will find that we are not wealthy enough
to live like Sahibs if we look at our average per capita income. We
must realize that we can look well-clad only if we wear khadi. If the
girls are keen on silk saris and laces they would be at the mercy of the
boys. Here, the boys accept the brides only if they bring thousands of
rupees and with this money they want to go to Oxford to get degrees.
The very fact that you have invited me and are presenting me a
purse implies your pledge that you would work for the Harijans. If
that is not true and you want to exonerate yourselves by giving
money, then that money is worthless. This work cannot be
accomplished by money alone. You must give your heart along with
money. Money alone will achieve nothing if your heart is not willing.
Have you taken a vow of such service? If you have done so, I will tell
you what to do. You would become humble and simple. And you
would go to the Harijan children and treat them as your own. These
children, their bodies, their noses and their mouths are so full of dirt
and they stink so much that you can go to them only in simple dress.
150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If you wish to work in India and among the Harijans, you have to do
it with humility and without being proud of your learning—only then
can you succeed. I have visited seven or eight Harijan colonies in
Karachi. Two or three of these places were quite good. I would like to
congratulate the people of Karachi on that. But there are two or three
other places where you would never stay. The huts there are on the
point of collapsing. There is no light and no sun. The sun can be
rarely seen from there. People are living under great hardships. Those
people approached me and requested me to arrange for houses for
them. You can do a lot of work if you go among such people. I do
not suggest that you should give up your studies and go there. You
should do this work in your spare time. Dr. Dutt, the Principal of the
Forman Christian College of Lahore, has written to me that some boys
from his college go and do Harijan work every day. I was delighted to
read the report of the work done by the students of the Agra College.
The Principal of that college also does the same work and sends me a
report. The students of the Dehra Dun College devote their vacation
to this work. Those boys asked me as to what they should do about
the problem of the left-over food. I wrote1 to them it was a sin to give
our left-over food to the sweepers and it should be stopped and they
stopped it. The sweepers then said that they must have the left-overs.
Just money would not be enough. We have got to serve the sweepers
even if they persist in bad habits.
How is such service possible? Only a person with a pure heart
and good faith can take up this work. It cannot be done by merely
making the Harijans conscious of their economic conditions. Dr.
Ambedkar is such an intelligent and clever lawyer that he puts to
shame many others. He is able to touch the hearts of many people by
his sharp intelligence. The magnitude of his sacrifice is great. He is
absorbed in his own work. He leads a simple life. He is capable of
earning one to two thousand rupees every month. He is also in a
position to settle down in Europe if he so desires. But he doesn’t want
to stay there. He is only concerned about the welfare of the Harijans.
But what is the condition of even a man like him in our society today?
He says: “If I go to Poona to attend the Assembly session, I have to
stay in a hotel and spend the entire amount of the daily allowance of
Rs. 10, whereas the others can stay with their friends and save that
money. There is no Hindu family in Poona which would accept me as
1

Vide “Students and Vacation”

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

151

a colleague or a friend.” Whose shame is this? How can one who has
been put to such treatment be won over? At the same time we have to
touch the heart of Shankaracharya. Those two are poles apart. How
can they be brought together? We stand between these two. Would we
be able to impress them by our learning? What would I do if
Ambedkar says, ‘You are traitors; I shall follow the path of violence’?
I would have to bend my head and say: ‘Here is my neck for your
sword. I must expiate for the sins of my ancestors.’ Again, should I
go before Shankaracharya and recite the Vedas? He would say: ‘You
have no right to recite the Vedas.’ But, surely, he cannot say that I am
not entitled to make any sacrifice, or be humble? Hence, we have to
win over both of them with our sacrifice and tolerance.
You had the portrait of the late Vithalbhai unveiled by me. But
what good has it done to you? Your Principal said that Vithalbhai was
one of the greatest servants of India. There is no doubt about it. No
one can deny the work he did in the Bombay Municipal Corporation,
the Bombay Legislative Assembly and the Central Legislative
Assembly. His courage, his ability, his sacrifice were second to none.
Moreover, he presided over the [Central] Legislative Assembly like a
rishi. No one could surpass him in simplicity. He was a scholar and a
great barrister. Had he been corrupt, he would have made lakhs of
rupees. But he did not have much money. He used to send me a large
portion of the salary he received as the President of the Central
Legislative Assembly. It was a fairly large sum and the interest from it
is added to it. I have not yet been able to decide how best I can use it.
You have made me unveil today the portrait of such a person. But
having done that you cannot claim that you have, thereby, discharged
your debt to Vithalbhai. He had accepted the Harijans as his own
people and used to mix with them. He was present in the Harijan
colony at Godhra when the first Harijan meeting was held there. I did
not recognize him at first, because he was dressed like an ascetic. He
did not feel that being a barrister it was beneath his dignity to visit the
Harijan colony.
I have laid down for you the conditions for doing Harijan work.
I suggested to you how to put your education to the best use. I also
told you that you must keep away from the evil custom of taking and
giving [dowry]. No matter how many progressive boys and girls there
may be in Sind, I would say that that is meaningless and the dust
152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

would remain dust1 so long as there is a single young man who is a
victim of this bad custom. You have to wear khadi if you wish to serve
Daridranarayana. May God grant you good sense and may you turn
out to be worthy servants of India.2
[ From Gujarati ]
Harijanbandhu, 22-7-1934

195. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
KARACHI,

July 11, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

These days I cannot write to you when I propose to do so. I
commenced this letter at 5.30 a.m. after breakfast. Just then a Parsi
lady came in with her 15-year-old daughter. The latter has won the
first place in tennis in the whole of India, but she has now lost interest
in worldly things. Her interest now is all in religion. She, therefore,
urged her mother to bring her to see me. She gave ten rupees for the
Harijan Fund and has now left after obtaining my autograph.
Please do not be unhappy at the news of my fast. It is absolutely
necessary. Large crowds come to the meetings and sanatanists are on
the war-path. People do not tolerate their conduct and, therefore,
trouble is bound to follow. People will not listen to mere exhortations.
One can convey one’s message to vast masses of people only by
fasting. Crowds at the meetings are larger than ever before and it is
very difficult to control them. Seven days will pass without any
difficulty. Please don’t worry in the least. My health is perfectly all
right. In spite of heavy pressure of work, the blood-pressure remains
round about 150. That should be considered very good. The weight is
104. I shall be happy if the rest of the tour is completed without
further trouble. August will be taken up by the fast and the gradual
return to normal diet. After that as God wills.
I must get a detailed report about your health. I am writing to
Dahyabhai to send me one.3
1

A Gujarati saying which means : ‘There will be no improvement.’
After the speech, an auction of rings and bangles given by women students
of the college fetched a considerable amount.
3
Vide the following item.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

153

I learnt yesterday about Mani having been released. Mahadev and
Pyarelal will join me at Lahore. That will increase the size of the party.
Kakasaheb has joined it at Hyderabad. It is quite desirable that all
three of them should be with me at present. Narahari will not be
coming. If I can stay at a fixed place, I can meet everybody. Let
God’s will prevail.
Ba keeps good health. She manages to secure the food that she
needs. At any rate, in such matters nothing is likely to escape
Thakkar Bapa’s attention.
Ramadas’s trouble is mental, and mental illness cannot but have
an effect on the body. At present he is following. . . ’s1 advice. He has
been considerably reduced. The fact that he has three children also
worries him. What is ordained will happen. Devdas’s Lakshmi keeps
fairly good health.
I had long discussion with . . .2 and others. Just now they are not
likely to listen to any advice. The new wind is intoxicating beyond
measure. They will come to their senses only when that intoxication
has subsided. Swami parted from us at Viramgam. He will now take
up constructive work in the suburbs.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 110-1

196. LETTER TO DAHYABHAI PATEL
KARACHI,

July 11, 1934
CHI. DAHYABHAI,

Let me have detailed news about Vallabhbhai’s health3 by return
of post.
1

The names are omitted in the source.
ibid
3
He was released from the Nasik Jail on July 14, 1934 on grounds of health.
2

154

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Ask Manibehn to write to me in detail about her health.1
Mahadev of course will bring all news.2
I hope you are doing well.
Blessings from

BAPU
DAHYABHAI VALLABHBHAI P ATEL
R AMNIVAS, P AREKH S TREET, B OMBAY 4

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-—4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 160

197. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
July 11, 1934
BHAISHRI MUNSHI,

I got your letter 3 . I went through your article 4 with as much
attention as I could command in this excitement. I found the last
paragraph against the spirit of peace. I have, therefore, omitted it and
concluded thearticle with two new sentences. [The new sentences are :]
Whether this consummation can be reached through the
Parliam-entary effort remains to be seen. Its success will largely
1

Manibehn Patel was released from the Belgaum Jail on July 8, 1934.
Mahadev Desai was released from the Belgaum Jail on July 9, 1934.
3
Dated July 7, 1934
4
This was entitled, “Our objective : A Constituent Assembly”. The last two
paragraphs of the article read : “Thus the Constituent Assembly has come to play an
important part in modern political life. The Congress stands for such an Assembly,
for, it alone can be the symbol of India’s freedom and the source of her people’s
strength. Through it India hopes to attain the dignity of an enfranchised nation,
fashion its will to self-determination and find its own soul to express it through
fundamental laws.
“Congressmen will fight the forthcoming elections to the Legislative
Assembly on the issue of Constituent Assembly. They will have nothing to do with
Simon Commission pretending to sit in judgment over our ability to govern
ourselves. They will have no more to do with Round Tables where nominees of
Government speak the language of patriots and follow in the footsteps of flunkeys.
They will aim at educating public opinion on the question of the Constituent
Assembly. And in the Assembly they will solely work to create a situation whereby
an Indian Constituent Assembly would become an accomplished fact. The path to
such a goal does not necessarily lie through bloodshed. It often lies through a
determined bloodless con-flict leading to a treaty between two nations which have
learnt to respect each other.”
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

155

depend on the verdict of the voters.1
If you approve of these changes, you may adopt them and use
the article.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C. W. 7546. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi. Also Pilgrimage to
Freedom, p. 376

198. TELEGRAM TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
KARACHI,

July 11, 1944
MATHURADAS
74 WALKESHWAR R D.
BOMBAY
APPEAL
TIFIED.

BAPA
BAPA

AND
DOING

IMPLIED

CONDEMNATION

EVERYTHING

HUMANLY

WHOLLY

UNJUS-

POSSIBLE.

BAPU
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

199. INTERVIEW TO SIND JOURNALISTS2
KARACHI,

July 11, 1934
Mr. Punniah3 at the outset said that the reasons adduced for embarking on his
new fast were not convincing and that he should not undertake another fiery ordeal
close on the heels of a strenous Harijan tour. Gandhiji replied :

The movement is of tremendous importance. Nothing but a
drastic measure like fasting can meet the situation. You can influence
the mass mind not through speeches or writings but only by
something which is most well understood by the masses, that is
suffering, and the most acceptable method is that of fasting. My
1
2
3

156

These two sentences are reproduced from Pilgrimage to Freedom.
The source had reproduced the interview from Sind Observer.
Editor, Sind Observer, and President of Sind Journalists’ Association
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

repeated experience here and in South Africa has been that, when well
applied, it has been the most infallible remedy. My lot has been cast
with the masses, and I have always to take work from and through
them. The only language they understand is the language of the heart,
and fasting when it is utterly unselfish is the language of the heart.
Gandhiji was acquainted with the news that the Bombay Congress circles
viewed with alarm his contemplated fast and Congress friends were of opinion that
the strain would be too much. Gandhiji smilingly answered :

I have no such fears, and physically speaking a fast after an
exhaustive tour can only benefit the person who has undertaken the
tour.
But then there is the risk.

Of course, I am risking. I am not taking this fast for its physical
effect. Physically speaking, there is some kind of risk, because my
body does not require a fasting cure. Any fast must require some risk,
otherwise it has no meaning. It must involve torture of the flesh.
The decision is irrevocable. I announced1 at the Ajmer meeting
that I would undertake some sort of penance. The announcement was
long overdue. I reasoned with myself and with my friends and then
came to the deliberate conclusion that fasting was the only penance
that I should make. Then the question was that of duration. I would
have undertaken a longer fast. I do not want to produce any unnecessary shocks, and therefore I did not undertake the maximum period.
Friends who at the present moment are physically near me have
realized the necessity of the fast.
Does it include also Kasturba ?

Yes. It has been my rare fortune that in all such matters she has
never worried me, never argued with me, and has allowed me to have
my own way, although she has felt the distress. Therefore although
she is my wife, I have not hesitated to say that she is one of the bravest
women I have ever met in this respect.
Mr. Punniah then asked him about his views on the Sind separation issue, over
which the people of this province were greatly agitated. Gandhiji with a significant
laughter and a nod of his head remarked :

Now, you are taking me out of my depths. It is not to be
answered before the 3rd of August.
But then you have been participating in political discussions.
1

Vide “Speech at Public Meeting, Ajmer”, 5-7-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

157

Yes. But it was not for public consumption. I am glad that a
reference has been now made to it, and that I got an opportunity for
expressing my sorrow at the breach of confidence indulged in by
some young journalists who were permitted to be present at the
Congress at the Khalikdina Hall meeting. I told them that the proceedings ought not to be reported. I consider that it is a breach of
confidence to have reported unauthorized statements, and I felt that
those who broke that promise had not observed the fundamental
etiquette of journalism and it was gross impropriety. I have a fairly
high notion of the journalistic profession.
Has not the Harijan movement estranged the community for natinal politics ?

No. Not in the slightest degree. Because, some people have used
this movement as a cloak to divert the mind of the people from real
politics. As it is well known, I don’t believe in watertight
compartments. Politics, religion, social reform, economic uplift all
these form parts of a whole.
Answering critics who are of the view that Council-entry was a concession to
weakness and that in his heart of hearts Gandhiji had no faith in such a programme,
Gandhiji said;

I have no such superiority complex. It is not a concession to
weakness. It is a concession to hard facts. That I have myself no faith
in the Council programme in terms of swaraj is a different matter. I
should be sorry that those who have faith in council-entry were by
any act of mine prevented from acting according to their faith. It was,
therefore, a matter of pleasure for me to help those congressmen who
had faith in Council-entry programme to follow out their policy.
The talk then turned to the Communal Award. Asked what course he would
adopt at the Benares meeting of the Congress Working Committee, Gandhiji said :

Pandit Malaviya, Bapu Aney and others have felt aggrieved over
the Working Committee resolution. For my part I have seen nothing
to alter my view. But I would, consistently with my belief in the
correctness of the Working Committee resolution, go any length to
retain the valuable co-operation of Panditji and other friends. The
more I think of the Working Committee resolution, the more I think
that for the Congress it is the only correct attitude possible.
Mr. Punniah said that the bomb of fast was hurled in a country which was
already apprehensive that unless Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan
and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel were released he may court jail again after 3rd August.
The public wanted an assurance that he would not go to jail again as there was a lot of

158

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

important national work to be attended to.

I honestly say that it is a matter not in my hands at all. I don’t
thereby mean to say that it is in the hands of the Government, though
it would be true to a certain extent if I said so. However, at the
presentmoment, what I wish to say is that it is surely in the hands of
God. I have no fixed notions of what I should do after the fast and the
convalescence after it is over. You should believe me implicitly when I
say that I should be guided by he inner voice.
To a question from a journalist he replied :

My impressions of the Sind tour have been very happy. I should
have been happier if I could beg more money.1
I do not want to rob you of what little you get. At least give me
your pencils.
The Tribune, 13-7-1934 and 15-7-1934

200. SPEECH AT PARSIS’ MEETING, KARACHI2
July 11, 1934
Whenever I come to you I do not at all feel that I am a guest, but
amidst Parsis I am amidst members of my own family. My close
relations with the Parsis are of long standing. It is not as if these
relations began with me. I have inherited them from my elders. My
father’s personal friends included many Parsis. I have accepted
money from you. But you have been giving away money to all the
world. You are known as donors of the first order. You have received
this certificate not from a Parsi but from an English writer. You have
fully earned that certificate. But you have given me something more
than money. I have been able to steal your hearts. I have always felt
that I have a place in the hearts of the Parsis. Even if I am invited to a
Parsi meeting or family out of courtesy, I would make it a point to
attend it. I am and I have always been confident that any time I want
some public service from you, I shall be able to get it. Hence, I could
not have declined your invitation this time. Bhai Sidhva3 has already
explained to you that my physical and mental condition does not
permit me to attend any meetings. I do not like to go out anywhere. I
1

What follows is reproduced from The Tribune, 13-7-1934, which had reported
that a sum of Rs. 30 was collected on the spot and presented to Gandhiji.
2
The meeting was held at Jahangir Rajkotwala Gardens. This appeared under
the title: “To the Parsis of Karachi”.
3
R. K. Sidhva, Secretary, Parsi Rajkiya Mandal. He gave an account of the
activites of the Mandal.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

159

prefer to do my work sitting at home. If there is an occasion to go
anywhere on foot I would like to walk from village to village
spreading my message through conversation and that would give me
enough satisfaction. But I could not decline your invitation.
After saying this much, let me come to the work I want you to
do. The Chairman has given you some idea about it. The fact that
from the activities going on here he selected only two suggests that I
am going to ask for those very things from you—khadi and
prohibition. You must understand what these two things mean. You
have got into the habit of giving away money as donation, and so, you
are sure to give it. But when something becomes a matter of habit it
loses its virtue. If a man always speaks the truth it is not a trait
cultivated in childhood but his inborn nature. It is in your nature to
give away money. It would be a novel thing if you do something
more. That is why when I came to you last time I told you that if you
wished to make some tangible sacrifice, you must give up your
fondness for city life. Your population throughout the world is of
about one lakh. Out of this the majority is in India and that too
mainly in Bombay and Gujarat. You do business worth millions of
rupees and naturally you have become one with the cities. One can see
your impact very much in Bombay and Karachi. But what about the
villages? Your impact does not reach the villages. And it is quite
evident that it is not felt there. If the Parsis scatter themselves in seven
lakh villages they would be completely lost, for, there would be one
Parsi for every seven villages. Moreover, this population of one lakh
includes men, women and children. Hence, you cannot reach all the
villages. But you can certainly influence them [through supporting
khadi].
The khadi which the villagers produce is meant not only for the
Hindus and Muslims but also for the Parsis. Hence you can reach and
influence the villages by using the khadi produced there. You know
that men and women in Utkal walk four to five miles in the hope of
obtaining rice worth one pice or some work. Just think of thier plight.
I have received a letter from Utkal today in which it is said that it is
said that it is possible to do a lot of khadi work there; but from where
to get the workers? And, who would use that khadi? I am at least
having a loin-cloth. Those men in Utkal do not have even that. What
they are wearing cannot be called a loin-cloth. They are merely rags.
How can these people bathe? They must at least have a change of
clothes after their bath. They have to carry on with just one loin-cloth.
160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Millions of people live in such conditions. If I can provide them work
for a pice, they would be able to get something at any rate. In Utkal I
met ten thousand weavers. They told me that nobody bought the cloth
they had woven. Those weavers had been weaving mill yarn. I had to
tell them that I would become their customer if they would weave
khadi out of hand-spun yarn. Moreover they would have to spin
themselves. What charity can you give when conditions of such
poverty and starvation prevail and where people are ready to work for
a pice and ask for so little? They cannot fill their stomachs with cash
and they would become invalids. How can one give charity to anyone
who is able to work? He can be given charity only in terms of work.
Hence I told them that they must work and take their wages and buy
cheap rice. We can even give them that rice at subsidized price. So
much can be and has been done. Many of them, therefore, have not
accepted alms and have taken up work. I want such pure charity from
you. You have given money and will give more. But I would not be
satisfied with that much. I would be satisfied only if you would serve
Daridranarayana. They would not come to ask for alms. You should
provide them with work.
What work can be provided for millions of men? There should
be some home industry for them. That industry can only be the
spinning-wheel. And it can thrive on if you would buy the khadi
made by the millions. If you visit the local Khadi Bhandar you would
get any type of khadi, in any colour and of a fine texture. No Parsi
woman would be able to say that she cannot get the type of khadi that
she would like to have or would suit her. If you have forgotten or do
not know it, let me tell you that there are 75 Parsi women in Bombay
who maintain themselves by doing khadi embroidery. Dadabhoy’s
granddaughters have engaged them for that work. Mithubehn Petit
also does similar work. She has gone to the villages. In Bombay the
women earn [daliy] wages of one, two and even three rupees out of
this kind of work.
These women print designs and embroider khadi and thereby
make it acceptable to the women who are fond of these things. You
can help these women. Bhai Sidhva has, while talking about khadi,
stated that you women buy not foreign cloth but swadeshi mill cloth.
You only fill the coffers of the millonaires. I have not come here to
beg on behalf of the millionaires, but I ask for donations on behalf of
Daridranarayana. And that too not donations in the form of money.
You must appreciate the craftsmanship of the poor. Adorn yourselves
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

161

by wearing the khadi made by them.
Liquor was another thing that Bhai Sidhva mentioned. I was
very much delighted when I learnt from your report that 80 per cent
of you had given up liquor. But I heard there that this 80 per cent
applies to the occasions of marriage and navjot1 when liquor is not
served. I had thought that it had stopped even in private homes. I
would not be satisfied if it has not gone from homes. Still, whatever
has happened is a good thing. But the work would be complete only
when the evil of drink has disappeared from homes. Some Parsis tell
me that toddy does one good rather than harm. Some may even say
that the proportion of alcohol is more in whisky and less in toddy and
lesser still if the toddy is fresh. That way even those who take beer
fool themselves. I have seen drunkenness among people who take
both these. It is not as if those who do not drink toddy are unhealthy
and those who take it do not have to go to the doctors. I have seen a
whole array of medicine bottles in the houses of some Parsi friends
who are habitual toddy drinkers. So I request the Parsis and would go
on requesting them till I die that they must give up this evil thing. If
the Parsis in general give up liquor, those Parsis who earn their
livelihood out of it would also be convinced. You are people with
great enterprise. If you realize that this is not a worthy occupation,
you would take up something else. I can never persuade myself to
believe that the Parsi community lacks the spirit do discovery and
adventure and enterprise. You are capable of finding your way where
others may not.
You have given me Rs. 352 for Harijan work. In a way, I have
no right to ask money from you for that work. I always ask money
from you for everything. But when I take money from you for the
work which is meant for the Hindus it implies something else. The
direct objective of this activity is to wipe out untouchability which
involves 50 million people. This is such a great corroding factor in
Hinduism that it has penetrated into other fields as well and
untouchability has become a widespread thing. A large number of
wise Parsis come to me and say that the distinctions of high and low
have always existed, and so I need not pursue this activity. I ask them:
“Since when have you become such Vedantists? And when did you
study the Hindu Shastras?” They might have read a few sacred books;
1

A Parsi religious ceremony where a boy or a girl is invested with the sacred

thread.

162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and since the Parsis have a custom of consulting astrologers, they
might have heard something from them; and from that they might
have come to the conclusion that the differences of high and low
have existed since time immemorial. Is untouchability something that
the prophet Zoroaster preached? The feeling of high and low is
something Satanic. It can never be divine. The evil that is going on in
the name of Hindu religion has penetrated all religions. The same
religions prevailing outside India may not have even the slightest tinge
of it; but it has definitely entered those religions as soon as they
landed in India. It is such a dark well. The other wide implication of
removing untouchability is the feeling of brotherhood amongst all
religions. It does not mean doing away with the differences among
religions. Just as men have different names and faces, these religions
also are different. But just as men are all human in spite of their
different names and forms, just as leaves of a tree though different as
leaves are the same as leaves of the same tree, all religions though
different are the same. We must treat all religions as equal. It is this
lofty consequence of this activity that I have in mind. But for it I
would not have decided to devote my life to this work. I am not such a
fool that I would offer to sacrifice my life for a trifling job, go from
village to village at the age of 65 and beg for two pice or even a
pice.This work that I have begun not only means the liberation of 50
millions, but I have to melt the hardened hearts of the caste Hindus for
their liberation. If those hearts can be melted, untouchability which
has gone so deep and whose impact is so widespread can be
eradicated. I do not hesitate of feel ashamed to take money from you
for such a widespread activity.
I have shown you what the removal of untouchability should
mean to you. I am of course taking this money you have offered; but
along with it I wish to carry away the hearts of the Parsi men and
women, and seek your blessings that God should grant me rapid
success in this work.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 22-7-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

163

201. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
July 12, 1934
CHI. MRIDULA,

I am replying to your letter in the moving train.
All similes are misleading. They can be carried only up to a
point. You should have taken this view of the simile I used. I would
not hesitate to admit that the Congress misled the public into a
fraudulent activity. To some extent I had a hand in framing those
rules. If I can have a say, I shall definitely wind up the fraud of
swadeshi through the Congress. Whatever purpose that fraud had to
serve has been served. Now I see that it is only doing harm. But it may
well be useful to those who still do not see it as a fraudulent activity. It
is merely a question of discernment. I have patience.
My blessings to Bharati, Suhrid, Nimubehn and Indu. They
must be all doing well. Nothing has gone wrong with me. The body
and the mind are terribly fatigued. I need sleep very badly. I am
trying to have it.
You need not be alarmed by my coming fast1 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 11191. Courtesy: Sarabhai Foundation

202. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
July 12, 1934
CHI. MIRA,

This is being written in a moving train.
I hope you duly received a note of authority on his banker. I do
not know for how much it was. You will let me know your
requirement in due time.
For the whole of August at least I am free. The way before me
after is not at all clear and I do not worry. He will show the next step.
Andrews is due on 25th August.
You will keep your health. Please know that I shall not mind if
you show no visible result from your visit to England. The experience
1

Which Gandhiji was to undertake from August 7 to August 13. For his
statement on the fast, vide “Statement on Fast”, 10-7-1934

164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you will gain is adequate result for me. Therefore you will not be
impatient with yourself or your surroundings.
I am keeping quite well. The fatigue is there. But that is
inevitable.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6191. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9757

203. INTERVIEW TO “THE TRIBUNE”1
July 12, 1934
Gandhiji, who was very tired, first hesitated to give any interview saying that
his brain was not working owing to the fatigue from the strain of the journey; but
being pressed to give a message to the people of the Punjab he said :

I wish I would get the quiet I am pining for in Lahore. The
terrific noises that greeted me at every station have already shattered
my nerves, which are now ill-fitted to stand such strain, nor are these
noises conducive to the reception of the message of essential
brotherhood I am struggling to deliver. I long for a suitable atmosphere for its delivery.
The Tribune, 14-7-1934

204. TELEGRAM TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE
[Before July 13, 1934 ] 2
YOUR

KIND

ANXIOUS
HAVE

FOR

BEEN

WIRE.
A

THE

CALCUTTA

SETTLEMENT

BOOKED,

PRAY

OF

VISIT

IS

DOMESTIC

URGENT.
QUARRELS.

FRIENDS
ALL

ARE

DATES

FORGIVE.

GANDHI

The Bombay Chronicle, 14-7-1934

1

Gandhiji was interviewed in the train by the special correspondent who
travelled with him from Samasta to Lahore.
2
The telegram, as received by the addressee, had appeared under the date-line,
“Santiniketan, July 13”, 1934.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

165

205. LETTER TO UTTAMCHAND SHAH
July 13, 1934
CHI. UTTAMCHAND,

I got your letter. Just now I don’t feel like criticizing you or
other co-workers for what you or they do. Maybe through the present
separation itself the sincere ones will come together. Anybody who
earns an honest pie will certainly be doing service thus. Please remain
where you are without feeling any regret and see that both of you
improve your health. When the time comes, you may return. Why do
you worry about my fast?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 9442

206. INTERVIEW TO PROVINCIAL CONGRESS LEADERS
LAHORE,

July 13, 1934
Provincial Congress leaders including Lala Dunichand of Ambala, Raizada
Hansraj and Lala Sham Lal met Gandhiji. One of the questions discussed was that of
the elimination of undesirable elements from the Congress in the new scheme of reorganization. Gandhiji admitted the existence of such elements, but he could not see
his way under the present constitution of the Congress to prevent such undesirable
elements from becoming members of the Congress. The only way to keep such
elements in check was to strengthen the better element in the Congress.
At the same time he pointed out that at the instance of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru
a rule had been framed that if an office-bearer of the Congress acted in a manner
prejudicial to the discipline of the Congress, he could be dealt with.
The next topic discussed was that of lack of co-operation among Congress
workers and leaders. Gandhiji said that the only way in which this could be dealt with
was to evolve higher character and a noble spirit of service among Congress workers.
Gandhiji was then asked how power, influence and prestige could be secured for
the Congress as that alone could enable the Congress to meet the reactionary and
hostile forces in the country. It was pointed out that if the country sent higher type of
men to the legislatures, that would give some additional prestige and influence to the
Congress. Gandhiji agreed with this, but laid emphasis on the fact that Congressmen
should acquire influence and position in the Councils by dint of their service and
work.

166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The question of employing a large contingent of paid workers for every
province next came up. Gandhiji agreed with the proposal that a large number of paid
workers to carry on the work of the Congress should be employed in every province;
and to some extent already there were paid men in the All-India and Provincial
Congress organizations, though on a small scale. Gandhiji was requested to remove
the idea prevailing among the public regarding paid workers, and he said that he
would write on the subject, though he had previously written on the subject.
The question of the Communal Award was also raised. It was pointed out that if
the Communal Award became an accomplished fact and a Constitution based on it
became legal statute, it would become extremely difficult for any future national
Government to undo the mischief that it would have done by that time . Gandhiji
replied that he recognized such evils in case of effect being given to the Communal
Award but he saw no solution of the problem unless all parties concerned agreed to an
equitable scheme.

The Tribune, 15-7-1934

207. INTERVIEW TO HARIJAN DEPUTATION
LAHORE,

July 13, 1934
That he was maturing the scheme to start an Industrial Home at Delhi for the
Harijans was the information conveyed by Gandhiji to the Harijan deputation that met
him this afternoon.
With reference to the suggestion that the Harijan Sangh should agitate for
annulment of the Punjab Land Alienation Act, Gandhiji said that Harijan Sangh being
a non-political social reform body, is unable to do anything in this respect and
cannot come in conflict with the Government on such political matters.

The Bombay Chronicle, 14-7-1934

208. SPEECH AT STUDENTS’ MEETING, LAHORE1
July 13, 1934
I am very grateful to all of you who have presented me with the
address and the purses. That which I feared has happened. This
meeting was arranged exclusively for students but the general public
has come in. This is not proper. Even yesterday when I saw the huge
crowd I was afraid that my car would break down on the way. On
work for which a quarter of an hour was enough you wasted an hour
1

This appeared under the title : “Knowledge for Service”.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

167

and quarter of my time. Therefore, in future, only those for whom a
meeting is fixed should attend it. Service to Harijans is a religious
undertaking and so it can be accomplished by penance alone. Such
tasks can only be performed in a peaceful and quiet atmosphere.
Perhaps this is my last tour of the Punjab, because I may not be able
to come here again. Therefore, I should like to impress upon you [the
importance of my message] as strongly as I can during this tour. I
thank all the students who have shown interest in the task of service to
Harijans. 1
In your two addresses you have in all humility acknowledged
your shortcomings. And for this I cannot thank you enough, however,
much I try. Even in order to acquire knowledge, one must recognize
one’s ignorance and acknowledge it in all humility. That you have
acknowle-dged it is a good sign. Please understand the limitations
and conditions of this activity. I congratulate the students of this
college who are taking part in it, and hope for their greater participation. As I told2 the students at Karachi, this work can be carried out
only by self-sacrifice, penance and suffering. Moreover, the work is to
be carried on not in the cities but mainly in the villages. You say that
you wish to treat Harijans as your own and that you do not
discriminate against them. If this is true, do your duty towards them. It
is not enough that you treat the Harijan boys on equal terms in
schools and colleges.Your duty consists in going to the Harijans in the
villages, treating them as your own and loving them. You will realize
when you go there that they have very little knowledge about rules of
sanitation. Some of them are given to drinking and carrion-eating.
You have to go and convince them. How can that be done? It is not
possible by going there like sahebs. Rather, you would have to go
there in simplictiy and humility. In that work college education is of
little use. If you carry with you the fragrance of courtesy, religious
sentiment, truthfulness and abstinence, you will be able to influence
them. Giving orders or feeling superior will serve no purpose. It
would be done only by remaining their servants and fulfilling the
conditions which I have indicated. It is enough if you can spare some
time after studies.
Hinduism and the Hindu community would perish unless

1
2

168

This paragraph is translated from Harijan Sevak, 20-7-1934.
Vide “Speech at Dayaram Jethamal Sind College, Karachi”, 10-7-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

untouchability is eradicated. That adharma1 , that blemish, that poison
is so widespread and it has been with us for so long that we are not
able to feel its poisonous effect. But it is corroding us. A person like
me sees with his naked eye that religion is well on the path of
destruction. This poison has not remained confined to the Harijans. It
has of course affected the 60 millions, but it has spread to the caste
Hindus as well. It has also reached the Muslim and Christian
communities that come in contact with us. It is most important and
essential that we wipe out the difference of high and low among us.
If we want to do that work, we have to fulfil two conditions. You
tell me that you indulge in pleasures and think anxiously about
examinations day and night. But you are not satisfied with what you
get out of it and you are eager to improve this state of affairs. I do not
wish to suggest that because you say these things you must leave your
schools and colleges. But, while remaining in your schools and
colleges, secure that education which is not provided there; and
supplement the education imparted there. At present, the minds of the
students become dull there. They can only imitate. Instead of this,
they must acquire the power of independent thinking. We are born
into this world not for indulging in sensuous activities but for
sacrifice, for restraint. The purpose of education is that we know God
and progress towards the ideal , and get closer to Him. It is the strict
law of God that anyone who desires to be close to Him should
renounce the world and yet be in it. This is what the first mantra of
the Ishopanishad exhorts us to do. This thing is difficult and yet easy
at the same time. It is easy if we believe that we have to live for service.
We acquire learning not for sensuous pleasures and for earning but
for mukti. Education is considered necessary to save ourselves from
darkness, sensuous pleasures and capricious behaviour. If we understand this, we can put our learning to good use. If you understand this
much, you would not be worried about examinations. You would be
calm if you succeed and not be despondent if you fail.
You have said in your address that you are given to sensuous
pleasures. This implies that you have given up khadi. The fact that
you have given up khadi in the Punjab where it is readily available
means that you have given up Daridranarayana, the village and the
village people. Khadi is produced by the villagers. Millions of
unemployed people and those who can find no other occupation are
1

Opposite of dharma

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

169

able to earn a little by it. In my view, you have committed a grave
crime by giving up khadi. You are getting education for which the
villagers pay. Not every student among you pays for the education he
receives. Apart from your tuition fee, there is much other expenditure
incurred for you, and that money comes from the villages. You study
with the help of the money from the villages, and what do you give
them in return? Nothing ! Wearing khadi is the least you should do.
Serve Daridranarayana to this extent. To label anything else than
khadi as swadeshi is a false claim. By calling it swadeshi you are
deceiving yourselves and the world. Save yourselves from this
deception.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 29-7-1934

209. TELEGRAM TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL1
[July 14, 1934]
GET
EXAMINED
ME AT
CAWNPOR

BY
DOCTOR
AND
E OR
BENARES.

AFTER

TREATMENT

JOIN

The Hindustan Times, 15-7-1934

210. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA2
LAHORE,

July 14, 1934
AM

FOLLOWING

DOCTORS’

ADVICE.

BAPU
C. W. 7964. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

211. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
July 14, 1934
CHI. AMALA,

I am sorry you are not at peace now at Sabarmati. Will you tell
me what you would like to do? It is a terrible thing for anyone to live
1

The addressee was released on health grounds form Nasik Jail on July 14,

1934.
2

The telegram was in reply to the addressee’s of even date which read : “Most
humbly submit you should not gamble with your health against doctors’ advice.”

170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

under a sense of humiliation. 1 I would like you therefore to make
your choice. I had hoped that you would be happy in Sabarmati. One
thing you would make up your mind about. You cannot stay with me,
unless I can settle down anywhere for any length of time. And you
won’t feel happy in Wardha in any case. You should be sure also that
I do not want to drive you away from me. On the contrary I want to
make you happy in so far as it is within my power.
Please do not worry about my fast. It would be all right. You
simply cannot understand it and its value. You will, by and by.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

212. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
July 14, 1934
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

Have Budhabhai [and] Juthabhai taken up some additional work
now? Try and remove Amalabehn’s difficulties2 if you can. Let me
know if she is harassing you. I suppose you must have asked that girl
to leave the Ashram. I hope Ramabehn is staying on there for the
present.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4024

1
2

Vide the following item.
Vide also the preceding item.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

171

213. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
July 14, 1934
CHI. RAMA,

I have not yet been able to persuade any woman [worker] to go
there1 . I am still trying. Please regard it as your dharma to stay on till
somebody relieves you. Mahadev will arrive here today. I will know
more after he comes.
Write to me sometimes.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5365

214. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
July 14, 1934
CHI. VASUMATI,

I got your letter. I see no need for your coming to Wardha, but
you may come if you cannot cantrol your desire. Even if you don’t
feel inclined to stay in the Harijan Ashram, I think it will be worthwhile to have some experience there. But I don’t insist on your adopting any particular course. All I desire is that you should do what appeals to you and that, having made your choice, you should stick to it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 9403. Also C. W. 649. Courtesy:
Vasumati Pandit

215. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
July 14, 1934
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

Your letter. There is not a trace of anger behind the action taken
about Ramnarayan. This affair makes a fast imperative, of this I am
fully convinced. Not to undertake one would be only a sign of
weakness. There is no other way than fasting to make the public
1

172

Wardha Kanya Ashram
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

understand. I am tangibly experiencing every moment the degree of
violence in people’s hearts.
I got your wire and have already replied to it. 1 I am treading
most carefully. The doctors are fully confident that I am harbouring
no disease; and they do not want to restrain me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Dr. Bidhan’s resignation may well be accepted. Write to
Satisbabu. If you find it inconvenient, don’t come to Calcutta. In any
case we shall meet at the station.
From Hindi: C.W. 7965. Courtesy: G.D. Birla

216. SPEECH AT WOMEN STUDENTS’ MEETING,
LAHORE
July 14, 1934
I am grateful to you for the purses you have presented me for
the service of the Harijans. One sister has presented me a garland2 of
yarn. I felt very sad when I saw this garland. It seems as if the sister
who made this garland had no idea of the science of spinning. This
yarn can be put to no use. As soon as yarn is spun it should be made
into spools. The state of this yarn is exactly as pitiable as our
condition. We are ourselves responsible for it. The self is its own
friend and also its own enemy. This applies to girls, women and men
equally. I have had the acquaintance of countless girls during my
tours. Form the point of view of them all I am not a man but only a
woman. When I was in South Africa, I had realized that if I did not
serve the cause of women, all my work would remain unfinished. And
perhaps this is the reason why when I go to a women’s assembly, the
women there think that a friend has come in their midst. I consider
myself the father of thousands of girls. It has always been my
endeavour to be both father and mother to girls. In this capacity I
shall mention one thing to you here. Outward show and fashion is
increasing among the Punjabi girls. I can see much luxury here.
Although this may not be true of all, it is true of most of you. Our
land is getting poorer day by day because of this destructive fashion.
Our civilization too has been encouraging this luxury. If all of us fell
1
2

Vide “Telegram to G. D. Birla”, 14-7-1934
It was made by stringing the cones of yarn together.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

173

a prey to pleasure, we shall be ruined. History teaches us that nations
steeped in luxury and pleasure are destroyed. It is difficult to rise
from the depths of luxury. So my entreaty to you is to give up this
fashion and not to indulge in luxuries and pleasures. Unfortunately,
the literature taught in our schools and colleges is also tending
towards these things. But it is gratifying that this literature cannot
reach the crores and only a few thousand have access to it. Just as
water flows downwards people given to sensual pleasures surely head
for a downfall. We do not realize this but it is eating into our vitals. If
you wish to save yourselves from such suicidal pleasures, this is the
time. I appeal to you to be on your guard immediately.
Now for the subject of service to Harijans. I have told1 the boys
and I say the same thing to you to devote the time you can spare from
studies in the service of the Harijans. In this way so much work can be
accomplished. You can help a great deal in the work for the abolition
of untouchability. Khaddar you must adopt. Along with it be
proficient in the art of spinning. When I visited Punjab ten years ago, I
saw very fine charkhas here. But I find they are not in good condition
today. It is true Orissa Province is much poorer as compared to the
Punjab but culture there is better than it is here. If you wish to help a
poor province like Orissa please ply the charkha. Thus you will not
only spend your leisure usefully but you will be free from sensual
pleasures. Do devote your spare time in the service of Harijans and in
spinning. You should always wear only khadi.2
Concluding, Mahatma Gandhi said that those who had ornaments on their
persons should part with them for the Harijan cause. He knew that the Punjabi girls
were not very fond of ornaments. He could take ornaments from other parts of India
also. But those who wanted to offer their ornaments should send them on to him and
those who could make monetary contribution should also give money for the Harijan
purse.

[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 27-7-1934

1
2

174

Vide “Speech at Students Meeting, Lahore”, 13-7-1934
What follows is reproduced from The Tribune, 16-7-1934.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

217. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, LAHORE
July 14, 1934
Gandhiji in his speech thanked the women for the addresses and purses
presented3 to him. He asked the women to remove the curse of untouchability,
otherwise, he said, Hinduism would die. The women of India, he said, had always
protected the religion of this country and they were embodiments of renunciation.
Gandhiji then explained the meaning of untouchability to the women. They
had, he said, been cherishing the feeling of high and low amongst them so long. This
feeling must be removed. Unless this was removed untouchability could not go.
Tulsidas had told them the essence of religion in two words. And that was this: daya
(charity and pity) was the foundation of all religions and that abhiman (pride) made
them feel high and

low. And when abhiman was removed form them and they took

resort to daya, then abhiman was lost and they became truly religious.
In the end Gandhiji appealed to the women to part with their ornaments and
make monetary contributions for the Harijan cause. He also asked the women to
cultivate the habit of simplicity and serve the Daridranarayana, because in that, he
said, lay their welfare.
Gandhiji once more thanked the women and concluded his speech amidst
constant noise and uproar.

The Tribune, 16-7-1934

218. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
July 15, 1934
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,

I have your letter.
I shall hold myself in readiness to see the Governor. I shall want
also to see the editor of The Statesman. I shall therefore ask you to
reserve some time for him too.
I suppose a public meeting for men and one for women will be
necessary. And then there is the foundation of another wing or is it
the opening ?
There is nothing wrong with me, but I have a feeling of intense
mental and physical tiredness. I love to sleep whenever I get the
1

By the members of Rashtriya Stri Samaj and other women’s organizations of

Lahore.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

175

opportunity. But I do not worry. You will overhaul the system and
take from me what work you choose and want.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. B IDHAN C HANDRA R OY
C ALCUTTA
Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

219. LETTER TO VIDYA R. PATEL
July 15, 1934
CHI. VIDYA

I got your letter. you are unnecessarily worrying. What does it
matter if someone reads your letters? Surely you don’t write anything
of which you need feel ashamed? We should welcome our elders,
guardians and teachers to read our letters. Of course we should see
that nobody reads them without our knowledge. Since you have
forbidden me, henceforward I will not send your letters to Bhai. But
you should withdraw your ban.
We shall now be meeting in a few days. Don’t get tired of that
place.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 9587. Courtesy: Ravindra R. Patel

220. INTERVIEW TO AKALI AND KHALSA DURBAR
DEPUTATION 1
LAHORE,

July 15, 1934
Gandhiji enquired of the deputation the cause of the retirement of Master Tara
Singh from Sikh politics. Sardar Mangal Singh briefly explained the facts.
The deputationists then placed their point of view before Gandhiji regarding
the Communal Award. They expressed disapproval of the non-committal policy of
the Congress in the matter of Communal Award and said that the Sikhs had taken a
1
According to the source, “About 50 Sikhs representing all progressive
elements of the community” met Gandhiji at 9.15 a.m. Sardul Singh Caveeshar was
also present.

176

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

vow not to submit to it. They, therefore, while supporting the Congress in all other
matters, were determined to carry on their fight in the legislatures against the
Communal Award and to otherwise safeguard Sikh rights. They informed Gandhiji that
the Khalsa Durbar had decided to run their own candidates in the coming Assembly
elections.
Gandhiji, who listened to the viewpoint of the Sikhs with attention,
replying, explained the Congress position and said that the rejection of the White
Paper meant the rejection and the lapse of the Communal Award. He added that no
constitution would be acceptable to the Congress which did not satisfy the Sikhs.
Similarly the Congress would not reject what the Mussalmans wanted nor could it
accept what the Hindus or Sikhs rejected. Therefore if there was no Congress candidate
among Sikhs, a Congress voter with conscientious scruples would abstain from
voting. But if there was an otherwise safe candidate against a reactionary, he would be
free to use his vote to defeat the out-and-out reactionary.
The deputationists at this stage drew the attention of Gandhiji to the necessity
of issuing proper instructions to the anti-untouchability workers to restrict
themselves to Harijan uplift work and to refrain from making it a religious
conversion propaganda. This was needed, they said, because in the Punjab there were
so-called untouchables who professed Sikh faith.
Gandhiji said that he had numerous complaints against Sikhs to the effect that
they were tempting Hindu Harijans to reject Hinduism and to become Sikhs. If this
was the case it was certainly reprehensible. For his part he did not believe in
coversion propaganda and it was no part of the Harijan Sevak Sangh’s plan.

The Tribune, 18-7-1934

221. INTERVIEW TO DEPUTATION OF PUNJAB HINDUS
AND SIKHS 1
July 15, 1934
It is reported that Mahatma Gandhi admitted that an injustice had been done to
the Hindus and the Sikhs, but he wanted to know a practical scheme by which the
Communal Award could be scrapped or modified. The present policy of the Congress
was something inevitable in the circumstances. The policy of the Congress was to
accept any settlement that was agreed by all communities, even if it fell short of the
1

The source had reported : “The deputation, which was led by Raja
Narendranath, waited on Gandhiji in the afternoon to convey to him the resentment of
the Hindus and the Sikhs of the Punjab in respect of the non-committal policy of the
Congress about the Communal Award.”
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

177

national ideal.
Mahatma Gandhi assured the deputation that he was thinking of the matter
night and day and had come to the conclusion that the only way to modify the Award
was to get the White Paper scrapped.

The Hindustan Times, 16-7-1934

222. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, LAHORE1
July 15, 1934
Ever since I first came to the Punjab, the Punjabis have showered
their love on me. They have always met me in their thousands but this
time their numbers have been much greater than before, so much so
the D. A. V. College Hostel ground in unable to accommodate this
vast assembly. To me this phenomenon is very satisfactory; for I have
not come today with a political mission but for a mission which is
purely religious and which I have been carrying on in a purely
religious spirit. The vast numbers that attend the meetings are to me a
sign that it will be well with both the country and Hinduism. There is
no end to our difficulties but the vast meetings that I have been
addressing leave no doubt in my mind that we shall be able to remove
untouchability root and branch. I have seen during my tour that
thousands have attended the morning prayer; the sight that I witnessed
at this morning’s prayer would have moved anyone and would have
inspired faith even in an atheist. They were about 10,000 in number
but pin-drop silence prevailed and they sat with rapt attention for
about 25 minutes and I presume they thought of God alone in those
moments. All these experiences have deepened my faith in God and I
feel that I am but an instrument in His hand. He seems to have
ordained that untouchability, which held its sway over Hindu society
for hundreds of years, should now be abolished. He seems to be
bringing about a transformation in the hearts of savarna Hindus. This
vast meeting is a testimony to that transformation.
The object of this movement is neither to score a victory over
any other community nor to increase the number of Hindus. It is
1
The source had reported that this was a summary of Gandhiji’s speech
obtained from his secretary by one of its representatives. Gandhiji was inaudible at
the meeting.

178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

essentially a movement of self-purification and of ridding Hinduism
of the blot of untouchability. I see that you are unable to sit quiet and
probably you are not satisfied with seeing me for these few minutes. I
tell you, however, that I am made of common clay as much as you are
and you will be able to gain nothing by merely seeing me. You will
gain much only if you act up to what I say.
I repeat what I have said from a thousand platforms that, if we
did not remove untouchability, both Hinduism and Hindus would
perish.
The Tribune, 18-7-1934

223. LETTER TO ABUL KALAM AZAD
July 16, 1934
DEAR MAULANA SAHEB,

I have your letter. Of course I shall gladly see the Governor
during my stay in Calcutta and do whatever is possible. Dr. Bidhan
wrote to me two days ago.
The fast had to come. Such was God’s will. So long as He
desires service from me, I shall be unhurt.
I reach there 19th morning.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
MAULANA ABUL KALAM AZAD
19-A BALLYGUNJ C IRCULAR R OAD
C ALCUTTA
Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

224. LETTER TO BISHOP OF CALCUTTA
LAHORE,

July 16, 1934
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your kind letter. So long as He wants me to live,
nothing can harm me. This faith has found root firm in me.
Whether I have opposed the Government or the popular will, I
have believed in God’s guidance.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

179

After all I am going to Calcutta tomorrow. I know I shall miss
you there.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
THE METROPOLITAN BISHOP OF C ALCUTTA
THE C HURCH IMPERIAL C LUB
75 VICTORIA S TREET
WESTMINSTER, L ONDON, S. W. 1
Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

225. LETTER TO DILIP KUMAR ROY
July 16, 1934
MY DEAR DILIP,

I have your letter and enclosures. The letter came into my hands
only yesterday. It went first to Bombay and then by oversight
remained with one of my helpers for some days.
My difficulty is fundamental. I do not believe that my present
activity is less conducive to self-realization or merger in the Divine
than abstention would be. Sannyasa is not cessation of all physical
activity. It means to me cessation of all activity, mental or physical that
is selfish. If I could be convinced that cessation is the better way for
me, I should adopt it at once.
I am no judge of poetry. Of what use, therefore, can be any
opinion of mine on your poems ! I have really no opinion to offer.
But now Mahadev is free. He is himself a poet. And he will, I doubt
not, give you his opinion after I have explained the thing to him.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S RI DILIP KUMAR R OY
S RI AUROBINDO ASHRAM
P ONDICHERRY
Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

226. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
LAHORE,

July 16, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I never expected that you would be released. The Government
and we both have been following our own ways independently of each
other. That is good in a way. People will know what both of us mean.
After you have studied the whole situation I will ask for your view as
an impartial judge. You may seem to agree out of loyalty as a coworker, but the truth is that the habit of agreeing with all that I do is
not likely to have been cured by a few years of imprisonment.
I like your decision to come only after you have got your nose
trouble completely cured. Your presence at Benares is certainly
necessary, but we will do without you if the condition of your nose
does not permit you to come.
It wouldn’t have been advisable to refuse to visit . . .1 . Our
workers also desired that I should go. He will gain nothing by my
visit. It is true, however, that the atmosphere at Ajmer and elsewhere is
full of violence. You will hear echoes of it even there.
I found Lalnath to be the best man in that part. He is brave, too.
He always kept his word. But of course he did criticize and abuse me.
Everydbody has a right to do that. This is not the first time that he was
assaulted. His men also have been assaulted. But he has never lodged a
complaint with the police. Generally he and his men do not even ask
for police protection. Moreover, he has good control over his men. If
I had not kept strict control over our workers, Lalnath and his men
would have sustained serious injuries and our cause would have
suffered. Only today I received a letter from somebody who says he
had played a part in inciting people against Lalnath. He wants to know
what he should do to atone for his lapse. He is one of our best
workers. He is a writer and a poet. Tell me now, was I not right in
announcing a fast? Whom should I consult in such matters? And
where? If a person is bitten by a snake, would a physician who knows
the remedy argue about its merits with other people or would he apply
it straightaway? Surely it can give me no pleasure to take such steps
without consulting co-workers. But I find myself helpless in such
cases. Ghanshyamdas had wired to me requesting that he should be
1

The name is omitted in the source.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

181

consulted before I took any decision. I, therefore, wrote1 to him. He
left the decision to me. Devdas suggested a fourday fast. Jairamdas 2
felt that a fast was necessary, and advised that, if I did fast, it should
not be for a period of less than seven days. Bapa3 did not oppose the
idea. As for Chandrashankar, poor man, how could he oppose me?
Kaka 4 couldn’t find any argument to oppose me. The great task on
which we have embarked cannot be accomplished without undertaking such fasts. There is no limit to the awakening among the people.
In Lahore and other places I see crowds such as I have never
seen before.
I do feel convinced about one thing. You should force me to
stop travelling by rail and car, let me stay at one place and tour on
foot—if, that is, I am out of jail—which I shall be during August. 5
After that Rama alone knows.
Andrews will arrive here on the 25th. Swami will give you
enough news and Chandrashankar also will write.
I am going to Calcutta, purely for cleaning our house there. But
I had a letter from Dr. Bidhan Roy telling me that most probably I
would have to see the Governor. That possibility was certainly there.
Agatha and others had strongly pressed for a meeting. Now it seems
to have become a certainty. The discussion will be exclusively about
the terrorism in Bengal. More after the meeting. And since Mahadev
is with me now, you will get all the news you want.
Mani 6 should get very strong again. This time, however, her
health does seem to have suffered fairly. She is only putting on a
brave face. I am not writing to her separately today.
Blessings from

BAPU
S ARDAR VALLABHBHAI P ATEL
S HRIRAM MANSION
SANDHURST R OAD, B OMBAY

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 112-4

1

Vide “Letter to G. D. Birla”, 14-7-1934
Jairamdas Doulatram
3
A. V. Thakkar
4
D. B. Kalelkar
5
Gandhiji proposed to go on a week’s fast from August 7; vide “Statement of
Fast”, 10-7-1934
6
Manibehn Patel
2

182

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

227. LETTER TO PADMA
[July 16, 1934] 1
CHI. PADMA,

What kind of a girl you are! You are lazy and don’t write to me
but expect me nevertheless to write to you. Even so, I would have
certainly written. But I have no time. I got your letter today and I am
replying to you. It is good that you kept good health even in the heat.
Don’t let your handwriting deteriorate. . .2 .
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 6148. Also C. W. 3504. Courtesy:
Prabhudas Gandhi

228. LETTER TO DAHYABHAI M. PATEL
July 16, 1934
BHAI DAHYABHAI,

I had got your article about impolite names. I have been
wanting to write on the subject. At present I don’t get even a single
moment. I cannot write anything for Harijan or Harijanbandhu. But
I will certai-nly write about impolite names. I hope you do spin.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. D AHAYABHAI MANORDAS P ATEL
DHOLKA
From Gujarati: C. W. 2704. Courtesy: Dahyabhai M. Patel

1
2

From the G. N. Register
The rest of the letter is illegible in the source.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

183

229. LETTER TO GOPABANDHU CHOWDHRY
July 16, 1934
BHAI GOPABANDHUBABU,

I have your letters. It is good that you have resolved to go to the
countryside. I have not been able to read all about the workers. I shall
write when I have done it.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI GOPABANDHU C HOWDHRY
C HANDNI C HOWK
C UTTACK
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2781

230. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
July 17, 1934
DEAR SISTER,

I thank you for your letter enclosing cheque for £ 54-4-3 for
the Bihar earthquake relief on behalf of the Indian Medical
Association of Great Britain. I am forwarding it to Rajendrababu with
instructions to send an acknowledgment to Dr. Bhandari.
I know your concern about me. God will take care of me so
long as He wants to use me as His instrument. I had hoped that we
would meet in Lahore. We must, some day somewhere.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
MANOR VILLE
S IMLA W.
From a photostat: G. N. 6319. Also C. W. 3510. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur

231. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
July 17, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have your letter. I get frightened when I think of your
responsibilities on the one hand and your ear-trouble on the other.
Now that Vallabhbhai has been released, I expect that the burden on
you will become lighter in a month or so. It will be enough if you do
184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the best you can without worrying about anything. Do what you can
about Bihar. There are things which we cannot improve, do what we
will. I will explain this when we meet. Only you can bring about some
improvement, if at all, in Mahendrababu’s management. I cannot
understand the problems. I shall be able to understand the account
relating to Bihar.
I read the article criticizing the Ashram. No reply is necessary.
If we can safeguard the Ashram, everything will be well. We will solve
the problem. You may write to Gangabehn and Prema if you wish.
The chances of their coming are remote. The latter has developed new
interests now. It can do no good to press anybody to come against her
wishes. But now continues to write to me. He is trying to see you.
I am well. You should have no fear regarding my fast. It is clear
that it is absolutely necessary.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2936

232. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
July 17, 1934
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

Please do not worry about the fast I have to tak e up in August.
God will see me through it. Don’t worry about attempts on my life
either. They are nothing new. I have survived such attempts so far and
will survive them as long as God wills. When He wills otherwise, a mere
yawn will end my life.
Ramdas doesn’t keep good health. He will improve if he goes
there. Can he and a vaid accompanying him get permission to go
there? If it is possible, please secure it and send it here. The
companion’s name in Raghunandan Sharma.
I am writing this letter from Lahore. We are leaving this place
today. Devdas is here. Mahadev, who has been released, Pyarelal and
Kakasaheb are with me. It is, therefore, a family gathering, so to say.
I am all right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4822

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

185

233. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING, LAHORE1
July 17, 1934
I want you to keep up the practice you have now started of
beginning your day’s work with early morning prayers as you have
been doing with me these few days. You may have them either
privately in your own respective homes or congregationally in some
central place in your localities. It is impossible to exaggerate the
importance of this prayer. When one begins the day with a devout
prayer all his day’s work will be informed with a spirit of purity and
prayerfulness. The time for it is the early hour of the dawn when the
sun, the most luminous of God’s manifestations, reveals to us His
witnessing presence in all that we do.
I shall tell you now one or two marks of genuine worshipper of
God. One is a spirit of friendliness and brotherhood for the oppressed
and the depressed. This cannot express itself better than by be
friending the Harijan and you cannot befriend him in a better way
than by getting off his back, so that he may no longer remain the
beast of burden and the downtrodden creature that we have kept him
for ages, and that he may breathe and move free.
The other mark is the service of Daridranarayana—India’s
starving millions among whom are included, of course, the Harijans,
but whereas the poorest of the poor, if he is not an untouchable, may
move about free wherever he pleases, even the richest Harijan may not
enter a Hindu temple and use a public well. Whilst, therefore, the
service of the Harijans lies in the eradication of untouchability, the
service of the poor lies in enabling him to find work and to add to his
scanty income. The best way to do this thing is the habitual use of
khaddar and daily sacrificial spinning. If all the women of the Punjab
were to make a resolve to give all their spare time to spinning, I am
sure they would be able not only to clothe the whole of the Punjab but
also to send out cloth to other provinces.
If you do these two things, I should unhesitatingly say that you
are going nearer to God every day, provided that all that you do is
1

The source had reported that this was ‘‘a translation made by Mahadev

Desai’’.

186

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

done not for show or self-advertisement but in a spirit of service and
humanity. There is a third thing which also I would declare to be the
distinguishing mark of a man of prayer—the spirit of silence. The
noise and the din of meetings jar on me wherever I go. You should all
make a point of avoiding all bustle and noise and cultivating a spirit
of orderliness and discipline. These are three out of the many
implications of prayer which I want you all to bear in mind.
The Tribune, 19-7-1934

234. DISCUSSION WITH VOLUNTEERS1
July 17, 1934
Gandhiji, in the course of a short speech said that the volunteers spent a lot of
their time in looking after his personal comforts wherever he went. They should
instead look to their general duty and service of which they had taken a vow to fulfil.
Questioned, Gandhiji said he had no objection to the volunteers taking
military training, but they must abstain from violence. He asked them not to use
violence even if women were attacked by the mob, because he thought that women
were not helpless and they were strong enough to take care of themselves.2

The Tribune, 19-7-1934

235. DISCUSSION WITH FRONTIER LEADERS3
July 17, 1934
Gandhiji has advised the fullest voluntary obedience of the law in pursuance of
the Congress decision.
This, it is understood, has been definitely promised by the Frontier leaders,
who are anxious to do nothing to weaken Gandhiji’s hands and give Congress
prestige a shock.4
The delegation conveyed the love and respect of the Frontier people for
Mahatma, who also reciprocated his feeling of love for Frontier Pathans.
1

Gandhiji met the volunteers in the morning at Lajpat Rai Bhavan.
The report concluded : ‘‘The women volunteers who were present supported
Gandhiji’s view and the meeting came to a close.’’
3
The source had reported that the Frontier Province Congressmen,
representing the districts of Peshawar, Bannu, Kohat and Hazara, met Gandhiji in the
morning. They were led by Pir Shahen Shah, President, Frontier Congress
Committee.
4
What follows is reproduced from The Bombay Chronicle.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

187

Mahatma Gandhi expressed his desire to visit the Frontier Province and told
the delegation :

I regard Frontier Gandhi, Abdul Ghaffar Khan, as dear to my
heart as Devdas.
Finally, Gandhiji conveyed his message of love to the Frontier people
through them and said, he could never forget them in his life and their particular
difficulties and troubles were ever in his mind.
The Hindustan Times, 18-7-1934; also The Bombay Chronicle, 18-7-1934

236. SPEECH TO PUNJAB NATIONALIST WORKERS,
LAHORE
July 17, 1934
Gandhiji said it was harder to carry out their programme of work than to go to
jail. He himself found it much easier to go to jail and spend a quiet time there reading
his books and drinking goat’s milk than to carry out a strenuous and taxing
programme in the country. Gandhiji added humourously that Mrs. Gandhi had
suggested to him to go to jail and have an easier time there than tire himself our with
strenuous work outside.
Mahatma Gandhi added that their programme had to be worked out now and it
would be wrong to think that they could wait till swaraj was achieved for completing
it. He advised the workers to distribute the work among themselves and carry it out
sincerely. Let truth be their motto and work would prosper. This was a time of peace
and their message should be one of peace. Referring to the reception given to him at
Lahore on his arrival, Gandhiji said he was slightly hurt physically by those who
wanted to touch his feet. He could well meet crowds of thousands of people if there
was no noise. Swaraj could not be attained by noise.

The Hindustan Times, 18-7-1934

237. SPEECH TO KHADI WORKERS,LAHORE
July 17, 1934
Addressing the khadi workers, Gandhiji described khadi as annapurna (the
butter part of food), for, if our peasants took to spinning, they could have butter to
add to their bread or rice. The other cottage industries could support thousands at the
most, while khadi was an indispensable cottage industry for crores. Khadi could bring
about an automatic adjustment between the supply and the demand, for the peasants
would mainly produce it for themselves and their neighbours and but little transportation would be necessary. He had found out that they could have first-class, cheap

188

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

khadi, if weaver families spun the yarn to be woven by themselves. Again, if a
producer of cotton wanted cloth free of cost, he had only to carry out himself all the
processes from picking to cotton to weaving. This would not take the bread out of the
weaver’s mouth, because, if the whole of India took to khadi, they would need twice as
many weavers as there were now. Khadi was the only swadeshi cloth; it was pure
humbug to describe Indian mill-cloth as swadeshi in the same breath as khadi.1

Till now I have been very lenient but henceforward I cannot but
be strict. I recruited to the Charkha Sangh even those who did not
know spinning in the hope that good workers would be found only
from among such people. I have now come to the conclusion that the
latitude shown has been quite enough. Every worker of the Charkha
Sangh must learn and become fully proficient in ginning, carding and
spinning. He should be well versed in weaving also. This will greatly
facilitate our work in the villages and expedite the advent of freedom.
Harijan, 3-8-1934, also Khadi Jagat, May 1947

238. INTERVIEW TO JOURNALISTS
LAHORE,

July 17, 1934
The journalists, who numbered between twenty and thirty, desired a message
from him but Gandhiji said he was not selling goods gratis and wanted them to pay
the price for a message in the shape of a contribution to the Harijan Fund. A ring came
forth and then a few rupees and coppers totalling Rs. 16. . . .
Gandhiji said that . . . if they were really serious about the message they
should make up Rs. 50 . . . .
A member of the staff of one of the papers present undertook to make up the
balance required and remit it in the evening.
Gandhiji responded by saying that of course he did credit business and would
give a message on that basis . . . . He said :

The extraordinary enthusiasm with which I was greeted at the
Lahore railway station and which has been sustained throughout my
five days stay in the Punjab has been a matter of great joy as it has
been also a matter equally of great enthusiasm.
How I wish all this enthusiasm turned into the direction of a solid, continuous
and constructive work. It behoves the Punjab leaders to harness this enthusiasm,
which is running waste. It is a matter of joy also that the people, rich and poor alike,
1

What follows is translated from the Hindi report in Khadi Jagat.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

189

spontaneously came to offer their quota to the Harijan Purse Fund. To me it is sure that
the donors believe in the removal of the curse of untouchability from Hinduism.
Referring to morning mass prayers, Mahatma Gandhi said that there was complete
silence and revered attention. That was evidently observed by vast audiences when
verses were chanted. It was to him a sure sign of their heart-felt co-operation in this
movement of self-purification.
Concluding, Mahatma Gandhi said that the one thing that saddened him most
was the condition of the Harijans in Lahore which he thought testified to the criminal
neglect by the Municipality of its most deserving employees and citizens. Mahatma
Gandhi referred particularly to lighting and sanitary arrangements and want of tapwater in the Harijan quarters.

I know that Municipal finances all over India are in a bad plight.
But surely its effect ought not be visited upon these most deserving
and useful employees and citizens. I hope, therefore, that complaints
about insufficiency of water, want of light and sanitary conveniences,
will receive immediate attention. Whatever be the difficulties in the
Munici-pality, surely this essential humanitarian work should not be
allowed to suffer.
I have a great deal to say about the manner of living, conditions
of work, and economic condition of these people, but I do not want
unnecessarily to burden this message and I want the attention of the
public and Municipality to be concentrated upon the grievance that is
crying and capable of immediate redress.
The Hindustan Times, 18-7-1934

239. SPEECH AT GULABDEVI TUBERCULOSIS HOSPITAL,
LAHORE1
July 17, 1934
Mahatma Gandhi said that he thanked them for having asked him to perform
the ceremonies2 . He was not surprised, he said, that the late Lalaji had wished him to
perform the opening ceremony of this Hospital because of the intimate relations that
he had with him. He was delighted that he could come to Lahore and take part in the
opening ceremony of this Hospital.
Gandhiji said the present function put him in mind of Deshabandhu Das, who
also had expressed a desire in his will that a hospital for women should be established
1

The first and the last pragraph have been reproduced from The Tribune. This
and the following item are extracted from ‘‘Weekly Letter’’ in Harijan.
2
Of unveiling the portrait of Gulabdevi and opening of the Hospital

190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in Calcutta. The Chittaranjan Sevasadan was now a flourishing institution under the
fostering care of Dr. Bidhan Roy. It was a remarkable coincidence that both these
great Indian leaders cherished in their heart the idea of social service, especially
service of women. The nation could not achieve greatness, unless our women were
fitted to stand shoulder to shoulder with the men. Most of their leading men were
social servants by choice and politicians only from necessity. They were powerful
advocates of social reform. Everyone knew Lalaji as a great social worker, and he
would have chosen social service as his life-work if had the choice. But no true
servant of the people could now a days ignore politics. It was remarkable that the last
wishes of Chittaranjan Das and Lalaji were centred on social service.
Those who knew Lalaji could not be surprised to learn that Lalaji had desired
that preference should be given to Harijan women. There was no greater Harijan
servant than Lalaji had been.
Tuberculosis hospitals were unfortunately a necessity, but Gandhiji trusted
that the medical men in charge would attend to prevention no less than to the cure of
the terrible scourge. The prevalence of tuberculosis in India, which was the land of
perpetual sunshine, was rather inexplicable and required investigation. The medical
staff of the hospital had the unique opportunity of studying the causes of tuberculosis
among their patients and discovering means of prevention.
In the end, Gandhiji congratulated all who had helped to build this Hospital
and hoped that they would help it with money.1

Harijan, 3-8-1934

240. SPEECH AT MODEL TOWN,2 LAHORE
July 17, 1934
Referring to the rosy picture of the town drawn in the address, Gandhiji said he
was sorry to learn that the picture did not seem to square with facts. A model town
hardly deserved the name if it slavishly followed the bad old tradition of segregating
Harijans, who did for society what every mother did for her own children. Then,
again, he had heard that they lived in bad houses and were put to great hardship with
regard to water. He trusted the good people of Model Town would investigate the
complaint and fulfil their promise to treat Harijans on a footing of equality with
themselves.

Harijan, 3-8-1934

1

Gandhiji then declared the Hospital open amidst cheers and afterwards
inspected some of the buildings.
2
The source had reported that just before he left Lahore for Calcutta, Gandhiji
attended a meeting in this suburb of Lahore and received an address of welcome and a
purse from its citizens.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

191

241. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA
LAHORE,

July 17, 1934
When he was asked whether there was any hope of his abandoning the seven
day’s fast he has announced to begin on the 7th August, now that Pandit Lal Nath had
made an appeal to him to reconsider his decision, and in the light of the statement
recently made by the Secretary, Rajputana Harijan Board, Mahatma Gandhi said :

There is no possibility of abandoning the fast.
Replying to a further enquiry whether he was prescribing any penance for the
Secretary of the Rajputana Harijan Board, as he had been asked by the Secretary,
Mahatma Gandhi said that no penance save greater watchfulness was necessary on the
part of the Secretary.
The next question was whether Mahatma Gandhi thought that his health would
not be put to undue strain by this fast, following as it would his strenuous Harijan
tour. The Mahatma replied that he did not anticipate any permanent injury.
Replying to an enquiry whether there was any possibility of avoiding an
election fight between the Hindu Maha Sabha and the Congress and of retaining
Pandit Malaviya and Mr. Aney on the Congress Parliamentary Board, Mahatma
Gandhi stated :

I can only say I shall try to avoid a split.
Mahatma Gandhi had no idea of this programme after the Harijan tour and the
fast.
The final question was regarding the manner in which the Harijan Fund would
be spent. The Mahatma said that three-fourths would return to the source from where it
came, provided it could usefully be spent there. The balance would be used for
constructive work.

The Tribune, 19-7-1934

242. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA1
July 18, 1934
With reference to Sir Samuel Hoare’s reply in the Commons regarding the nonrelease of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Gandhiji said :

There is no reason for deferring the question till after the
completion of the Harijan tour.
He was already considering it.
1

192

At New Delhi station en route to Calcutta
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Asked what penance he proposed for the volunteer who beat Pandit Lal Nath at
Ajmer and who confessed the act in a letter to a newspaper, Gandhiji said that he
should put his brain in order.
Replying to another question regarding Doctor Alam’s resignation from the
Working Committee, he said that it was due to domestic reasons.

The Bombay Chronicle, 19-7-1934

243. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
July 19, 1934
CHI. MIRA,

Again I am writing this on the train. You must not expect long
or informing letters from [me]1 . It is enough for me to send you my
love from week to week. Chandrashankar does the rest effectively.
And now Mahadev is free and so is Vallabhbhai. Pyarelal and
Mahadev are with me, also Kaka. Jairamdas too is free but not with
me. Now of the principal ones Jawaharlal and Abdul Ghaffar Khan
remain.
This train is taking me to Calcutta. I am likely to see the
Governor and of course Moore.
The coming fast must not disturb you. You will be surprised to
learn that the news of the fast has brought to light the names of men
who actually took part in the assault on the black-flag demonstrators.
I have already asked whether you had the credit note I
promised.2
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6292. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9758

244. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
July 19, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got both your letters. I understand your view regarding the
dairy, namely, that it should be run indpendently. If so, who should be
1
2

The source has ‘‘you’’.
Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

193

its trustees? Shankerlal1 , Ambalalbhai2 , Ranchhodbhai 3 and Titus? I
have left out the names of persons who are likely to be imprisoned
any time. We may include Chimanlal4 also, if you wish.
I don’t know what to do regarding Amalabehn. Can you
accommodate her in Rajkot? She is not likely to remain even at
Wardha for long. I don’t know on whom I should place this burden.
After all, how long am I likely to remain in Wardha? If I am not
arrested, I will live not at Wardha but somewhere in Orissa or Bengal
or the Frontier Province. I should be written off now so far as routine
work is concerned.
I hope everything is going well. Has Jamnadas’s health
improved? What is Keshu doing? We have to provide the monthly
expenses of Santok, Keshu and Radha. It is for you to decide what
they should be paid. Fix any sum that you think proper. Relieve
Radha of her worries. Santok should do some work there, either
teaching the children or any other work that she can do. Where does
she live? Where does Keshu live? I am placing this burden on you, but
I am helpless. I can’t decide anything from here. You should decide
objectively and do what is right with firmness of mind. If you think it
necessary, you may consult me.
How is Kusum doing? It is rather strange that Prema has not
written a single letter. Sushila was to write to me about herself, but she
has not written so far.
I am writing this in the train on my way to Calcutta.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
It may be assumed that the Ashram khadi is given away to the
Spinner’s Association. Tell Shankerlal this.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M. M. U. / I. Also C. W. 8405. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1
2
3
4

194

Shankerlal Banker
Ambalal Sarabhai
Ranchhodlal Amritlal Shodhan
Chimanlal Shah
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

245. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
July 19, 1934
CHI. PREMA,

I am unhappy that, despite your promise, you have not written
to me. I had hoped that you would write and let me know what your
plans for the future were. May I still hope for it?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10358. Also C. W. 6795. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

246. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
July 19, 1934
CHI. LILAVATI,

I got your letter. Please overcome your desire, born of your
attachment, to stay with me. Count me as a useless man. The Ashram
has been broken up and understand that it cannot be revived now. I
shall be wandering from place to place or be in a prison. I shall be
staying in Wardha only because of the fast. What will you do there at
that time? There you have settled down to some useful work. Stay
there and learn and teach what you can.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 9574. Also C. W. 6546. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

247. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
C ALCUTTA,

July 19, 1934
It was a matter of great grief to me that I was not able to alight at
Howrah Station. I had not understood that the public knew that I
would alight at Howrah Station. As a matter of fact, I was to be taken
away at Burdwan but finally I was taken away from Belur Station,
1

The source had reported that Gandhiji made this statement ‘‘immediately after
his arrival in Calcutta’’.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

195

thanks to the courtesy of the Railway authorities. Had I known that I
was expected by the public at Howrah Station I would have insisted on
reaching there.
I was also distressed to learn that some people were arrested for
fear of their molesting me or causing disturbance. I would request the
police authorities to discharge them. My life is held in trust by the
public and it is at their disposal and has been since I have entered
upon public life. I fully realize that the police have their own duty to
perform. Nevertheless I would ask them to release those people who
have been arrested, if it is at all possible to do so.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 20-7-1934.

248. IN PRAISE OF WALKING
In the middle of the railway and the motor-car to which fellowworkers have dragged me again from the slow but steady and fruitful
quiet walks in Orissa, it is pleasant to receive reflections like the
following :
Your pilgrimage makes my heart sing. It is a yajna (sacrifice) worthy
of those for whom you perfom it. Forgive my presumption! But I feel all aglow
when I think of it. Somehow your rushing about in a motor-car in the cause of
Harijans seemed to be queer, incongruous. I see this as a wholly spiritual
problem, and that you should approach it on foot, as a true pilgrim, satisfies
me through and through like perfect music, or a magnificent sunset. So, I feel,
should Daridranarayana (the starving millions) be approached. Forgive me.
My words are an involuntary exclamation of a musician, in ecstasy over a
tambura flawlessly in tune. People say, ‘But how many villages can he cover
on foot?’ My heart says, ‘Yes, but how many souls he will touch !’ Surely,
souls matter more than villages and one pilgrim is worth a thousand
propagandists.

How I wish other fellow-workers will realize the beauty and the
necessity of pilgrimages on foot for Harijan work. People’s hearts
cannot be touched by a mad rush through space. They can be by
quiet, personal, intimate contact with them. Rushing in motor-cars and
railway trains dazes one and makes one powerless for clear thinking
for the time being. But hardly has he recovered from the shock when
he has to prepare to receive another. And so there is no chance of
recovery, either for the occupant or for his victims. I know that the
present programme cannot be substantially varied. But the remarks
196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

quoted above should be treasured for any future programme, and the
one for the few remaining weeks should be so shaped as to fit in with
the idea of no-rush. Let there be as few visits as possibe during my
stay in the principal places. My presence ought not to be exploited on
behalf of other causes, however meritorious they may be. Let my
mind be concentrated, as far as may be, on the Harijan cause.
Harijan, 20-7-1934

249. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
July 20, 1934
CHI. AMALA,

I have your letters. You are unnecessarily alarmed over my fast.
Nobody else is. Seven days’ fast can’t kill me. But if my end is to
come, it will come, fast or no fast. Therefore I would ask you to give
up all anxiety about me.
It betrays gross neglect of duty to want to come to Wardha. You
are living with me when you are doing my work, even though you
may be physically miles away from me. And you are not living with
me though you may be physically in the same place, if you are not
doing my work. When God will it you will be physically near me. But
as I have said, if you simply cannot live in the Ashram you must do
as you like. In that case there is no question of permission. I cannot
surmount my nature and do the impossible. Will you go and live with
Narandas in Rajkot?
Dwarkanath has not yet left Wardha. I am quite well. Blood
pressure normal.
Love.
BAPU
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

197

250. LETTER TO S. AMBUJAMMAL
July 20, 1934
CHI. AMBUJAM,

I have your two letters.
Have no anxiety about my fast. God will see it safely through.
This body can come to no harm as long as God wants it to render
even the least service.
You should tell your parents if it is utterly impossible for you to
live with your husband. You must listen calmly to whatever they say
and bear it. If you can, you may certainly go to Kumbakonam and
live with your husband. If the heart does not accept something, there
is no gain but only harm in forcing it, the heart being the means to the
deliverance of the soul from bondage. Gita declares thus and this is
also the experience of all. Do write to me about your activities.
May God give you peace.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: C. W. 9596. Courtesy: S. Ambujammal

251. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
July 20, 1934
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

I have your letter. It is clear. I now understand your situation
clearly. It is natural for you to wish to have Prabhavati with you. Such
being the case I do not wish to keep her at Wardha. I am certain that
Prabhavati can do some work in Bihar. But Prabhavati does not have
that feeling. She has not enough self-confidence. If she could be
pursuaded of the virtue of going to Bihar, it would be well. The way is
now clear. You can have Prabha anywhere you want. You should both
decide something together. I shall have nothing to say about it. I can
only give advice when you seek it. Yes, I do want that neither of you
should coerce the other. The ideals the two of you pursue are
different. No doubt I have had a hand in shaping Prabhavati’s ideal
and I do not regret it. But if your love draws her to your ideal, it will
be all right by me. It will lessen my responsibility and give you
satisfaction. It is a matter of sorrow to me that your life is becoming
198

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

dreary. Send for Prabha or come and meet her. Take some decision.
To what extent it is right for you, considering your communist
beliefs, to accept help from me I cannot say. I cannot also say where
we disagree and why. We shall argue about it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

252. DISCUSSION WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF THE
DEPRESSED CLASSED1
[On or before July 21, 1934] 2
Gandhiji had no difficulty in showing them that the term ‘Depressed Classes’
had itself a bad odour which the name ‘Harijan’ had certainly not, but he assured them
that he would be the last man to impose even a term of endearment on those who did
not like it. Among the other grievances was the one that they were not given a
majority of seats on the Harijan Board. Gandhiji explained to them at length the
penitential character of the work that the organization of the caste Hindus had set
before itself and that, whilst they were in no way called upon to share in the act of
penitence, they would do better to form an independent advisory board, in order to
inspect and review the work of the Harijan Sevak Sangh Board, and to offer helpful
advice and guidance. This was not only their privilege but their duty. Their other duty
which they could perform much more effectively than savarna reformers was internal
reform, viz., weaning from carrion-eating, drink, etc., those Harijans who were
addicted to them. Finally he implored them not to be impatient—though they had
every right to—as during the last two years a marvellous change had come over the
mentality of caste Hindus. For, when action precedes mental change, it may well be
mechanical and fruitless, but, when it is the result of a change of mind and heart, it
has a vitality of which everyone feels the warmth and glow.

Harijan, 10-8-1934

1
This is extracted from ‘‘Three Days in Calcutta’’ by Mahadev Desai. Gandhiji
left Calcutta for Kanpur on July 21, 1934.
2
ibid

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

199

253. SPEECH AT CHITTARANJAN SEVA SADAN,
CALCUTTA
July 21, 1934
We Indians as a nation are lacking in self-confidence. It is often
said against us by our critics that we are deficient in constructive
abilities and that we are incapable of running and managing
successfully big public institutions. The steady progress that the Seva
Sadan has shown under the capable guidance of Dr. Bidhan Chandra
Roy and Sir Nilratan Sircar constitutes the most effective reply to this
charge.
The other day I was called upon to perform the opening
ceremony of Gulabdevi Charitable Hospital at Lahore.1 I want to share
with you the reflection which that occasion gave rise to in my mind. Is
it not surprising that both the late Lala Lajpat Rai and the late
Deshbandhu Das who were the foremost political leaders of their time
and who had passed their entire life in political struggles, should at the
time of their death assign all their property not for any political object
but for purely philanthropic and charitable object? It is a
phenomenon for our critics to reflect upon and digest. It shows that
our essential talent runs always in the direction of service and
philanthropy. But we are forced into politics against our will owing to
extraneous circumstances with the result that our innermost urge for
constructive work is smothered and remains unfulfilled. This was just
what the late Lokamanya lamented also. As the whole world knows,
twice he was imprisoned and on both these occasions he utilized his
time and talents not for writing any political work but for producing
religious and scientific works. On one occasion it was the celebrated
Gita Rahasya and on the other the monumental work on the antiquity
of the Vedas that has since become famous throughout the world. If I
repeat what I have already remarked, this again proves the fact that
although today politics may seem to engross our entire being, the
ideal that our soul craves for is service, our innermost bent is religious
not in the narrow or parochial sense but in the broadest sense of the
term, and if we are often compelled to engage in politics it is in order
to clear the way for the exercise of our constructive talent.
You know how close Deshbandhu and I had come together
particularly towards the close of Deshbandhu’s life during our stay
1

200

Vide “Speech at Gulabdevi Tuberculosis Hospital, Lahore”, 17-7-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

together at Darjeeling. I was looking forward to his fullest cooperation in the prosecution of the constructive programme which we
had planned together. But God had willed otherwise and within a week
of that meeting Deshbandhu passed away. It always gives me supreme
pleasure to be able to do anything for the ideal that we held in
common. I therefore gladly availed of the invitation of Dr. Bidhan
Roy to perform the present ceremony 1 . I would appeal to you to
render all help that you are capable of to this institution. This is the
least that you owe to the memory of the late Deshbandhu.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 22-7-1934

254. DISCUSSION WITH STUDENTS
[July 21, 1934] 2
QUESTION:

Believing that mass revolution is the only means to achieve

freedom, do you believe it a practical proposition that the mass will and can remain
absolutely non-violent in thought and action in spite of all possible provocations in
the course of such revolution? It may be possible for an individual to attain that
standard but do you think that it is possible for the masses to attain that standard of
non-violence in action?
GANDHIJI : This is a strange question coming from you at this time
of the day, for the entire course of our non-violent fight bears
testimony to the fact that wherever violence has broken out, it has
broken out not on the part of the masses but, if I may put it like that,
on the part of the classes, that is, it was manipulated by the
intellectuals. Even in violent fighting, though the individual sometimes
lets himself go and forgets everything the mass of the fighting force
dares not and does not. It resorts to arms only under orders and has to
suspend fire in response to orders, no matter how great the individual
impulse to revenge or retaliation might be. There is no prima facie
reason why under non-violence the mass, if disciplined, should be
incapable of showing the discipline which in organized warfare a
fighting force normally does. Besides, a non-violent General has this
special advantage: he does not require thousands of leaders to
successfully carry on his fight. The non-violent message does not
require so many for transmission. The example of a new true men or
1

Gandhiji laid the foundation-stone of the children’s wing of the Seva Sadan.
From Amrita Bazar Patrika, 22-7-1934. The source has ‘‘July 18, 1934’’,
which is evidently incorrect.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

201

women if they have fully imbibed the spirit of non-violence is bound
to infect the whole mass in the end. This was just what I experienced
in the beginning of the movement. I found that people actually
believed that in my heart of hearts I favoured violence even when I
preached non-violence. That was the way they had been trained to
read and interpret the utterances of the leaders. But when they realized
that I meant what I said, they did observe non-violence indeed under
the most trying circumstances. There has been no repetition of Chauri
Chaura. As for non-violence in thought God alone is judge. But this
much is certain that non-violence in action cannot be sustained unless
it goes hand in hand with non-violence in thought.
Do you think co-operation between the exploited and the exploiters is at all
possible to attain the ideals you stand for? Do you not think that time has come when
Congress should take a definite stand for the rights of the masses irrespective of the
interests of the capitalists and the landlord? Do you not think that it is not possible
to organize the masses effectively on nationalistic programme and workers have no
need or no other alternative but to array themselves against the capitalists and
landlords for the exploited tenants and labour? Do you not think that a class war is
inevitable and interested classes must perish for the sake of a greater humanity?

I never said that there should be co-operation between the
exploiter and the exploited so long as exploitation and the will to
exploit persist. Only I do not believe that the capitalists and landlords
are all exploiters by an inherent necessity or that there is a basic or
irreconcilable antagonism between their interests and those of the
masses. All exploitation is based on the co-operation willing or forced,
of the exploited. However much we may detest admitting it, the fact
remains that there would be no exploitation if people refuse to obey
the exploiter. But self comes in and we hug the chains that bind us.
This must cease. What is needed is not the extinction of the landlords
and the capitalists but transformation of the existing relationship
between them and the masses into something healthier and purer. You
ask ‘whether the time has not come when the Congress should stand
for the rights of the masses as opposed to the interests of the capitalists
and the landlords’. My reply is that ever since the Congress had come
on the scene it has done nothing else whether it was dominated by the
Moderates or the Extremists. From its very inception under A. O.
Hume it has sought to represent the masses. That indeed was its origin,
and a study of its history of nearly half a centrury would prove to the
hilt that the Congress has been all through progressively representative
of the masses.
202

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Do I not think that time has come when Congress should take a
definite stand for the rights of the masses irrespective of the interests
of the capitalists and the landlords? No, we, the so-called friends of the
masses, will only dig our and their graves if we took that stand. I
would like to use the landlords and capitalists for the service of the
masses as the late Sir Surendranath used to do. We must not sacrifice
the interests of the masses to the capitalists. We must not play their
game. We must trust them to the measure of their ability to surrender
their gains for the service of the masses. Do you think that the socalled privileged classes are altogether devoid of nationalistic
sentiments? If you think so, you will be doing grave injustice to them
and disservice to the cause of the masses. Are not they too exploited
by the rulers? They are not insusceptible to the higher appeal. It has
invariably been my experience that a kind word uttered does go home
to them. If we win their confidence and put them at their ease we will
find that they are not averse to progressively sharing their riches with
the masses. Moreover, let us ask ourselves with the masses, have we
bridged the gulf between the surging millions and us? Let us who live
in glass houses not throw stones. To what extent do you share the life
of the masses? I confess that with me it is still an aspiration. We
ourselves have not completely shed the habits of living that we say the
capitalists are notorious for The idea of class war does not appeal to
me. In India class war is not only inevitable but it is avoidable if we
have understood the message of non- violence. Those who talk about
class war as being inevitable have not understood the implications of
non-violence or have understood them only skin-deep.
How can the rich help the poor without the rich being poor themselves?
Richness or capitalism is a system which tries to perpetuate the colossal difference
between capital and labour in order to maintain its position and status. Is it therefore
possible to effect any compromise between them without greatly injuring the
interests of either?

The rich can help the poor by using their riches not for selfish
pleasure, but so as to subserve the interests of the poor. If they do so
there will not be that unbridgeable gulf that today exists between the
‘haves’ and the ‘have-nots’. Class divisions there will be, but they will
then be horizontal, not vertical. Let us not be obsessed with
catchwords and seductive slogans imported from the West. Have we
not our own distinct Eastern traditions? Are we not capable of finding
our own solution to the question of capital and labour? What is the
system of varnashrama but a means of harmonizing the difference
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

203

between high and low, as well as between capital and labour? All that
comes from the West on this subject is tarred with the brush of
violence. I object to it because I have seen the wreckage that lies at the
end of this road. The more thinking set even in the West today stand
aghast at the abyss for which their system is heading. And I owe
whatever influence I have in the West to my ceaseless endeavour to
find a solution which promises an escape from the vicious circle of
violence of exploitation. I have been a sympathetic student of the
Western social order and I have discovered that underlying the fever
that fills the souls of the West there is a restless search for truth. I value
that spirit. Let us study our Eastern institutions in that spirit of
scientific inquiry and we shall evolve a truer socialism and a truer
communism than the world has yet dreamed of. It is surely wrong to
presume that Western socialism or communism is the last word on the
question of mass poverty.
We want to be precise as to what you mean by non-violence. If by nonviolence you mean absence of personal hatred, we have no objection to it. What we
object to is your identifying non-violence with non-killing. Wars are waged not on
personal lines but to vindicate national honour or interests. Issues have always been
fought with the maximum amount of force both moral and physical. When all can
successfully use physical force for the triumph of our national ideals and when it is
the shortest cut, why do you object to it? Besides, the world is not even now advanced
enough to appreciate moral persuasion.

My ahimsa does rule out the use of all force otherwise than
moral. But it is one thing to say that physical force has been or is
today being used in the world for the settlement of national issues;
quite another thing to say that it should continue so to be used.
Wecannot afford to blindly imitate the West. In the West, if they do
certain things they have antidotes for them too; we have not. Take the
instance of birth-control. It may seem to work well there, but if we
took to the practice of birth-control as it is being advocated in the
West, in ten years there will be a race of eunuchs in India. Similarly, if
we take to violence after the West we shall soon be bankrput as the
West is fast becoming. Only the other day, I was having a talk with a
European friend. He was appalled at the prospect of wholesale
exploitation of the coloured races of the world by the highly
industrialized nations of the West with which civilization is today
confronted. The principle of non-violence is today passing through a
period of probation. The forces of the spirit are engaged in life and
death grapples with brute force. Let us in this crisis not shrink from
the test.

204

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

What has the Congress done or what should it do in connection with the young
men and women of Bengal detained without trial?

I have given you my solution. If we work the Congress
organization non-violently and honsetly we shall be able to purge it of
its corruptions today. It is reeking with corruption, and Bengal, I must
confess to my sorrow, has been the worst sinner in this respect. I will
promise you that every one of these detenus is discharged. But then
our non-violence will have to be real in thought, word and deed.
We regard all those elements in our society as Harijans who in one way or
other are being exploited or kept suppressed. Your satyagraha movement is always
for those who are downtrodden. Why then a separate Harijan movement?

It is not a separate Harijan movement that I am conducting. Its
significance is world-wide.
Is it yet time for the youths of India to force a social re-ordering? Should it
follow or precede any further political effort towards swaraj?

The two things—the social re-ordering and the fight for political
swaraj—must go hand in hand. There can be no question of
precedence or division into water-tight compartments here. But a new
social order cannot be ‘forced’; that would be a remedy worse than
the disease. I am an impatient reformer. I am all for thorough-going,
radical, social re-ordering; but it must be an organic growth, not a
violent super-imposition.
What is the utility of trying to keep a number of pseudo-nationalist Muslims
within the Congress fold by allowing them illegitimate and illogical concessions
which are only increasing their insatiable hunger?

If the Muslim nationalists are ‘pseudo-nationalists’, we too are
‘pseudo-nationalists’. Let us therefore eradicate that word from our
dictionary. I do not know that an ‘illogical concession’ means, but
you will never find me supporting an illegitimate concession. That is
common ground between us.
Is not the Congress Party responsible for the embitterment of the communal
relations when it brought the Khilafat question on the Congress platform?

It is historically not true that the participation of the Congress in
the Khilafat movement is responsible for the embitterment of the
communal relations. The fact is just the other way about, and I shall
always maintain that the Congress did well in standing by our
Mussalman compatriots in their fight for the Khilafat.
To the Students, pp. 204-9
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

205

255. SPEECH AT TOWN HALL, CALCUTTA1
July 21, 1934
Replying in Hindi, Gandhiji expressed regret for want of knowledge of the
Bengali language although it had always been one of the cherished dreams of his life
that he should learn his beautiful and sweet language—a language the wealth of which
had been immensely increased by the contributions of his Gurudev, Rabindranath
Tagore.
He recalled the occasion when he received another civic address from the hands
of Deshbandhu Chittaranjan Das and made a touching reference to his close and
intimate association with Deshpriya Jatindra Mohan Sen Gupta whom he no more
found by his side today.
As regards the good words had been said about him in the address, Gandhiji
received them as their blessings. What could he say to them in reply? He would only
fervently pray to God that this great Corporation become an ideal body, that it could
set up such an example as might with profit be emulated by other municipal
institutions.
Calcutta with its beautiful parks, big thoroughfares and magnificent buildings
was rightly called the City of Palaces but they could not overlook the fact that the
picture had its other side too. On the one hand, there were these gorgeous things
which the city could be well proud of and on the other, there was the miserable
condition of the bastis in which the Harijans lived. The contrast distressed him very
much. He had an opportunity of visiting some Harijan quarters in the morning and it
pained him very much to see the wretched state in which these people lived, without
air, without light and without sufficient water for drinking. He was a Harijan himself
by adoption and it would be no exaggeration to say that he felt uneasy in that place.
They must not forget that it was these scavengers and sweepers of the city who were
responsible for the cleanliness and the health of this big city. It was his prayer to the
Councillors of the Corporation that they should make provision of some amount of
money every year for removing the various grievances of these people. He appealed
to them in the name of humanity and justice to devote a little of their time and
attention to this noble cause.
Concluding, Gandhiji said that his attention had been drawn to the big
headlines in newspapers regarding the dispute over the Mayoral election. He hoped
that there would be no repetition of the same, and appealed to the Councillors to see
that all sections of the Corporation could work with one common purpose of serving
1

Nalini Ranjan Sarkar, the Mayor, presented the civic address in the
afternoon. The address was printed in Bengali on white khaddar.

206

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the interests of the city, without any distinction of caste, colour and creed. He hoped
that this great body would work in a way as could make it the object of pride and
admiration to the whole of Hindustan.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 22-7-1934

256. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, CALCUTTA1
July 21, 1934
He began by expressing regret that he could not make his stay in Calcutta
longer, for he was leaving Bengal that very night in connection with the Harijan
work. The presence of such a huge gathering, continued Gandhiji, demonstrated that
the people of Bengal would not and could not forget their work for Harijans. So far he
had collected Rs. 65,000 in Calcutta for that noble work and, before he left that city
that night, he hoped to receive further contributions. Even the Bengal Bus Syndicate,
he was glad to find, had come forward to identify itself with that cause by contributing
Rs. 501. Harijan work was such that it could not but be dear to all classes of people,
even to those who called themselves sanatanists. They could not but ignore that cause
without ceasing to be human.
Continuing, he said that some mazdurs (labourers), who had gathered there in
large numbers, asked him as to what he had done for their welfare. To the service of
Harijans he had already dedicated his life and thereby he had been doing his service to
the labour also.
He was also working for the cause of popularizing charkha and this was a work
in which was involved the welfare of millions of poor Harijans. Beause he was
serving the cause of these poor labourers, he was himself leading the life of a labourer
and had embraced poverty, for their joy was his joy and their sorrow was his sorrow.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 22-7-1934

257. INTERVIEW TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA2
July 21, 1934
When I agreed to go to Calcutta for three days in order to try to
compose the domestic differences, Dr. B. C. Roy wrote to me
inquiring how all the workers could be brought together and whether
I considered Maulana Abul Kalam Azad to be a neutral party for
issuing invitation to workers. I wrote immediately, saying that the
1

Held at Deshbandhu Park; Gandhiji spoke in Hindi.
Gandhiji was going to Kanpur. A representative travelled with him up to
Asansol.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

207

Maulanasaheb would be the proper man to issue invitations which he
did.
On my arrival I found that there was some dissatisfaction that
enough invitations had not been issued, and the Maulana Saheb was
willing to issue more invitations as soon as names were supplied to
him. The names were ultimately supplied. They were too many for
issuing cards within the time for the meeting. I, therefore, suggested
that workers should be admitted without cards on identification by
checkers. It is necessary for me to make this statement in order to
make clear what happened in connection with bringing the workers
together.
I have had a full and frank discussion with the different groups,
and as a result of this discussion I came to the conclusion that, if party
feeling was to be avoided, the Congress organization must be freed of
manipulation of votes, even what amounts to a purchase of a vote.
It is most essential to avoid such manipulation, especially in
Bengal where party feeling runs very high. I am happy to be able to
say that nearly 22 out of 48 districts assured me through their
representatives that they endorsed my suggestion and also assured me
that they would have unopposed elections. If the representatives of the
districts named are able to make good their claim, it would be a happy
augury for the future, and the example of such a large number of
districts was bound to prove infectious.
In any event I have no remedy to suggest for purging the
Congress organization in Bengal of all the undesirable elements. It
would be impossible to run the Bengal Congress organization, or for
that matter any Congress organization, until and unless the vast
majority of Congressmen make up their minds to work the Congress
with absolute honesty. Let it not be forgotten that my suggestion does
not mean in any shape or form the suppression of the Election Board
with Mr. M. S. Aney as the final arbitrator. He would still have to
scrutinize papers received from districts having unopposed election. A
declaration of such elections will have to be made by that Board and
in the unfortunate event of any contested elections it would be that
Board which would regulate them.
It is to be hoped, therefore, that my suggestion will commend
itself to all Congressmen, no matter to which party they belong. I am
sure that without purity and honesty in the Congress organization it
would not be possible to rid Bengal of the many special ills from
which she is suffering.
208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

In conclusion, whatever happens to my advice I would like to
state that the workers were throughout courteous and attentive to
whatever I had to say to them.1
Asked by the Associated Press representative as to the progress made by the
Harijan movement in Bengal, Mahatma Gandhi said that he was unable to answer the
question until he had studied the situation more thoroughly. He, however, expressed
great satisfaction at the generous contribution made by the province to the Harijan
Fund.
He declined to say anything with regard to the release of Pandit Jawaharlal
Nehru and the question of Bengal detenus.
The Statesman, 22-7-1934; also Amrita Bazar Patrika, 22-7-1934

258. LETTER TO SANATANISTS
[July 22, 1934] 2
In reply to a letter of an orthodox sanatanist of Benares, Mahatma Gandhi says
that he is always prepared to hear the discussion of pundits with a view to obtaining
correct interpretation of the Shastras on the subject of untouchability, but if the
conclusion arrived at by the President was not convincing to him he will not be
bound to accept it.3

The Hindustan Times, 24-7-1934

259. REPLY TO CIVIC ADDRESSES, KANPUR4
July 22, 1934
Replying to the addresses presented by the Municipal and District Boards,
Gandhiji congratulated the Municipal Board on the very good work it had done for the
uplift of Harijans. He appealed to the members of the Board to complete the scheme as
early as possible. He said that for a big municipality like that of Cawnpore it was not
difficult to construct sanitary houses within a short time. He hoped to see these
quarters himself. He referred to his visit to the Bhagalpore Municipality and said that
there too he had advised the Board to complete the work at once, which they readily
accepted to do. He hoped the Cawnpore Municipal Board too would act upon his
1

What follows is reproduced from Amrita Bazar Patrika.
The report was published under the date-line, ‘‘Benares, July 22’’, 1934.
3
For a discussion with the sanatanists, vide “Discussion with Sanatanists”,
24-7-1934
4
In ‘‘Weekly Letter’’, Valji G. Desai had explained that the civic bodies
presented their addresses at ‘‘Dr. Jawaharlal’s bungalow, where Gandhiji had put up’’.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

209

advice. He said that there were many things which they could do without much
trouble. Their grievances were not such as would require lakhs of rupees in the
budgets. Those who were called the higher class of people could get their work done
in so many ways. But how could poor Harijans get their grievances redressed?
Gandhiji was pleased to note that in the Cawnpore Municipality, members belonging
to all the communities—Hindus,—Muslims and others loved the Harijans alike. As he
said, they were not there in the boards as Hindus or Muslims or anybody else but as
public servants. He again expressed his gratification at the substantial and solid work
done for the welfare of the Harijans by the Cawnpore Municipality.
Turning to the District Board’s address, he returned to two points particularly.
The address stated that the District Board had resolved that students should be admitted
to all their schools without any restriction, but he said that it was a rule like so many
others. What he advised the Board was to see whether the rule was observed, as it was
well-known that often the rules said something while what was actually done was
something quite different. He said that he had seen some sign-boards over wells
saying that the wells were for the use of Harijans as well, but still the so-called caste
Hindus beat any untouchables that used them and did not let them use them.

We should realize that the Harijans also are men and not beasts.
Our Dharmashastras all say that if a man gives water to a thirsty man,
he is rewarded manifold for it.
Referring to spinning taught in District Board Girls’ Schools, Gandhiji said
that his faith in khadi was as bright as ever. It was closely related to the Harijan
cause, as they were serving hundreds of Harijan women and weavers through khadi.
These, being terribly restricted in the choice of professions, would starve if they did
not give them spinning or weaving. Indeed, for that matter, they were similarly
serving hundreds of Muslim women and men. The women, as they observed purdah,
would not earn the few pice they did per day if they were not given the opportunity of
spinning. To these they must add the thousands of general spinners among the semistarved millions of India. Khadi was thus no respecter of persons, and no lover of
Daridranarayana could afford to go without khadi. He who bought a yard might rest
assured that he was giving tangible help to the poor, whether Harijan Hindu, Muslim
or savarna Hindu.1
In the end, he thanked both the Boards for the addresses presented to him.
The Leader, 26-7-1934; also Harijan, 10-8-1934

1

210

This paragraph is reproduced from Harijan.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

260. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, KANPUR1
July 22, 1934
I thank you for your purse of Rs. 11,000, but you will allow me
to say that it is not worthy of the open-handedness which you have
taught me to associate with Cawnpore. I am certain that you would
have given me many times as much, if you had realized the magnitude
of the task before us.
There are some people in Cownpore who look upon the Harijan
movement as irreligious and have issued a large number of leaflets for
public consumption. I was sorry to find that these were full of palpable falsehoods and insidious half-truths, exaggerations and distortions.
How I wish that these statements were made unintentionally ! For
instance, it is said that reformers in some place slaughtered sanatanists
without mercy, but I know nothing about it. If I did, I need scarcely
say that I would take strong action to check it. What a deep tragedy it
is that these falsehoods are spread in the name of sanatana dharma? I
appeal to the sanatanists to stop this campaign of falsehoods.
You would give lakhs where you now give thousands, if you
understood the far-reaching character of the Harijan movement.
Nevertheless, our goal cannot be achieved by collections, no matter
how large they are; it will be achieved only with the melting of
savarna Hindu hearts. When a gift is token of a change of heart, its
value is multiplied a hundredfold. This is a movement of purification.
It has nothing to do with the counting of heads. It is not a movement
designed to fight Muslims or others. We do not seek to make goondas
of Harijans. We seek to make them worthy citizens. If we succeed, the
world will benefit as well as we. At present the world would be fully
justified in despising us and our faith for our maltreatment of five
crores of our own kith and kin in the name of religion.
I have regard for the black-flaggers no less than for the
reformers and, if it was at all possible, I would gladly go away as they
wish me to do. But I consider it my religious duty to bear witness to
the truth as I see it, and any number of black flags, or even a bomb or
a revolver cannot prevent me from discharging it by such means as
are open to me. I am but an imperfect being and not a tapasvi2 who
1
According to the source, this is ‘‘a substance of Gandhiji’s speech’’. This
appeared under the title ‘‘The Cawnpore Speech’’.
2
One who has acquired spiritual power through austerities

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

211

could blow away untouchability with a breath from the Himalayas. I
can only speak to such as are inclined to hear me, and for this I am
going about from place to place, although I long for rest from the toil
of continuous travel.
Let me tell the sanatanists who claim to be monopolists of
religious truth that I believe in the same Shastras as they do. I have
profound disagreement with them as regards interpretation. These
Shastras lay down that, when there is a conflict of interpretation, one
must follow the promptings of one’s own conscience. And that is
exactly what I am doing. I would be the sanatanists.’ slave if they
could convince me that I was wrong. Meanwhile, I will say even with
my last breath that, if we do not wash out the stain of untouchability,
Hindus and Hinduism will be wiped out from the face of the earth.
Let me repeat the implications of this movement. It is limited to
the removal of the feeling of superiority and inferiority and has
nothing to do with inter-dining and intermarriage. I personally interdine with Bhangis and Mussalmans. I am not ashamed of this. On the
other hand, I think my conduct in this respect is fully in consonance
with the Shastras. But it has nothing to do with this movement. Interdining and inter-marriage are matters of individual choice. There is
no need, nor can I spare time, for such propaganda. I only place the
essentials or religion before the people for their acceptance. The
movement claims for the Harijans the same social, civic and religious
rights as belong to any other Hindu.
As regards temple-entry, you should know that no temple is
opened to Harijans except with the full consent of those who attend
that temple for worship. Temples must be opened as a part of our
penance. Not a single pie from the Harijan Fund is spent on templebuilding. Our constant effort is to ensure that as large a part of it as
possible finds its way into Harijan pockets in one way or another.
As this is a Harijan tour, I do not often speak about khadi,
although my faith in it is as strong as ever. But you must not forget
that khadi supports a large number of Harijan spinners and weavers. It
will never do for you to give a second place to khadi in your
thoughts.
I thank you for the peacefulness of the proceedings, but I can
not lose sight of the fact that we are under the shade of the elaborate
police precautions we see around us. I would very much wish they
were away, but they, too, must discharge their duty. Reformers as well
212

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

as sanatanists should be ashamed that the presence of the police
should be required for my protection or for ensuring peace during
my stay in your midst. Reformers and sanatanists should realize the
importance of maintaining self-imposed discipline so as to render
police precautions wholly unnecessary. As it is, however distasteful
their presence may be to me, I must testify to the exemplary manner
in which the police have behaved throughout the trying tour. I must
also testify to the facilities that the railway authorities have given from
time to time.
Harijan, 3-8-1934

261. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
July 23, 1934
MY DEAR MALKANI,

Your letter. Have read your suggestions which will be discussed
in Benares. You have not sent me your franchise proposal though you
mention it in your letter.
I heard from Jamnalalji some days ago but forgot to write to
you to say that he is revising the whole consititution of the Sangh and
thinks that you could not be taken. More in Benares.
Yours,

BAPU
P ROF. M ALKANI
BIRLA MILLS
DELHI
From a photostat: G. N. 908.

262. LETTER TO SULOCHANA A. SHAH
July 23, 1934
CHI. SULOCHANA,

I got your letter. It was a good one. I have taken some time to
reply to it. It is something that I am able to write even today. It was
very good that you could preserve your health and maintain your
weight even in jail. You did good study, too. Tell me in your next
letter what you read and thought about.
Why don’t you yourself think what you should do? If you
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

213

cannot decide, however, follow Narandas’s advice. He knows you
better.
Premabehn has not so far gone to Wardha. She doesn’t seem to
have come to any decision. Lilavati and Siddhimati are at Rajkot.
Kusum must marry if she wishes to do so. If she has no such
desire, she must engage herself in some kind of public service. She
should know that, if physical desire troubles the mind, it is a sin to
hide it. It would be good if she could keep such thoughts out. If,
however, she cannot do that despite her best efforts, she should get
married at any cost.
I will tell Gulab to write when I meet her in a few days. It is
rather surprising that she doesn’t write.
There is room for improvement in your handwriting. It
wouldn’t be bad if you even make the letters a little bigger. What are
you reading at present?
Ba is with me, and so are Mahadevbhai, Pyarelal, Valjibhai and
Chandrashankar. There are others too, but perhaps you would not
know them. Isn’t this a sufficiently long letter?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 1751

263. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
July 23, 1934
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

I got your letter. I had received your wire too. Amalabehn
seems to have given you a lot of trouble. I will not send her to you
again. She arrived here yesterday. She seems to be half crazy. She
herself does not know what she wants. She appears to stick to her word
that she would stay nowhere but with me.
How is your pain which was caused by the beating?
Was the report about that man having been dismissed or
demoted found to be true or false? Did the Baroda State take any
steps?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostate of the Gujarati: G.N. 4023

214

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

264. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
July 23, 1934
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

I got the letter from you both. I understand [what you say]
about West. If finally he does not reply, let it be. It is necessary that
you should stay on there till somebody else agrees to take charge of
your work. I see no harm in your remaining there so long as you can
meet your expenses.
Have quarrels started even on the football ground? So be it.
Certainly do what you think best. I have no desire at all to guide you
from here, nor wish to criticize your actions. I want nothing but that
you should be completely independent. It is not desirable that every
day you should have to think what I would say. I want you always to
do what seems proper and right to you. Progress for you two lies in
your doing so. Who will guide you after my death? God is the only
true guide. You should, therefore, pray to Him every day. You should
daily pray, “Let Your will be mine”, and then act with faith that the
Lord dwelling in your heart will guide you rightly without fail.
This answers Sushila’s question. It will be enough to maintain
courteous relations with Sorabji. If you try to go further, you may
have to compromise yourselves.
I hope you have seen about passports for Ramdas and Dr.
Sharma.
Would you give Rs. 5 or 10 to Mama1 every month? I have got
Rs. 500 paid to him by Jamnalal. I should like it if you, Devdas and
Lakshmi contribute small sums towards that. If you agree, you should
pay regularly, remitting the amount to Jamnalal.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4834

1

Madhavdas Kapadia, brother of Kasturba Gandhi

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

215

265. LETTER TO SHANTILAL J. MEHTA
July 23, 1934
CHI. SHANTI,

I wish you will get properly settled down.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4823

266. LETTER TO KANTI GANDHI
July 23, 1934
CHI. KANTI,

I got your letter today.
Your analysis is correct. I don’t feel disappointed when I find
that somebody has not fulfilled my expectation, for I don’t see
anybody’s fault in such failure. I don’t blame even myself. I gave
according to the best of my lights, and you all received as you could.
When all are imperfect, nothing else can happen. At the age of about
thirty, I happened to read, “Through hundreds of thousands of
disappointments, endures imperishable hope”. I had pondered long
over this line, memorized it and used to sing it to myself. The ghazal1
was a source of great consolation to me. Now I don’t even need its
support. How can I spare time even to keep count of the number of
disappointments?
The illusory appearance of silver in a mother-of-pearl or of water in the sun’s
rays,although unreal at all times, cannot be avoided2 .

If you or I feel that Bal is doing wrong, what is that to poor
Bal?
I hopee you understand the meaning of these lines. If you
don’t, ask Devdas. The doha is by Tulsidas. It has had a profound
effect on my mind. Man cannot but cling to an illusion so long as it
seems truth to him. That is why the world has been de-scribed as an
illusion and a snare, as maya. I will be content if you always do your
best. I haven’t written to Mr. Cousins, as I couldn’t get time to do
that. But since Rajaji has now written to me positively,I am waiting till
we meet in Benares.
1
2

216

By Manibhai Nabhubhai Dwivedi
Ramacharitamanas, Balakanda, 117
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If you feel a strong wish to come to Wardha, you may do so.
Otherwise, after paying the intended visit to relations, go to the South.
I have not abandoned Harilal, nor given up hope about him. I
am serving him by not yielding to him. The saying means “to follow
his wishes”. I am extremely doubtful about the rightness of the
course which has now been adopted. He has always lived thus up to
now. He used to be brave, but friends have deprived him of his
capacity for self-reliance. And now he has thought of [business in]
patent medicines. But as all of you have approved of this solution, I
need not criticize it. What seems right to one, that is one’s dharma.
Keep writing to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7287. Courtesy: Kanti Gandhi

267. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
July 23, 1934
CHI. NARAHARI,

I have been wanting to write to you for a long time, but
couldn’t do so till today.I felt, too, that since Mahadev had been
released, it wouldn’t matter if I didn’t write. If I expressed
disappointment on hearing that you would not be able to go to
Wardha, I don’t remember why; I didn’t feel disappointed. I was
afraid that you wouldn’t like to go there, and I had expressed my fear
to Jamnalalji. The reasons which you have given are sound.The reason
about the Vidyapith is not valid. If it is, it is such as can be overcome.
But the reasons regarding temperament are so strong that they
require no support from others. It is not a small responsibility to take
charge of Wardha. An experienced and mature woman is required for
that. Perhaps Prema may be such a woman. Gangabehn has no interest
in the work. I don’t know where Prema is now. She did come and see
me, but that’s all. Besides these two, I can’t think of any other woman
in our circle. Can you think of any?
Blessings from

BAPU
Form a photostat of the Gujarati S.N. 9062

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

217

268. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
KANPUR,

July 23, 1934
CHI. MANI,

You have been writing quite regularly. Continue to do so. But
do not expect any letters from me. Mahadev’s being with me relieves
me from writing some of the letters. I don’t have to write even to
Sardarsaheb now. I agree with you that the best medicine for you is to
stay on there.
Probably we shall meet very soon now.
Blessings from

BAPU
PS.

1

I am sending the enclosed letter to you. Please send it on to Father
immediately. You have frightened him all right by telling him what I told Bhaskar. I
have said the same thing to many others. And, indeed, I am not alone in my view. At
least Velanbehn and two girls are with me. Our problem, therefore, is not so easy as
all that. Let us hope that everything will be settled in Wardha.

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro— 4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 117

269. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
July 23, 1934
CHI, BRIJKRISHNA,

I have both your letters.
Why should it be taken that all those companions of mine are
sinners who do not live with me or render personal service to me?
What sins could Vinoba, who has ever lived away from me, have
committed? Disabuse yourself of this misconception.
It is true that you are suffering from the three delusions you
have dwelt on in the second letter. But you have to get rid of all three
of them if you wish to render any service to the Ashram and me. As
you have renounced everything, you should regard it as wrong to
take anything from the brothers to render help to individuals. All that
1

From the honourific plural used in the Gujarati original, the postscript
appears to have been written by Mahadev Desai.

218

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you may save from the subsistence money you receive may be
donated to the Ashram but never anything received from personal
friends or relatives. To give anything to Damodardas would be
disservice to a friend; he will not come out of his stupor. His duty is to
perform his labour with humility. If he is not up to it he may well
choose his own way of life and provide for himself. My reading is that
your financial assistance has been demoralizing him and he makes no
progress.
Am I clear? If not, do ask again.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Where is the need for a confidential letter? There is no one here
who would harm you or anyone else if he happens to see your letter.
Form a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2415

270. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
KANPUR,

July 24, 1934
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I got your letter. I had come to know about Rama’s having
gone there. It is just her excuse when she says that she doesn’t write to
me to save my time. Her aversion to writing is an old one. You should
not, therefore, readily accept such an excuse. Some habits become
part of one’s nature. This habit of Rama’s, like Devdas’s, is of that
kind. The only difference is that Devdas would not offer any such
excuse for not writing, for he knows that it would not be accepted by
me. Rama is not sufficently aware of that. Please go on doing your
work. Don’t even think about the fast.
Blessings from

BAPU
S JT. C HHAGANLAL JOSHI
S HRI DAKSHINAMURTI BHAVAN
BHAVNAGAR
KATHIAWAR
Form a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5520

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

219

271. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
July 24, 1934
CHI. HARIBHAU,

Jamnalalji’s telegram arrived just when I had no time to spare.
Martanda and his wife have my blessings of course. May God grant
them long lives. Let them both serve the country and meticulously
observe the restraints of married life.
I hope eveything went off well there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Haribhau Upadhyaya Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

272. SPEECH AT OPENING OF TILAK HALL, KANPUR1
July 24, 1934
I am thankful to you for inviting me to perform this sacred
ceremony this morning. When I learnt early this morning that I had to
come here, my memory went beck to the day 20 years ago when I
first visited Cawnpore as a stranger. It was the late Babu Ganesh
Shankar Vidyarthi then a youth unknown to me, who then housed me
in his press which was also his residence, for nobody else would dare
harbour me. I was then an utter stranger to the bulk of our countrymen. Whatever little was known of me was through my services in
South Africa. Neither the people nor the Government knew what I
would do here. Nor did I myself know what was in store for me or
what part I was to play in the national affairs. It was a happy
coincidence that Tilak Maharaj came to this city that very day and was
accorded a very hearty reception. To me the association with this city
is bound up with the memory of Ganesh Shankar. I came to know
him more intimately later on and found in him a simple, straightforward, upright, selfless servant of the nation. You know more than I
do of the services he rendered through various channels to this city in
particular and the country in general. He was a lover of the Hindi
language. The Pratap founded by him is a living monument of that
1

220

This appeared as “an authorized translation of Gandhiji’s speech”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

love. As we all know he crowned a life of service with a heroic death.
I cannot describe to you how I miss him today on my first visit to this
city after his death.
Tilak’s vast learning, his immense sacrifice and his life-long
service has won for him a unique place in the hearts of the people. He
it was who infused life into the nation with the mantra of swaraj to the
achievement of which his whole life was dedicated. But the thing to
which I want to draw your attention today was his outlook and
catholicity in matters of religion. He was a live sanatanist. No one in
his lifetime nor even now could claim deeper or vaster knowledge of
the Shastras than he possessed. His masterwork—the ‘commentary on
the Gita’ 1 —is unsurpassed and will remain so for a long time to
come. Nobody has yet carried on more elaborate research in
questions arising from the Gita and the Vedas. It was not without deep
study and careful research that he had declared that there was no
sanction in the Shastras for untouchability as it is practised today. I
can bear witness to the fact that he had eliminated the distinctions of
high and low from his own life. He did not believe in untouchability
based on birth and never hesitated to mix freely with so-called
untouchables. I carried on anti-untouchability work in those days as I
do now. I remember my many conversations with him on this subject
and I can bear testimony to the fact that he was wholeheartedly with
me and keenly desired the abolition of untouch-ability from
Hinduism. It is relevant to refer to his opinion today, for it is said in
some quarters nowadays that this anti-untouchability movement is
subversive of religion.
I can give you many more reminiscences of his liberal outlook
in other fields of life also. His contribution of the growth of the
political life of the people has been unparalleled. But I believe his
commentary on the Gita will be a more lasting monument to his
memory. It will survive even the successful termination of the struggle
for swaraj. Even then his memory will remain as fresh as ever on
account of his spotless purity of life and his great commentary on the
Gita. We owe to the memory of the great leader whom we revere that
we should strive ceaselessly for completing the structure of swaraj of
which he laid the foundation. Let this hall be but an outward token of
our intense desire to make that effort to the best of our ability.
The Leader, 29-7-1934
1

Gita Rahasya

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

221

273. DISCUSSION WITH SANATANISTS1
KANPUR,

[July 24, 1934] 2
QUESTION: How is this temple-entry agitation of yours going to benefit the

Harijans materially? Are you sure that they want it?
GANDHIJI: It is for the material benefit of the Harijans. It is for
the spiritual benefit of the savarna Hindus, who have to purify
themselves and who owe a debt to the Harijans, If untouchability is a
sin and if the Harijans are as good Hindus as the rest of us, they have
as much right to enter the temples as the others. Whether they can get
any material benefit from it, or even spiritual benefit or salvation, or
whether they themselves want it or not, is beside the point. The point is
whoever cares to go to a temple, provided he observes the rules
observed by all other Hindus, ought to have the right to do so. He
may be a sinner,but it is precisely because we are all sinners that we
would like to go to temples to wash out our sins there. A saint need
not go there. The sanat-anists may expect him to observe all the rules
of outward cleanliness that they themselves observe,but nothing more.
But the Shastras are against temple-entry. Why not frankly say that you want
to found a new Shastra?

No. I believe in the same Shastras as you do; only my interpretation is different. I am not a shastri myself,but if there is a section
which contends that the Shastras enjoin untouchability, there is
another equally strong section of pandits and shastris who no doubt
say that there is no sanction in the Shastras for untouchability as it is
practised today.
But if you destroy untouchability, the untouchables will invade our
professions and occupations. They will have sweetmeat shops, for instance. All selfrestraint in matters of food will be swept away.

You forget that the Harijan campaign has nothing to do with
questions of food and drink, it seeks to destroy untouchability as it is
1

This is extracted from “Some Misconceptions” by Mahadev Desai who
explains: “The organizers of the reception in Cawnpore had set apart a certain time
exclusively for the sanatanists . . . . There were, however, no opposing pundist there.
But there was a young man (who afterwards I found was an oil-dealer) who had a list of
several questions…which, naturally, someone more learned had written up for him
and which represent the misconceptions that still have possession of the santanist
mind.”
2
From The Leader

222

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

practised today. There are numerous shops being run by non-Hindus
and non-Brahmins. No one compels the Hindus or the Brahmins
among them to go to these shops. There are orthodox Brahmins who
would not touch food cooked by anyone else. They are quite
welcome to their self-imposed restrictions, which will remain
untouched for all time.
But why do you say untouchability is a sin, when our own mothers and sisters
and daughters are treated as untouchables four days in the month?

You must know that some kind of untouchability is practised
not only by us, Hindus,but by people of all faiths—Parsis,
Mussalmans, Christians. But do we treat our mothers and sisters as
untouchables for the rest of the month? Do we spurn them, do we
fling our food remains at them even during the period of untouchability? Do we keep them out of our houses? For God’s sake, don’t
forget that you are subjecting the so-called untouchables to insults
and outrages that you would not dare to impose on anyone else.
Those insults and outrages are unknown here. You had better go to places
where they are practised.

Will you accompany me?
Why should we? It is enough that we are not guilty. We invite them to our
caste-dinners.

And fling remains at them, don’t you?
But you, reformers, do not so much as fling the remains at them. In your zeal
for reform, you starve them. We don’t starve them. Whilst we observe untouchability,
we have that much sympathy for them. You always say the Harijan campaign has
nothing to do with questions of eating and drinking or with the question of marriage.
Why, then, did you marry your boy Devdas to a Brahmin girl?

This is an irrelevant question. But I must answer it. The marriage
was no part of the Harijan movement. I did not allow the marriage as
a leader of the anti-untouchability campaign, but I allowed it as a
Hindu reformer. As a reformer of Hinduism, I want to restore the
ancient varnashramadharma to its pristine purity. Varnashramadharma
lays down the functions and duties of various classes according to
their special aptitudes and gifts and has nothing to do with questions
of marraige and food and drink. Now that you have raised the
question of my son’s marriage, I shall summarize the considerations
that weighed with me and would weigh with me on all such occasions:
(1) The four varnas do not exist today, and, therefore, it is the duty of
those who believe in the varnas to restore them by observing the
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

223

sovereign principles of purity and self-restraint. Let me tell you that,
when I was told that there was mutual attachment between the two
young people in question, I asked them to impose self-restraint on
themselves for a period of five years—not meet each other, not even
to correspond with each other—and thus to prove the purity of their
attachment. They fulfilled the conditions and even then would not
have the marriage until it was blessed by their parents. (2) Even
assuming that varnas exist,instances are not wanting in Mahabharata
and other work of inter-varna marriages. (3) After all is said and done,
the laws and codes governing personal conduct apply to the times in
which they were framed. The ruling principle is self- restraint.
There are, besides, numerous texts in our smritis which
contradict one another, and hence we cannot blindly accept every text
as gospel truth. We have to prove them on the touchstone of truth and
non-violence. There are things, for instance, in Manusmriti which no
author believing in ahimsa could ever have written and which run
counter to the precepts in the same great work, precepts which would
do credit to the spiritual genius of any race or clime. I must expunge
those texts as apocryphal, as we do in the case of many verses of
doubtful authenticity which have crept into a much more recent work
like, for instance, Tulsidas’s Ramayana. For me, the text of Manu
defining sanatana dharma—eternal religion—is all-sufficing :
That dharma is eternal which is always observed by saintly men of learning,
free form ill will and passion, and which appeals to one’s hridaya or sense of right
and justice.

As regards my own practice in matters of food and drink,
everyone knows that I eat food from the hands of any human being,
provided it is clean and pure. It is a purely personal question and
nota social question at all. I am not out for reform in the matter, as I
know that it can take care of itself, and I, therefore, do not seek to air
my views in public. My own sister would not eat food cooked by
many, certainly not food touched by a Harijan, But I would not strive
with her. It should be enough for me that she discards untouchability
and refuses to regard a human being an untouchable because of his
birth.
Harijan, 24-8-1934

224

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

274. SPEECH TO U. P. HARIJAN WORKERS, KANPUR1
[July 24, 1934] 2
As regards the general complaint of municipal neglect, Gandhiji said they
must rouse the members from their lethargy by directly approaching them as well as
by educating the voters, who could then be expected to keep the members straight. He
was glad to learn that the non-Hindu members of Cawnpore Municipality co-operated
whole-heartedly with the Hindus as regards the welfare work among its Harijan
employees, and he was sure that the Mussalman members of other municipalities,
too, would be equally sympathetic when, as guardians of not one section but of the
whole body of the public, they realized that ours was a purely humanitarian
movement which had nothing to do with politics, that Harijans ministered to nonHindus no less than to Hindus and that insanitary conditions in Harijan quarters were
a potential source of danger ot the whole of the city. It was a notorious fact that
Harijans did not enjoy the same amenitites as regards water-supply, light,etc. as the
rest of the citizens did.
But irrespective of what the municipalities might do or fail to do, the Sangh
must try to secure decent liveing conditions for Harijans. And this could be done with
ease and without any heavy expenditure. First, they must see to the proper drainage
and cleaning of the Harijan quarters and the making of roads. Slight repairs should be
carried out in the houses so as to allow a free passage to light and air. If they placed
before municipalities a modest programme of improving the sanitation of Harijan
quarters, they would make a small grant of money to the Sangh and make them their
agents in carrying it out, for municipalities might not have at hand the worker
required, or if the workers were there, they might not have a keen interest in work of
this nature.
Secondly, they must obtain for Harijans a good supply of water. Harijans in
villages were worse off in this respect than their fellows in cities. They had yet to
develop strength enough to assert and maintain their right to draw water from public
wells by seeking the protection of courts or otherwise. Meanwhile the Sangh must
construct for them good wells from which even the savarnas would be tempted to take
water for themselves, and during the period that these wells were under construction,
reformers, must draw water for the Harijans and pour it into their pots.
Thirdly, the Sangh should establish good perparatory schools for Harijan
children, where the teachers would not make a fetish of the 3 R’s, but try to teach
their pupils to keep their person and clothes clean, so as to enable them at the end of
six months to take their place in a line with savarna children of the same age. For
1
2

This appeared under the title : “Harijan Workers’ Guide”.
From Valji G. Desai’s “Weekly Letter”

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

225

this, kindliness was more essential in a teacher then scholarship. The Sangh would do
well even to bring out a Harijan preparatory schoolmaster’s guide, showing him how
he should impart to his charges the cultural training which savarna children received
in their homes.
Fourthly, as regrads Ashrams, he thought they had better fight shy of that big
word and rather call their institutions ‘Chhatralayas’ (hostels) or ‘Udyogalayas’.
Personally he did not like that the institution at Sabarmati was called Harijan
Ashram. In these hostels they might supplement the ordinary education of the
inmates at schools by teaching them some industry and religion, not through textbooks but in actual pracitce. The superintendent must see that the members used their
hands and feet and told the truth in their actual lives, insteand of merely reading
copybook maxims about it. In fact, he should be as father to them. A couple of such
institutions in each province should go a long way in the spread of culture and serve
the purpose of comprehensive propaganda.
As regards total abstinence, Gandhiji said they could make an impression only
if they entered into the drunkards’ lives and established an intimate personal relation
with them. It was no use merely getting them to sign a pledge. They must find out the
reasons why people took to drink. They must devise substitutes for it, such as milk
and tea, and organize games, lectures and such other diversions.
Finally, Gandhiji expressed his emphatic opinion that they had hardly touched
the fringe of their problem so long as they had not penetrated into the villages,
which were the stronghold of untouchability and where alone they could strike it a
death-blow.

Harijan, 10-8-1934

275. SPEECH TO STUDENTS AND HARIJANS, KANPUR1
July 24, 1934
Mahatma Gandhi, replying, thanked the students for the purse but said that it
was too little for Cawnpore students who gave Rs. 1,500 in his last visit but as it was
given out of love it was welcome. He was pleased to learn that they regarded him as a
votary to true sanatana dharma and that their wish to do Harijan service was a good
sign.
At the Harijan workers’ meeting 2 it was said that there were not sufficient
Harijian workers but here they were. As he did not expect them to give up their
studies and devote all their time to this work, but he did expect them to devote their
1

At Queen’s Park; the students of Sanatan Dharma College presented an

address.
2

226

Vide The preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

time to this work along with their studies just as they attended their parents when
they fell ill. He wanted the spirit of sacrifice instilled in them. Knowledge did not
mean mere book-reading. It included this kind of service also. He wished he could
bring home to their hearts how much poor Harijans suffered and students could remove
many of their grievances, if not all, and all this could be done while continuing
regular studies.
In the end Mahatma Gandhi appealed to students, both male and female, to
wear khadi at least if they could not devote much time to Harijan work. This wearing
of khadi gives to Harijans much of what we pay for it.1
Replying to the Harijans’ address, Gandhiji said that sanitary service was a
sacred occupation, and scavengers no more deserved to be despised than a nurse, a
surgeon or a mother, who had all to handle excreta. But they must observe the rules of
cleanliness and give up carrion as well as liquor and gambling. They should refuse to
accept leavings of food and ask for monetary equivalent or at least uncooked cereals
or pulses in payment of their services. As regards strikes, Gandhiji said, he himself
had led several successful strikes in South Africa as well as in the mother country, and
as an expert in the science, he would advise them to exhaust all other avenues of
settlement of disputes before they downed tools.2
The Leader, 27-7-1934; also Harijan, 19-8-1934

276. INTERVIEW TO RASHTRIYA BHASHA DEPUTATION 3
July 24, 1934
He told them to carry on vigorous propaganda, write out literature in Hindi
issues and pamphlets, prepare dictionary and books in Hindi on lines adopted in the
West, and made various other suggestions for improving and popularizing the Hindi
language and literature.

The Hindustan Times, 25-7-1934

Gandhiji then received an address from Harijan sweepers which was read out
by Lalloo Ram, a sweeper.
2
This paragraph is reproduced from Valji G. Desai’s “Weekly Letter”.
3
The deputation consisted of Hiralal Khanna, Principal, Bishambarnath
Sanatan Dharma Intermediate College, Brij Behari Mehrotra, Balkrishan Sharma,
Chail Behari Kantak and others and was led by Baba Raghav Dass.
1

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

227

277. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
ON THE TRAIN,

July 25, 1934
CHI. MIRA,

This is just to tell you, you are constantly with me.
Love.
BAPU
Bapu’s Letters to Mira, p. 267

278. ENTRY IN VISITORS’ BOOK1
July 25, 1934
How can those who do not wear khadi serve Daridranarayana?
The Pioneer, 27-7-1934

279. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, LUCKNOW2
July 25, 1934
Replying to the addresses Mahatma Gandhi thanked the sanatanists, the
Harijans and the other citizens of Lucknow for the reception accorded to him but
frankly expressed his dissatisfaction at the small sum contributed by Lucknow to the
Harijan Fund. He refused to recognize that there were extenuating circumstances for
the paltry contribution. Lucknow had fair notice of his visit and the sum raised for
the cause of the Harijans should have been much larger. A few years ago when he had
come to Lucknow, the premier city of the United provinces had presented him with a
much bigger purse but this time it had disappointed him.
When the women of Lucknow presented3 him with a purse of Rs.1,500 and
ornaments valued at Rs. 500, he hoped that the other citizens would contribute a sum
to the Harijan Fund which would be fitting to the city’s status but all his expectations
had been frustrated. He was, however, prepared to give Lucknow another chance to
redeem its honour and hoped that its citizens would send him a substantial sum before
his tour in the provinces was concluded.
1

In the morning, Gandhiji visited the Charkha Sangh Khadi Bhandar, near
Aminuddaula Park, Lucknow.
2
At Aminuddaula Park
3
At Zenana Park, earlier in the morning, soon after he had reached Lucknow

228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

So far as work for the Harijans was concerned, Mahatma Gandhi invited the pepople
to go and see for themselves the plight of the Harijans all over India. Regarded as
outcastes they were denied even the elementary rights of human beings in the name of
religion. Those who countenanced untouchability were guilty of a grave social sin.
To keep more than 6,00,00,000 people outside the pale of the society in the name of
religion was an unpardonable act for which there was no justification.
In South Africa and America the whites showed the same aversion and
intolerance to the members of the darker races as were being shown in India by the
caste people to the members of the Depressed Classes, but in those countries the
whites had taken up that attitude as a political weapon for their own aggrandizement.
They did not take recourse to religion as was being done by the caste Hindus in India
to justify their action.
Due to this impossible attitude, for which there was no justification, people
like Dr. Ambedkar, for whose intelligence, sincerity and other sterling qualities he
had the highest respect though he differed from him on the Harijan question, were
regarded as untouchables by the Hindu society. The Depressed Classes were not born
depressed but had been kept oppressed for centuries by the cast Hindus.
There was no justification for the theory advanced by the caste Hindus that the
Depressed Classes had been born as untouchables for their sins in their previous
lives. It was rank injustice and sin to deny the rights of human beings to the members
of the Depressed Classes.
The surest way of serving God, according to all religions, is to serve the poor.
By using khadi people could easily do that. If the use of khadi became more popular
millions of people in India, who were now starving, would be assured of at least one
full meal. A person buying even one rupee worth of khadi could be sure that fifteen
annas of it would go to the poor and keep them from starvation.

The Leader, 27-7-1934

280. SPEECH AT ARYA SAMAJ
KANPUR,

July 25, 1934
Gandhiji felt grateful to the Sabha for having invited him to receive the
address. 1 Gandhiji agreed with the members of the Sabha that Swami Dayanand had
tried to serve the Depressed Classes and that he had taken a great part in the removal
of untouchability. Mahatma Gandhi said that his connection with the Arya Samaj was
1
The source had reported that the address was presented at 5 p.m. by the U.P.
Arya Pratinidhi Sabha. It “gave an account of the work which was being done by the
Arya Samaj, specially in connection with the antiuntouchability movement”.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

229

not recent but dated back to the time when he was is South Africa and he was glad to
mention that the connection was getting closer and stronger. In the end, Mahatma
Gandhi wished that his connection with the Arya Samaj might get closer still in future
and that he and the Arya Samaj might serve their God and country together.

The Leader, 29-7-1934

281. ANSWERS TO ZAMINDARS1
July 25, 1934
The karachi Congress passed a resolution laying down the
fundamental rights of the people and, since it recognized private property,
nationalist zamindars have supported the Congress. But the new Socialist Party in
the Congress threatens the extinction of private property. How would it affect the
Congress policy? Do you not think that this will precipitate class war? Will you
prevent it?
QUESTION.

ANSWER. The Karachi resolution can be altered only by an open
session of the next Congress, but let me assure you that I shall be no
party to dispossessing the propertied classes of their private property
without just cause. My object is to reach your hearts and convert you
so that you may hold all your private property in trust for your
tenants and use it primarily for their welfare.
I am aware of the fact that within the ranks of the Congress a
new party called the Socialist Party is coming into being and I cannot
say what would happen if that party succeeds in carrying the Congress
with it. But I am quite clear that if a strictly honest and unchallengeable referendum of our millions were to be taken, they would not
vote for wholesale expropriation of the propertied classes. I am
working for the co-operation and co-ordination of capital and labour
and of landlords and tenants. It is open to you to join the Congress as
much as it is open to the poorest by paying the fee of four annas and
subscribing to the Congress creed.
But I must utter a note of warning . I have always told the millowners that they are not exclusive owners of the mills. Workmen are
equal sharers in the ownership. In the same way, I would tell you that
the ownership of your land belongs as much to the ryots as to you
and you may not squander your gains in luxurious or extravagant
1
According to the source, this appeared as “reported by Mahadev Desai” and
“revised by Gandhiji”. Gandhiji answered the questions which “the zamindars read out
to him”.

230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

living, but must use them for the wellbeing of the ryots. Once you
make your ryots experience a sense of kinship with you and a sense
of security that their interests as members of the family will never
suffer at your hands, you may be sure that there cannot be a class war
between you and them.
Class war is foreign to the essential genius of India which is
capable of evolving a form of communism broad based on the
fundam-ental rights of all and equal justice to all. The Ramarajya of
my dream ensures the rights alike of prince and pauper.
You may be sure that I shall throw the whole weight of my
influ-ence in preventing class war. I do not know what I am going to
do after the termination of my self-imposed restriction on August 3,
but I shall try my best to avoid going back to prison. But it is difficult
to predict anything with certainty in a situation of which I am
unaware today. But supposing that there is an attempt unjustly to
deprive you of your property, you will find me fighting on your side.
We propose to support Congress candidates in the next Assembly elections.
But we have our misgiving about the policy they will adopt in the Assembly. Could
you persuade the Parliamentary Board to dispel our fears?

I invite you to discuss this thing with the members of the Parliamentary Board. I know however that no member will talk of expropriation or extinction of private property. They will certainly insist on
a radical reform in your relations with the ryots but that should be no
new thing to you. Even Sir Malcolm Hailey1 and Lord Irwin appealed
to you to realize and live up to the spirit of the times., If you will only
do this, you may be sure that we shall be able to evolve an indigenous
socialism of the purest type.
Socialism and communism of the West are based on certain
conceptions which are fundamentally differnt from ours. One such
conception is their belief in the essential selfishness of human nature.
I do not subscribe to it, for I know that the essential difference
between man and brute is that the former can respond to the call of
spirit in him and can rise superior to the passions that he owns in
common with the brute and therefore superior to selfishness and
vilence which belong to brute nature and not to the immortal spirit of
man.
1

Governor of U.P.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

231

That is the fundamental conception of Hinduism, which has years of
penance and austerity at the back of the discovery of their truth. That
is why whilst we had had saints who have burnt out their bodies and
laid down their lives in order to explore the secrets of the soul, we
have none as in the West who have laid down their lives in exploring
the remotest or highest regions of earth. Our socialism or communism
should theref-ore be based on non-violence and on the harmonious
co-operation of labour and capital and the landlord and the tenant.
There is nothing in the Congress creed or policy that need
frighten you. All your fears and misgivings, permit me to tell you, are
those of a guilty conscience. Wipe out the injustice that you may have
been consciously or unconsciously guilty of and shed all fear of the
Congress and Congressmen.
Once You turn a new leaf in the relations between zamindars
and ryots, you will find us on your side jealously guarding your
private rights and property. When I say “us”, I have Pandit
Jawaharlal also in mind, for I am sure that on this essential principle
of non-violence there is no differnce between us. He does indeed
talk of nationalization of property, but it need not frighten you. The
nation cannot own property except by vesting it in individuals. It
simply ensures its just and equitable use and prevents all possible
misuse, and I do not think you can have any possible objection to
holding your property for the benefit of the ryots. The ryots have
themselves no greater ambition than to live in peace and freedom and
they will never grudge you your possession of property provided you
use it for them.
You have been almost avoiding us and the villages. Why not have candidates
belonging to the rural classes?

You may be sure that we are going to penetrate the villages and
establish healthy relations with you.
The Pioneer, 3-8-1934

282. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
July 26, 1934
CHI. MIRA,

This is being written with the vegetable in the one hand and pen
in the other. The mailing time is near.So I can only send you love.
BAPU
From the original: C. W. 6293. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9759

232

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

283. LETTER TO SARITA
July 26, 1934
CHI. SARITA,

I have your letter. I was waiting for it. It is not that you have not
seen happiness as well as misery. Mix well with the sisters there. I have
no other place in Bombay. My relations with that family are very old.
Isn’t Nirmala’s place a home? It is always crammed. But whether it is
crammed or not there is room in that family for everyone. Still if you
can manage to stay there, do so. I have written to both the sisters.
Blessings from

BAPU
Form the Gujarati original: G. N. 11529

284. DISCUSSION WITH CONGRESS, HARIJAN AND KHADI
WORKERS
KANPUR,

July 26, 1934
Mahatma Gandhi had another busy day in the course of which he held
illuminating discussions with Congress, Harijan, and khadi workers. He gave them
sound advice on many matters and pointed out that they must develop a very high
sense of discipline without which no real advancement was possible. He pointed out
that the volunteers like others had their shortcomings but it was neither difficult nor
impossible to overcome them. They must keep before themselves the high ideals
which impelled them to render service to their fellow-brothers and keep in view that
they were servants of the people and as such always prepared to render them help in
every possible way. He pointed out that they should be ever ready to suffer for the
cause of the country and discharge the duties entrusted to them honestly and faithfully
and diligently. Volunteers, he said, had great obligations and it was more difficult to
discharge those obligations than it was to speak about their duties.
He exhorted khadi workers to carrty on their work unceasingly and nothing
should deter them from carrying on khadi sales, for the use of khadi alone was the
surest way of serving God and the service of God was the service of the poor. The use
of khadi would provide food to the starving millions . . . Mahatma Gandhi is reported
to have pointed our to Congressmen to seek the co-operation of non-Congress
workers, give them offices and serve under them. Let them have no distinction
between Congress and non- Congressmen, he said, for Harijan work interested
everybody alike. He felt that healthy co-operation between Congress and nonVOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

233

Congressmen in Harijan work would prove very beneficial to the Harijans. He
appealed to them to seek the help of non-Congress workers as much as they possibly
could. 1
The Congress workers asked for his views on class war and desired to know if
it could be non-violent. He replied that it could not be non-violent in the form in
which it was spoken of today. Whenever there came up question of crushing anybody
it became violence.
Asked if the present policy of the Congress Socialist Party would injure the
Congress cause, he said that he had no complaint if the policy was so outlined in the
manifesto issued from Bombay. Asked if socialism was against Congress policy,
Gandhiji said that socialism was a good thing. He himself was a socialist. But his
definition was always non-violent, and what he really meant was expressed in the
Karachi resolution and he still stuck to that and would go no further pointed our to
Congressmen to seek the co-operation of non-Congress workers, give them offices
and serve under them. Let them have no distinction between Congress and nonCongressmen, he said, for Harijan work interested everybody alike. He felt that
healthy co-operation between Congress and non-Congressmen in Harijan work would
prove very beneficial to the Harijans. He appealed to them to seek the help of nonCongress workers as much as they possibly could.2
The Congress workers asked for his views on class war and desired to know if
it could be non-violent. He replied that it could not be non-violent in the form in
which it was spoken of today. Whenever there came up question of crushing anybody
it became violence.
Asked if the present policy of the Congress Socialist Party would injure the
Congress cause, he said that he had no complaint if the policy was so outlined in the
manifesto issued from Bombay. Asked if socialism was against Congress policy,
Gandhiji said that socialism was a good thing. He himself was a socialist. But his
definition was always non-violent, and what he really meant was expressed in the
Karachi resolution and he still stuck to that and would go no further.
Asked what attitude Congressmen must adopt towards zamindars, he said that
there should be a brotherly affection and that our aim must be to end injustice and
bring about samanvaya3 . They had to change hearts. He said that a feeling had been
created amongst the zamindars that when they got swaraj, zamindars would be robbed
of all they had. Supposing Government were pleased to award some land to a man in
1857, how could it be fair to rob his grand-children today of this property? If his land
was taken, the State must pay appropriate compensation. Similarly a man who
purchased land today and duly paid its price, could not be deprived of it Pandit
1
2
3

234

What follows is reproduced from The Hindustan Times, 27-7-1934.
ibid
Harmony
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Balkrishna Sharma questioned whether we should ameliorate the tenants’
condition while zamindars were there. Out of Rs. 19 crores realized from the peasantry
fo the U.P. only Rs. 7 crores went to Government Treasury, the rest Rs. 12 crores
being taken by the zamindars.
Gandhiji, replying, said that it was true that Rs. 12 crores should not go to
them unless they rendered services to the peasantry of the same value. There had been
times when they took Rs. 12 crores and rendered services worth Rs. 24 crores, but
today the return was not worth even Rs. 12.
To destroy them would be no solution and violence would creep in. They
should not make zamindars another sect of untouchables. They must get the Tenancy
Acts enacted on lines different from those of the present Acts. There were no zamindas
in Gujarat, still tenantry conditions remained the same.
Asked what work should be done amongst the tenants, Gandhiji said
that much of their sufferings resulted from their ignorance, which should be
removed. As they remained without work for six months in the year, they could be
supplied with some cottage industires. Another thing he emphasized was training in
hygiene and health besides education.
Asked what the workers should do in cases where lands had been confiscated
during the civil disobedience and where zamindars refused to restore the same,
Gandhiji said that the only way open to them was to approach the zamindars and
appeal to their sense of justice. He hoped zamindars would be brought round, but if
they could not they should approach lawcourts and sue them for justice.
Referring to civil resistance, he said that none should practise it, for he had
found after attempting to penetrate into the masses’s mind all these years since 1920
that they could not develop a sense of discipline.
In the end, he was asked why the clause of habitual wearer of khadi for
purposes of franchise was not deleted when it was found that it was impracticable to
get habitual wearers even in small numbers. He referred to the same question when it
was raised by Mr. Pranjapay in the same city. His reply then was that if they really
desired to be with the masses, they must keep that clause in the franchise rules, but
that if they wanted to delete it, he was prepared not to exercise his right of veto when
the question came up for voting. He would be quite satisfied if there were only one
hundred Congressmen who used khadi rather than a crore who did not.
The Leader, 30-7-1934; also The Hindustan Times, 27-7-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

235

285. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, KANPUR
July 26, 1934
Gandhiji, replying, said that Rs. 501 was too small an amount from Cawnpore
women. They were rich and could give more if they wanted to. He was all the same
obliged to them and felt sure, he said, that they would give more. He then emphasized
that women had a very important part to play in the Harijan uplift movement. He
called upon them to take up uplift work and do their best to improve the social and
economic condition of the Harijans who, he said, were as important a unit of human
society as the caste Hindus. Women, he said, could do a good deal more than men and
therefore women must come out and take up the work in all earnestness, sincerity and
devotion which was characteristic of the womenfolk. He appealed to them in strong
terms to use khadi for therein, he said, lay the salvation of the struggling and
starving millions. By using khadi they could provide them with work and food.
Charkha, he said, was the panacea for all ills. Charkha, he said, was remarkable and
by the use of charkha women could bring about the economic emancipation of the
country. He laid great stress on women’s education. No social uplift, he said, was
possible unless women were educated. An educated woman was an asset not only to
the family but to the country as a whole.
He then exhorted them to give up purdah, come out and take up the
responsible duties which they had to discharge. Purdah killed their independence. It
took away their spirit, their very life and the sooner the women-folk gave it up the
better for all concerned.

The Leader, 30-7-1934

286. LETTER TO M. S. ANEY
[Before July 27, 1934] 1
The moving train is responsible for making my bad writing
worse.
Neither Malaviyaji nor you have sent me any suggestions for
removing your difficulty. I have been taxing myself for a solution.
The more I think about it, the clearer I become that the Working
Committee resolution is faultless. Non-committal is the only position
the Congress can take up. We must not tease the communal boil. The
more we tease it, the worse it becomes. In my opinion it is a fatal
blunder to turn our attention from the White Paper. If the reforms are
not killed, the Award will stand in spite or agitation. The reforms can
1

In the source, Chandrashankar Shukla explains that this letter was written
before the Congress Working Committee meeting at Benares.

236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be killed by sustained effort. But I heard you say that the Award was
worse than the reforms!
Reminiscences of Gandhiji, p. 211

287. DISCUSSION WITH SOCIALISTS’ DEPUTATION1
BENARES,

July 27, 1934
The deputationists, who were invited by Gandhiji for a free and open
discussion, are reported to have told him that the Congress programme as it stood fell
far short of the socialist demand and that he should use his influence with the
Congress executive to adopt the socialist programme as envisaged in the Patna
resolution of the Socialists’ Conference.
Gandhiji is understood to have deprecated frequent and unwarranted socialist
attacks on the Congress executive and its programme and plainly told socialists that
they should either be prepared to abide by the Congress decision without attempting
to create unnecessary splits in Congress ranks or take over charge of the Congress
machinery including its executive. He and other members of the executive were
prepared to hand over control and make room for them if they so desired.
The socialists, who were evidently taken aback, came out disappointed in the
main, but somewhat mollified by the assurance that Gandhiji gave them that he would
put their suggestions before the Working Committee and after full consultation with
them get the Committee to pass a resolution clearly defining the Congress attitude
towards socialism, confiscation of property, etc.

The Bombay Chronicle, 28-7-1934

288. LETTER TO DR. GOPICHAND BHARGAVA
July 28, 1934
DEAR DR. GOPICHAND,

Can you not collect from the public what you have spent for the
Congress? But if you must pay, it is better to do so as early as possible
and avoid interest. Therefore you must give more attention to practice
than you are doing.
I am quite clear that you should keep away from the Congress
and the elections.
1

Led by Narendra Dev

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

237

I do not at all appreciate Dr. Kitchlew’s fast. I hope it will have
ended when this reaches you.
I shall await your letter on khadi.
I am ashamed to have put you to all that taxing trouble during
my stay.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

289. MANIFESTO OF CONGRESS PARLIAMENTARY
BOARD1
BENARES,
July 29, 1934
The Parliamentary Board appointed by the All-India Congress
Committee at its meeting at Patna on May 19 appeals to the voters of
the Legislative Assembly at the forthcoming elections to record their
votes in favour of Congress candidates.
The Congress policy has been declared and the Board has
received mandate from the Working Committee in the following
resolution2 passed by that body at Bombay on June 18.
Though much has been written for and against the part of the
resolution regarding the so-called Communal Award, the line is
absolutely clear so far as Congress candidates are concerned. By
common consent it is intrinsically bad. It is anti-national. But the
Congress cannot refuse to take into,account the attitude of
Mussalmans in general, who seem to want the Award; nor can the
Congress accept it as the Hindus and Sikhs reject it. No other policy
than that explained above is consistent with the aim and history of the
Congress, which has throughout stood for peace and unity and
founded all its activities on the firm belief that the various
communities of India will act justly and honourably towards one
another. The only thing, therefore, that Congress candidates and the
Congress can do is to promote and assist in securing an agreed
solution. Suffice it to say that we shall never reach such a solution by
1
The source had reported that the manifesto was drafted by Gandhiji. It was
released to the Press after its approval by the Board which met in the morning; vide
the following item.
2
Vide “Resolution on White Paper and Communal Award”

238

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

appealing to a third party or power. Then, again, those who have
confidence about successful opposition to the White Paper proposals
need not feel concerned about the Award. They should know that if
the White Paper lapses, the Award, which was framed for the White
Paper, must automatically lapse. If the Award is bad, the White Paper
is worse. The Parliamentary Board has, therefore, to concentrate the
attention of the voters on the rejection of the White Paper and, as the
only alternative to it, upon securing and convening a constituent
assembly.
The White Paper is in no way designed to secure complete or
even partial independence. It can easily retard the nation’s progress
towards it. It proposes a costly pretence of representative institutions
in India, with all the real control retained abroad. The safeguards
wherewith it bristles are not conceived for the protection of the
interests of India. On the contrary, they can easily be shown to prevent
its economic progress, to deepen the poverty of the masses and to
perpetuate the British exploitation of and domination over India. If
the proposals contained in the White Paper are carried out, there will
be no national control over the army or external affairs, and the
burden of military expenditure will remain what it has been, and in
effect foreign control will continue over the finance and fiscal and
economic policy of India. If it be said that the proposals at least seek
to give complete autonomy to the provinces, it is hedged in by
restrictions that make it a sham and a shadow. No wonder, almost all
parties have more or less condemned the White Paper scheme.
What is the alternative? Though the Congress claims to represent
the whole nation, in the opinion of the Government it is only one of
the political parties, albeit very powerful. Time will show what the
position of the Congress is in the country. The voters at the
forthcoming elections also may show it somewhat. But it is clear that
the Congress must not frame any constitution only to be rejected by
the Government. The Working Committee has, therefore, as stated
above, suggested an infallible alternative—a constituent assembly to
be elected on the basis of adult suffrage or as near as it may be. We
know that such an assembly can be convened only by an agreement
between the Governing Powers and the people, unless it is after a
successful revolution. We have in contemplation the former. We do
not despair of its acceptance if the electors choose their representatives
in the forthcoming elections with a clear mandate that a constituent
assembly is the only alternative to the White Paper. True, the existing
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

239

franchise is narrow and therefore not truly representative of the
masses. The constitution of the Assembly is, further, such that the
members elected by the people cannot play an effective part in it.
Nevertheless, if the verdict of the electorate is unequivocal, it cannot
be flouted.
If the voters reject the White Paper and insist on a constituent
assembly, it will no longer be said by the British bureaucracy that the
people are quite satisfied with the methods and measures of the British
Government and whatever they plan for them. It will be no small gain
to have the illusion dispelled. Every vote for a Congress candidate,
that is, for a constituent assembly in place of the White Paper, will help
to clear the atmosphere. We hope all communitites will unite on this
simple issue.
This rejection of the White Paper and the acceptance of a
constituent assembly is not all that the Congress representatives will
attempt. They cannot be unmindful of the reactionary legislation
passed during the past few years, unhappily often with elected
members’ votes. Nor can they be unmindful of the way in which the
non-violent struggle for liberty was met by Ordinances of extraordinary severity, and of the great sacrifices of thousands of
Congressmen, including many women, who went to prison, suffered
privations and lathi charges and submitted to heavy fines and
confiscation of property. It will be the duty of those Congress
candidates who are elected to press for their restoration wherever
possible and the repeal of the repressive laws and of the Ordinances,
now called Acts of the legislature. The extraordinarily drastic methods
adopted towards Congress organizations in the Frontier Province will
demand their special attention. It will also be their duty to demand an
impartial scrutiny of the methods adopted by the Government in the
Assembly for the purpose of meeting terrorism and to take measures
to give effect to public opinion in regard to them.
The Congress Parliamentary Party will miss no opportunity of
rendering such national service, be it small or great, as is possible
through the legislatures. We are fully aware that the powers of the
legislatures, provincial and central, are too small for the effort which
the nation must make for the realization of its goal of complete
independence. The constructive programme of the Congress, the
successful prosecution of which alone can make our demand
irresistible, can be most effectively carried on only outside the
240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

legislature. But there are matters which can be dealt with only through
the legislatures and which will engage the attention of the Congress
Party. In order to end the exploitation of the masses, political freedom
must include real economic freedom of the starving millions. The
economic policy of the Party will, therefore, be in accordance with the
fundamental rights and the economic programme contained in the
Karachi resolution of the All-India Congress Committee.
The Board, therefore, appeals to voters to unmistakably show
that they stand for the Congress methods and objective and that they
condemn the present bureaucratic rule and its methods.
The Leader, 1-8-1934

290. SPEECH ON MANIFESTO OF CONGRESS
PARLIAMENTARY BOARD, BENARES
July 29, 1934
It is understood that in the course of discussion on the manifesto of the
Parliamentary Board at the joint meeting of the Working Committee and the
Parliamentary Board, Mahatma Gandhi made a most powerful and moving speech in
support of the manifesto. He wanted to remove one misapprehension about the
Congress Parliamentary Board. He had come to the conclusion that parliamentary
mentality had come to stay in the Congress. It was no longer a question of the
obstructionist policy alone of the old Swaraj Party. The Parliamentary Board’s idea
was of contesting the elections to go to legislatures and remain there for the rejection
of the White Paper, the convening of a constituent assembly, the repeal of repressive
laws and the carrying on of a constructive programme and other national activities of
the Congress to the extent opportunities were available.
Referring to the work of the old Swaraj Party, Mahatma Gandhi is reported to
have said that he felt satisfied that they had rendered a good account of themselves in
the legislatures. There was not a single speech of the late Pandit Motilal Nehru of
which the nation need be ashamed. They had produced a good moral effect.
Answering a question whether Congressmen may not be in a minority.
Mahatma Gandhi said that while hoping for a majority, he was willing to concede that
they might be in minority; but all depended on the personnel of the minority.
Referring to Mr. Satyamurti, he said that even if he were in the minority of
one, he (Mahatma Gandhi) was confident that he would give a good account of
himself. The Congress was also learning by experience as the Government was.
Several things in connection with civil disobedience and other matters might not
have happened as they had happened, had Congressmen been in the legislatures. He
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

241

was confident, of course, that Congressmen would come out of the legislatures if they
were called upon to do so by the Working Committee of the Congress, but he did not
believe in calling them out unless there was a supreme need for the same and the
Congressmen in the legislatures had voluntarily agreed on the course. Even if civil
disobedience were to be re-started, the Congress might not call on Congress members
in the legislatures to come out, for after all, even if a crore of Indians offered civil
disobedience they could easily spare about a thousand Congressmen for work in the
legislatures. Today the Government were enacting repressive measure after repressive
measure, like the Bengal Act recently passed by the Assembly , and claiming before
the world that they had the support of the elected members of the Assembly for the
purpose. The Congress would be able to deprive the Government of that excuse.
In conclusion, Gandhiji said that a manifesto was to be issued by the Congress
Parliamentary Board for all work in legislatures subject to the control of the Congress
in matters of policy which would be laid down from time to time.

The Leader, 1-8-1934

291. SPEECH AT CENTRAL BOARD MEETING OFHARIJAN
SEVAK SANGH, BENARES1
July 29, 1934
There are two questions on which I have to speak to you —one
in connection with the nature of the whole organization and the other
in connection with the idea of having a training institution for workers
for a period or for life. To take up the first question, I know there is a
general desire to introduce an element of democracy—voting,
election, etc.—into our organization. I was torn between two opposites; but, after having gone through this nine months’ tour, I have
come to the conclusion that in an organization like ours there is no
room for election, democracy or anything of that sort. Ours is a
different kind of institution. It is not a people’s organization in the
ordinary sense. We handle money merely as self-appointed trustees,
using it solely for the benefit of the Harijans, and in such a manner
that it finds its way directly into their pockets. Ours is an organization
formed with a view to doing our duty by those whom we have
1
Published under the title “A Talk to the Workers”, this appeared as “a
condensed summary” of Gandhiji’s speech “at the conclusion of the proceedings” at
Kashi Vidyapith on July 28 and 29.

242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

despised. We are an organization to give effect to the pledge given to
Harijans at Bombay by the great meeting 1 held under the chairmanship of Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviyaji. The people who pay to
the Harijan Fund do so, we assume, in a penitent spirit, and all we have
to do is to utilize it for the Harijans. To run an elective institution
means expense and delay. Our aim is to distribute the funds among
the Harijans with as little expenditure and delay as possible. We do not
want any intervening medium between Harijans and ourselves. We are
mere trustees, and the trust descends to those whom we appoint. There
are people who say the donors ought to have a voice in the
administration. I should say, they do not know. To me, he who pays a
pie is as much a donor as, say, Ghanshyamdas Birla, who pays ten to
fifty thousand. Maybe, the value of that pie is greater than the ten
thousand rupees that Ghanshyamdas may give. I have seen in Orissa
poor people untying their knots and parting with their coppers. That
has given me more hope and greater pleasure than the thousands,
however willingly given. The thousands without the coppers would be
of little use in this cause of self-purification. But the thousands of the
poor donors will never receive the vote. We do not even know their
names. And still we are as much responsible to them as to the big
donors, or even more. We are a charitable institution, depending for its
existence upon honest and efficient management. And if we are to
have the highest amount of efficiency, we have to select the best and
the most honest workers.
Having said this, I leave it entirely to you to decide. I look at the
movement as purely religious, moral or humanitarian. It is to me
purely one of reparation and penitence. I do not know to what extent
all the lakhs of donors share with me the belief in the penitential
character of the work. But so far as I am concerned, I would declare
that there is nothing in my mind save the desire to expiate for sins we
have been guilty of all these years. Therefore I cannot think of the
movement in terms of any political end. Not that it will not have
political results, but we need not give a moment’s thought to them.
The results will be surer, our relation with Mussalmans and other
communities will be infinitely purer, if we keep only the larger end in
view, and no other, as a result of this movement. I want everyone to
dismiss the thought from his mind that our aim has been to raise an
army of six crores of goondas. That certainly is not how I would
1

Vide “Resolution at The Hindu Leaders Conference, Bombay”, 25-9-1932

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

243

think of defending Hinduism. I am sure that it can stand against the
whole world, if it is purged of the curse of untouchability. This is no
narrow movement; it is, I hope, the broadest of movements of our
times.
The second question is easier. As a matter of fact, it follows
from what I have said. I believe in the ideal of life-service. I want
servants whose sole ambition is to devote themselves body, mind and
soul to the Harijan cause. If we had ten thousand such workers—I
make bold to say even if we had a thousand,we should have startling
results. I would welcome a training institution for such workers. In
Pinetown, near Durban in South Africa, there is a Trappist monastery1 .
The rigour observed at the time, now more than thirty years ago,
when I visited the place, was very great. They had nothing like privacy
for themselves; they had one long hall in which they stretched
themselves; they had to get up at 2.30 a.m.; they had purely
vegetarian food; they strictly observed the vow of silence. Only two or
three who had to go to the market or to speak to visitors could speak.
All others had to work silently. They were giving instruction to the
Zulus. Their proselytization consisted in working among the Zulus
and giving them the best of their life. They were workers for life.
They were all learned sannyasins. They added to their learning a
calling. They wsere carpenters, smiths, porters, shoemakers. They
made all sorts of experiments. Their monastery was a model of
beauty, a veritable garden, with not a particle of dust anywhere, and
there was a sweet silence pervading the whole atmosphere. Zulu
students were taken as raw youths and discharged as accomplished
artisans. My idea is to have a training institution of this type. If
anything, I would do better. But we are today fallen from grace. We
used to have this rigorous discipline in our country but we have not
progressed, while they have progressed. They have made researches
and increased their heritage. If we can make anything like an
approach to them, I should be satisfied. If we can get even five
persons who are prepared to forget father, mother and children, and to
devote themselves to Harijan service, I would have them. They would
form the nucleus. But if we cannot aim so high, we may conduct an
industrial home or a Harijan hostel or some other thing. Sheth
Shivratan Mohatta has an industrial school in Karachi out of an
endowment made by his brother. He had got two teachers from
1

244

Vide “A Band of Vegetarian Missionaries”,
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Dayalbagh (Agra), which has its own aroma and its own Western
finish. The students are kept well, there is a good boarding-house and
a good dormitory. There are two departments—boot-making and
tailoring. It is not a training institution but an industrial home. The
Harijans there are conscious that they will not be discharged without
being taught some handicraft, so that, when they come out, they will
not be thrown on the streets. We may multiply such institutions.
We, Harijan workers, have not done justice to ourselves. Many of
us are not workers even to a passable type. They have not given their
whole time to their work; they do it in a leisurely fashion. I have often
asked them, ‘Do you read Harijan?’ They have said, ‘No’. Out of
the three editions of this weekly—English, Gujarati and Hindi—
English and Gujarati are self-supporting; Hindi is not. Sufficient
reception has not been given to these journals, though much labour is
put forth in the preparation of these. Even in this preparation,
sufficient help is not coming forth. Workers do not send information,
facts. They do not go in for a discussion of problems as they occur
from day to day. For, problems occur to workers and not to thinkers.
If our workers were alive to their work, they would flood the editors
with matter from which poor editors might find it difficult to make
selections. Today they are starved. Harijan is a workers’ journal, for
their guidance and for the interchange of their thoughts. I do not want
for it essays. I have been pained to be asked questions by workers who
should find the answers in the journal, if they were reading it
carefully. But many do not read it at all. If you do not read the
budget of news collected in these pages, how are you going to hold
the movement together? You must know what is being done by sister
organizations. We have not got itinerant messengers who will take the
story of the vicissitudes of institutions from place to place. That would
be a costly medium. But we have Harijan. It is full of inform-ation,
but it can still be filled with more accurate information and greater
variety.
Please do not run away with the idea that I am not capable of
recognizing what little has been done. Nice things are there, but they
do not need to be recounted. Virtue is its own reward. But I am an
inspector. I must show you the blemishes and not tickle your ears with
praise for the good things that you have done.
A word about the Harijan Ashram at Sabarmati. It is a big thing.
It is not being made full use of. It is nobody’s fault. Poor Parikshitlal
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

245

is there, but it is beyond his capacity to conduct it. He has also to look
to the work of the whole of Gujarat. To utilize this institution fully
would be an immense task for anybody. The burden of conducting
and maintaining it will be on trustees specially appointed. Many
baffling problems arise there from day to day. You can now
understand why we want men of the Trappist type before we can make
the fullest use of the big Ashram at Sabarmati.
Harijan, 24-8-1934

292. SPEECH ON NATIONAL EDUCATION 1
July 29, 1934
Gandhiji dwelt at length on the National education as imparted nowadays and
remarked that the Vidyapith up till now confined itself to towns only. He said that the
time has come when the National education should be spread in villages and pointed
out the necessity for the same.

I am fully aware of the part that Vidyapith played in the
national movement. I am ever ready to give any advice on the
subject.
The Bombay Chronicle, 31-7-1934

293. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
July 30, 1934
MY DEAR ANAND,

I have your letter. Jeramdas has supplemented it with news about
both you and Vidya.
I understand that you need Rs. 50 per month from July to
October and thereafter would need Rs. 100 per month. I shall arrange
for this sum to be paid to you. I want you to reduce your wants at
least to the Ashram standard but not at the sacrifice of your or
Vidya’s or Mahadev’s health.
You should get yourself examined by a competent doctor and
put your body in order.
Concentrate on your work to the exclusion of everything else. If
you do this you will derive the keenest joy from it and that will be
1

The source had reported that professors of Kashi Vidyapith and many leading
national educationists were present.

246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

itself be a great help towards re-building your body.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

294. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
July 30, 1934
Your letter was all right. I got it only today. It was given to me
immediately after the meeting of the Working Committee had ended.
There is an error in your suggestion, namely, that at present we
are not offering civil disobedience. Appointing Abdul Ghaffar Khan
would violate norms. Nobody has understood the difference between
the present programme and the previous one. Our actions and words
have become too arrogant. That is a sign of violence. Not only do we
lack the regard and courtesy which we should show even towards an
enemy, but I feel that falsehood and arrogance, instead of diminishing, are increasing among the workers. This requires further
explanation, but I don’t have time for that just now. If you wish to
know the reasons, when we meet and if I have time, you may ask me.
You also have been appointed one of the Treasurers. 1 See that
you don’t overtax your health. You can’t afford to do that.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 149

1

According to the source four treasurers of the Reception Committee were
appointed for the Congress session which was to be held in October in Bombay.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

247

295. STATEMENT ON FAST
BENARES,

July 30, 1934
It is to be hoped that no one would take the trouble to come to
Wardha, i.e., from August 7 to 14 next and during convalescence. I
would need perfect rest and quiet during these days. The best way of
showing their sympathy and sustaining me would be for every friend
to do the utmost he or she can to be friend the Harijans in evey way
they can and win over opponents by correct and gentle behaviour.
Those who have courageously admitted their error will do their share
not by joining in the fast but by making a firm resolve not to repeat
the error which has occasioned this fast.
The Leader, 1-8-1934

296. DISCUSSION WITH VALLABHBHAI PATEL1
[On or after July 30, 1934] 2
GANDHIJI: It is my view that we should now let the library remain
with the Municipality and, if possible have a separate trust made for
it.3 I think that we are thus making a good use of the library but, of
course, if the other trustees do not like this idea, we should not hesitate
to ask for its return. This is not a question of prestige, and therefore
whatever is proper should be done. I have no doubt Kakasaheb will be
big enough not to mind it. When I think over the matter further, I
must admit that even if Kakasaheb overlooked these points, I should
have considered whether he had the necessary authority. Rushed as I
was, I dealt with many matters hurriedly and this was one of those into
1

In the source, Narahari Parikh explains that the discussion was carried on
through writing on a Silence Day after Vallabhbhai Patel’s release on July 14.
Vallabhbhai Patel met Gandhiji in Banaras on August 1, 1934; vide “Speech at
Benares Hindu University”, 1-8-1934
2
Narahari Parikh explains that in july 1933, when Sabarmati Ashram was
disbanded, the Ashram Library was entrusted to the Ahmedabad Municipality. Later on
the Gujarat Vidyapith Library also was disposed of in like manner, after Gandhiji had
a discussion with D. B. Kalelkar. Vallabhbhai Patel and some other trustees of the
Vidyapith who were in jail at that time could not be consulted. Vallabhbhai Patel,
who did not like the move when he heard of it in jail, sought Gandhiji’s guidance after
his release. Vide also “Letter of Vallabhbhai Patel”, 21-8-1934 and “Letter to G.V.
Mavalankar”, 15-9-1934.
3
ibid

248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

which I did not go fully.
VALLABHBHAI PATEL : According to Kakasaheb, it was you who first suggested
that the Vidyapith library might be given to the Municipality.

GANDHIJI : I do not remember making this suggestion, but if he
says so, I am prepared to accept that I may have done so. . . .1
It is true that they too had no authority. I would only say this
much that any bequest made by one who had no authority to make it
could always be taken back. If, therefore, it is considered proper to
take these books back, they should be taken back. I think, however,
that if at that time kakasaheb had aske every body, possibly everyone
concerned would have agreed. . . .2
You say that the trustees had no right. Very well, if that is so
then you must take back the books.3

Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Vol. II, p. 163

297. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, BENARES
July 31, 1934
I am very happy that by God’s grace I have had a second
opportunity to visit Kashiji. The joy becomes greater when I realize
that my Harijan tour will end in this holy place. If there are any who
hold a different opinion, please come up to this platform and say
something. I do not know why the Pandit 4 of the Varnashrama
Swarajya sangh could not be present here. Harijan uplift is a religious
upheaval. There is no room for prejudice in this task. However hard I
may try, I am also prone to make mistakes and I have committed
them. I have never claimed that I have never erred nor that I ever will.
What I am admitting today is nothing new. Ever since my childhood I
have realized this fact. Even as a child, I followed my own way and
1
Narahari Parikh infers : “The Sardar must then have spoken about the rights
of the trustees. . .”
2
Narahari Parikh infers : “Vallabhbhai must then have said that the trustees
had no right to make such a bequest to a Government-controlled institution.”
3
Subsequently, Vallabhbhai Patel, after obtaining legal opinion from K. M.
Munshi and Bhulabhai Desai, moved the Municipality which on its part consulted
Bahadurji, another distinguished lawyer, and returned the books to the Vidyapith.
4
Reference is to Devanayakacharya, who, however, came late. In his “Weekly
Letter” (Harijan, 17-8-1934), Valji G. Desai had explained that “a representative of
Varnashrama Swarajya Sangh and Bharata Dharma Mahamandal” had been invited to
“present their standpoint before Gandhiji’s speech”.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

249

never recognized untouchability. I was taught the Ramanama mantra
which would always protect me. If I had forgotten to admit this selfevident fact, I shall not in the least be ashamed to admit it in this holy
place. Untouchability as it exists today has no place in the Shastras.
Untouchability is a blot on Hinduism. So many pundits have come
here at my invitation and many of their own accord. They have tried
to justify the present form of untouchability by quoting the Shastras;
but I respectfully beg to say that while attempting to understand the
arguments put forth by the pundits I am in no way convinced of
them.
I feel sad to say that according to the census published by the
Government, untouchables number about seven crores. The census
officers do not take the trouble to find out whether every one of these
is an untouchable according to the laws of Manu. They write whatever
the census inspectors report. Census is taken every ten years and the
population increases or decreases in these ten years. A dog can drink
from a reservoir, but a thirsty Harijan boy may not. If he goes, he
cannot escape being beaten. Untouchability as practised today
considers man worse than a dog.
A Harijan was down with pneumonia. A sanatanist doctor was
called on payment. He accepted the fees but how could he touch the
patient? He sent for a Muslim, gave him a watch and told him: “Please
tell me how many times his pulse beats in a minute.” The doctor was
given the pulse-count, he wrote the prescription and left. A second
doctor was then called. He examined the patient’s lungs and heart
carefully and then prescribed medicine; the sick man then recovered.
Such kind of untouchability practised now has no sanction in the
Shastras. In my opinion no shastri will be prepared to admit it.
Neither my mind nor my heart will admit that such untouchability
has sanction of the Shastras.
I shall say nothing more now.1 It is my first duty to give
Panditiji an opportunity to speak. At this time I shall say only one
word more. I am very grateful for the address of welcome given to me
by the Kashi pundits. I consider it your blessings to me. I am thankful
for the money presented to me. Although it is a small sum, I have
been promised that efforts will be made to collect more money.
Kindly remain quiet and listen to Panditji with attention and follow the
dictates of your reason as regards the removal of untouchability. I
1

250

Devanavakacharya had just arrived.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

hope you will all listen to Panditji’s speech with due respect.1
After what Pandit Malaviyaji has said from the bottom of his
heart, I have nothing more to add. I thank Pandit Devanayakacharya
for the valuable advice he gave you in his calm and short speech. I
thank you all for having listened to the speeches quietly. But if I do
not reply to Devanayakacharyaji it would be considered bad manners.
Panditji’s chief objection was in connection with the Temple-entry
Bill. I shall have no objection if, as Malaviyaji has suggested, there is a
talk between us both and some way is found in the future by which
with the consent of temple-goers there would be no legal obstruction
to temple-entry by Harijans. I have already said that without the
consent of the Hindus no law will be made on this subject. Rest
assured with this reply. Regarding the Bill, I made no reference to it in
my Harijan tour; I did not even mention the name of the Bill. This has
to be said about discussion: Today or in the future, discussions can
take place anywhere; but religion is not a subject to be understood by
the intellect but one that is accepted by the heart. Except the templeentry question I do not see anyone against any other question. I
neither wish to force anyone nor do I wish to quarrel with anyone.
None should be afraid of me. I can do no harm nor evil to sanatana
dharma. I am also a follower of the same sanatana dharma that you
profess.
[From Hindi]
Harijan Sevak, 10-8-1934

1

In his speech, Devanayakacharya opposed the Temple-entry Bill and said
that Gandhiji was introducing an innovation undermining the importance of sanatana
dharma. Madan Mohan Malaviya who spoke next made a forceful appeal in support of
the reform.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

251

298. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
August 1, 1934
CHI. PREMA,

I got your fairly long and frank letter.
Parents don’t think or talk about their children’s good health.
They think and talk about their diseases, which are not of the body
only. I am not surprised to learn that you are observing the Ashram
rules. I would have been surprised indeed had you not observed
them.
May you succeed in your noble aims.
Every day is one’s birthday. We are born every day and we die
every day and are born again. But, following convention, we regard a
particular day of the year as our bithday. You certainly have my
blessings for that day and for all other days of the year.
I am sending this reply through Narandas and thereby saving
five pice. Narandas also will write to you. I have to write to him today
and so, instead of sending the letter through Dhurandhar, I am
sending it through him.
Please keep writing to me. Your description of that place was
good. This letter is being written before the morning prayer.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10357. Also C.W. 6796. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

299. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 1, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. It is strange that Santok can do no work. How
is it that Baba1 has been brought up in such a way that he doesn’t let
her attend to anything else? How do the children of the poor grow?
Ask Kusum, Lilavati and others to write to me when they feel
inclined to do so. They should not, however, expect any letter from
me, for I shall not be able to write any.
1

252

Madhav, son of Rukmini Bazaj
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I got Prema’s long letter. A reply1 to her is enclosed.
Amala is extremely frank, but she has no common sense at all.
If I sent her to you, she would waste your money. It is better that, so
long as I live at one place, I should shoulder her responsibility. When
I give up a fixed residence, I will see what to do about her. I will try
to fix her permanently at the place where she may be at that time.
What work is Keshu doing? Where does he live? I often meet
Rukhi here. Her health cannot be described as very good.
You should keep up the practice of writing to me on a fixed day
once every week, whether or not there is any special business. If there
is anything particular to write about, you may write as often as
necessary. A postcard will do.
I am thinking about the dairy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U/I. Also C.W. 8405. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

300. SPEECH AT BANARES HINDU UNIVERSITY
August 1, 1934
The Hindu University is not new to me. Since its inception2
Malaviyaji had me associated with it and it remains exactly so to this
day. If there has been any change, the association has been strengthened and my regard for this University is increasing. With the
progress of this University there should be progress in dharma as well;
this is Pandit Malaviyaji’s idea. I hope students will acquire learning
and will make good use of it and not accept a narrow view of religion.
A broad-minded religion accepts all other religions in its fold. This is
the auspicious occasion of Lokamanya Tilak’s anniversary and I have
come to tell you what we should do about one aspect of religion. I
shall not speak of Lokamanya’s political strength; I have also no
freedom to touch upon that subject. I wish to tell you at this time
what Tilak Maharaj said about religion. You should know that
Lokamanya had great sympathy in his heart for the Harijan brothers.
In our exchange of thoughts and ideas with each other, he said that in
1

Vide the preceding item.
For Gandhiji speech on the occasion, vide
University”, 6-2-1916
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

“Spech at Benares Hindu

253

the dharmashastra there is no sanction for untouchability and there
cannot be because truth ranks highest in the Hindu religion. If truth
was put in one scale of the balance and all the rest in the other, even
then the scale with truth in it will go down. No pundit can find
anywhere in the Vedas, Puranas or history things said contrary to the
principles of religion. There is no mention of untouchability in other
religions. Hinduism alone seems to have taken a monopoly. There are
several things mentioned in our religion which are not found
elsewhere. If the varna system is abolished in our country, then
Hinduism will also disappear. There is no connection between the
varnashrama and the present-day concept of untouchability. My faith
in this is growing stronger and after nine months of this tour I can
avow it with greater conviction.1
I have been asked by Acharya Anandshankar Dhruva to say a
few words on the Gita to the students of the Kashi Vishvavidyalaya.
It is not without hesitation that I have accepted the invitation. What
right can a layman like myself have to discourse on a theme like this
in the presence of a savant like him? I have neither his profound
scholarship, nor the deep study of our ancient religious lore which
Pandit Malaviyaji, for instance, has. Sardar Vallabhbhai, in his
charcteristic manner, asked me this morning whether scavengers,
cultivators, and weavers like him and me were not altogether out of
court in a city of pundits like Kashi and in the presence of such
learned pundits as Malaviyaji and Acharya Dhruva, and in a way he
was right. But I have come here, not with any pretence to learning ,
but only to tell you what reaction the Gita had on lay natures like
mine and the Sardar’s. I wonder Whether you have even a distant idea
of how profoundly it affected the Sardar during his imprisonment. I
am here to bear witness to the fact that in the Yeravda Prison it gave
him more strength and sustenance than meat and drink. To read the
Gita in the original he set about learning Sanskrit with the help of
Pandit Satavalekar’s Sanskrit self-instructor, and once he had started
on it, the book seldom left his hands. It occupied him from morning
till night. It was not an obsession of an unoccupied mind, as you
might be tempted to think, but the result of deep thought. ‘Which is
the one book that can be to the Hindus what the Bible is to the
Christians or the Koran to the Maussalmans?’ We asked ourselves. Is it
1

This paragraph is translated from the Hindi report in Harijan Sevak. What
follows in reproduced from Harijan. It appeared under the title “Gita —The Mother”.

254

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the Vedas? No. The Bhagavata? No. Devipurana? No. Early in my
childhood I had felt the need of a scripture that would serve me as an
unfailing guide through the trials and temptations of life. The Vedas
could not supply that need, if only because to learn them would
require fifteen to sixteen years of hard study at a place like Kashi, for
which I was not ready then. But the Gita, I had read somewhere, gave
within the compass of its 700 verses the quintessence of all the
Shastras and the Upanishads. That decided me. I learnt Sanskrit to
enable me to read the Gita. Today the Gita is not only my Bible or
my Koran; it is more than that—it is my mother. I lost my earthly
mother who gave me birth long ago; but this eternal Mother has
completely filled her place by my side ever since. She has never
changed, She has never failed me. When I am in difficulty or distress,
I seek refuge in Her bosom. Often in the course of my struggle
against untouchability, I am confronted with conflicting opinions
delivered by doctors of learning. Some of them tell me that
untouchability as it is practised today has no sanction in Hinduism
and they bless my efforts to eradicate it; but there are some others
who maintain that untouchability has been an essential part of
Hinduism from the very beginning. Which authority should I follow
under the circumstances? I feel absolutely at sea. The Vedas and the
smritis are of no avail to me. I then approach the Mother and say,
“Mother, these learned pundits have put me in a predicament. Help
me out of my perplexity.” And the Mother, with a smile, says in
reply: “The assurance 1 held out by me in the ninth chapter is not
meant for the Brahmins only, but for the sinner and the outcaste, the
downtrodden and the disinherited, too.’ But in order to be worthy of
that promise, we must be obedient and devoted children of the Mother
and not disobedient and disloyal children, who only make a pretence
of devotion.
It is sometimes alleged against the Gita that it is too difficult a
work for the man in the street. The criticism, I venture to submit, is illfounded. The Gita enabled the late Lokamanya, out of his
encyclopaedic learning and study, to produce a monumental
commentary. For him it was a store-house of profound truths to
exercise his intellect upon. But that need not scare away a lay reader.
If you find all the eighteen chapters too difficult to negotiate, make a
careful study of the first three chapters only. They will give you in a
1

Bhagavad Gita, IX. 32

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

255

nutshell what is propounded in greater detail and from different
angles in the remaining fifteen chapters. Even these three chapters can
be further epitomized in a few verses that can be selected from these
chapters. Add to this the fact that at three distinct1 places the Gita goes
even further and exhorts to us to leave alone all ‘isms’ and take
refuge in the Lord alone, and it will be seen how baseless in the charge
that the message of the Gita is too subtle or complicated for lay
minds to understand. The Gita is the universal Mother. She turns away
nobody. Her door is wide open to anyone who knocks. A true votary
of the Gita does not know what disappointment is. He ever dwells in
perennial joy and peace that passeth understanding. But that peace
and joy come not to the sceptic or to him who is proud of his intellect
or learning. It is reserved only for the humble in spirit who brings to
Her worship a fullness of faith and an undivided singleness of mind.
There never was a man who worshipped Her in that spirit and went
back disappointed.
Our students are prone to be upset by trifles. A trivial thing like
failure in an examination plunges them into the darkest despair. The
Gita inculcates upon them the duty of perseverance in the face of
seeming failure. It teaches us that we have a right to action only but
not to the fruit thereof and that success and failure are one and the
same thing at bottom. 2 It calls upon us to dedicate ourselves, body,
mind and soul, to pure duty, and not to become mental voluptuaries at
the mercy of all chance desires and undisciplined impulses. As a
satyagrahi, I can declare that the Gita is ever presenting me with fresh
lessons. If somebody tells me that this is my delusion, my reply to him
would be that I shall hug this delusion as my richest treasure.
I would advise the students to begin their day with an early
morning recitation of the Gita. I am a lover and devotee of Tulsidas. I
adore the great spirit that gave to an aching world the allhealing
mantra of Ramanama. But I am here today, not to present Tulsidas to
you, but to ask you to take up the study of the Gita, not in a carping
or critical spirit, but in a devout and reverent spirit. Thus approached,
She will grant your every wish. It is no joke, I admit, remembering by
heart all the eighteen chapters but it is worth while to make the
attempt. Once you have tasted of its sweet nectar, you attachment to it
will grow from day to day. The recitation of the Gita verses will
1
2

256

Bhagavad Gita, III. 30, VIII. 7 and XVIII. 66
Bhagavad Gita, II. 47 and 48
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

support you in your trials and console you in your distress, even in
the darkness of solitary confinement. And, if with these verses on your
lips you receive the final summons and deliver up your spirit, you will
attain Brahmanirvana—the Final Liberation. What that blessed state is,
I leave it for your learned Acharyas to explain to you.
Harijan Sevak, 10-8-1934; also Harijan, 24-8-1934

301. SPEECH AT HARIJANS’ MEETING, BENARES1
August 1, 1934
In the course of his address to them, Gandhiji said that the Harijan movement
was fraught with immense possibilities and held within it the seeds of reconciliation,
not only between the various communities in India, but also the white and the
coloured races of the world.
The Municipality and the citizens of Benares should be ashamed of the fact, he
said, that Harijan quarters were situated just near public latrines and that Harijans had
to live in a place unfit even for cattle. It was up to the Municipality to construct
decent houses for them in good and pleasant surroundings.
Harijans must fulfil their part of the programme by giving up beef, carrion,
liquor, gambling and the idea of superiority and inferiority even among themselves.2
Mahatma Gandhi reiterated his view that anti-untouchability was not against
the Shastras. If anyone could convince him that this movement was against the
Shastras he would be the first person to give it up.
Harijan, 17-8-1934; also The Leader, 2-8-1934

302. LETTER TO NARENDRA DEVA
BENARES,

August 2, 1934
DEAR NARENDRA DEVA,

I was thankful for the two hearty meetings3 with the socialist friend during the all too few days I have been with you and enjoyed your
hospitality.
I promised to study your draft programme and let you have my
criticism on it. I cannot say I have studied it as carefully as I would
1

The Leader had reported that the meeting was held at Central Hindu School.
What follows is reproduced from The Leader.
3
Vide pp. 253-4.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

257

have liked to. The following therefore is meant as a cursory criticism
by no means exhaustive.
I think that it is wrong to call the party ‘Congress Socialist
Party’ unless you apply for permission to make it part of the
Congress organization. But it would be quite proper to call it ‘AllIndia Socialist Party of Congressmen’. I am sure you realize the
significance of the distinction.
I miss in your draft constitution acceptance of the Congress
objective of attainment of purna swaraj by legitimate and peaceful
means.
If it is an intentional omission I can understand it. For your
object seems to be far different from that of the Congress. You
perhaps claim that it is far ahead of the object of the Congress. Even
so you cannot then call yourself a Congress party.
The object of the Congress is to form an independent State.
What that State will be we can but dimly guess. Some of its features we
have already determined. Experience teaches us daily new things to
add. But your enunciation of the socialist object frightens me. The
implications of all the three principles are too vast for my comprehension. They make an intoxicating programme. I fear all intoxicants.
I now take by way of illustration what appear to me to be
objectionable items in your programme. Items 7 and 8 are contrary to
the present policy of the Congress. Though I have all my life
identified myself with the masses and renounced possession of private
property, I do not contemplate the elimination of the princes and the
landlords nor do I contemplate redistribution of land to peasants. I
aim at reformation of the princes and the landlords. It is possible,
without a violent redistribution of land, to secure for tenants rights
which virtually amount to ownership. I like item 11, which 7 and 8
and some others seem to me to contradict. To everyone “according to
his needs” should be, in my opinion, a perfect formula if you can
find place for “just” before “needs”. That alone sums up all you
can wish for for the most helpless and forlorn among the millions of
our. . . 1 . Your fifth method, as I conceive it, is a negation of nonviolence. I fail to find any justification for refusal to enter at any stage
into negotiations on the constitutional issue with the British
Government. The Congress did not adopt that policy even in the
1

258

The source is illegible here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

heyday of non-co-operation. I am sure this is a hasty interpolation.
Your “general strikes of workers and peasants” without any
qualif-ication is too dangerous for a sober, non-violent programme.
Your immediate demands are attractive with the exception of a
few items. But I find nothing in your methods to show that you have
any hope of immediate attainment.
I draw your attention to glaring omissions:
Removal of untouchability.
Communal unity.
Khaddar as symbol of identity with the masses and immediate
occupation till a better is found for the millions who are unemployed
for six or four months in the year.
Total prohibition of intoxicating drugs and drinks.
I plead for a drastic revision of the whole constitution. We are
both labouring under a heavy handicap in that Jawaharlal, who has
given us the mantra of socialism, is not in our midst, and I consider
him to be the natural wearer of the Congress crown of thorns when I
and other elderly men and women have been permitted to take welldeserved rest. I feel sure that if he was in our midst, he would have
hastened slowly. I suggest your presenting the country with practical
socialism in keeping with Indian conditions instead of scientific
socialism as your programme has been called. I am glad that the
programme you have given me is but draft though prepared by an
influential committee appointed for the purpose. It would be wise, if
when you settle your programme finally, you will associate with you
men who have socialist leanings and have experience of actual
conditions.
Yours sincerely,
From a facsimile: Mahatma, Vol. III, between pp. 344 and 345

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

259

303. LETTER TO GOVINDDAS
BENARES,

[August ] 1 2, 1934
BHAI GOVINDDASJI,

I have gone through your letter. My article or statement did not
at all imply that Congress Committees should not or cannot be formed
in the Indian States. The Committees already existing such as the
Baghelkhand District Congress Committee about which you wrote to
me should certainly continue to exist. It will, of course, be a matter of
extreme regret if such committees are disallowed in any State.
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI

[From Hindi]
Madhya Pradesh aur Gandhiji, p. 103

304. LETTER TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
BENARES,

August 2, 1934
There are grave objections to organizing things in accordance
with your demand. The Congress would, in that case, be charged with
complete nullification of its resolution and this it cannot afford. First,
only the Parliamentary Board can properly deliberate over this
because that alone is in possession of correct information regarding
the number and the names of candidates to be put up and their
respective constituencies. But the Parliamentary Board itself will find it
well-nigh impossible to accept the suggested arrangement. It has
already put up candidates at many places and the work too has been
started. To withdraw the Congress candidates and put up your
candidates instead would have, in view of the Bombay Resolution2 , an
extremely adverse effect. It is also very difficult to judge whether
candidates whom you want to be put up on your behalf can be found
among tried Congressmen in sufficiently large number. What we
suggested was that you yourself, Shri Aney and only a few other
important persons whose participation you consider most essential
should come. They should be confirmed Congressmen and willing to
1

The source has “2-3-1934”, but Gandhiji was in Benares in August 1934.
Vide Appendix “ Resolution on White Paper and Communal Award”
18-6-1934
2

260

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

co-operate fully with the members of the Parliamentary Board in all
other respects except the Communal Award. I feel this would be the
proper course and I do not expect good results from any other. My
appeal to you even now is to accept this scheme and not to involve
yourself in the botheration of forming a new group. It would add to
the prestige of both sides if you avoid any contest with the Congress
candidates. You have left the Parliamentary Board regarding it as your
dharma. If we all work placing this dharma before us we shall all
benefit and achieve our objectives. Competition is bound to be very
harmful. I am confident that your opposition by itself would suffice
as an expression of disapproval of Communal Award. I hope you will
respond to my humble appeal.
[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

305. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, BENARES 1
[August 2, 1934] 2
It is a tragedy that religion for us means today nothing more
than restriction on food and drink, nothing more than adherence to a
sense of superiority and inferiority. Let me tell you that there cannot
be grosser ignorance than this. Birth and observance of forms cannot
determine one’s superiority or inferiority. Character is the only
determining factor. God did not create men with the badge of
superiority or inferiority, and no scripture which labels a human being
as inferior or untouchable because of his or her birth can command
our allegience; it is a denial of God and Truth which is God. God, who
is the embodiment of Truth and Right and Justice, can never have
sanctioned a religion or practice which regards a fifth of our vast
population as untouchables. I want you, therefore, to rid yourselves of
this monstrous notion. Untouchability attaching to unclean work is
there, must be there. It applies to every one of us, but the moment we
have washed ourselves clean of dirt or filth, we cease to be untouchable. But no work or conduct can render a man or woman
untouchables for all time. Sinners we are all to a greater or less extent,
and every one of our spiritual books—Gita, Bhagavata, and Tulsi
1
This appeared under the title “Plain Talk to Women”. The meeting was held in
Harish Chandra School.
2
From Valji G. Desai’s “Weekly Letter” in Harijan, 17-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

261

Ramayana—declares in no uncertain terms that whoever seeks refuge
in Him, whoever takes His name, shall be free from sin. That covenant
is for all mankind.
There is another simple test that I want you to apply to this
question. Every species, human and sub-human, has some
distinguishing mark, so that you can tell a man from a beast, or a dog
from a cow and so on. Have the so-called untouchables any distinguishing mark declaring them to be untouchables? They are as much
human as every one of us, and we do not regard even sub-human
beings as bearing the mark of untouchability. Why and whence, then,
this monstrous injustice? It is not religion, but the grossest species of
irreligion. I want you to cast off that sin, if you still happen to have it
in you.
The only way in which we can expiate this sin of centuries is to
befriend the Harijans by going to their quarters, by hugging their
children as you do your own, by interesting yourselves in their
welfare, by finding out whether they get enough to eat, whether they
get pure water to drink, whether they have the fresh light and air that
you enjoy as of right. The other way is for each of you to start the
spinning sacrifice and to pledge vourselves to wear khadi, which
supports millions of these submerged human beings. The spinning
sacrifice will help you in some slight measure to identify yourselves
with them, and every yard of khadi you wear will mean some coppers
going into the pockets of the Harijans and the poor. The last thing is
to contribute your mite to the Harijan Fund, which has no other end
but the amelioration of the lot of the Harijans.
Harijan, 31-8-1934

262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

306. THE ANTI-UNTOUCHABILITY BILL1
August 3, 1934
This interpretation of the Bill is not sustained by lawyers.
Harijans will be shut out of temples effectively where savarna Hindus
are against their entry, though not on the ground of untouchability. If
there is any doubt about it, the Bill can be amended; but I hold that in
principle it is absolutely necessary, more so than the Temple-entry
Bill.
Harijan, 3-8-1934

307. LETTER TO J. C. GUPTA
P ATNA,

August 3, 1934
DEAR MR. GUPTA,

Thanks for your letter. I cannot help feeling that your
resignation is a mistake. You were at liberty, although a member of
Parliamentary Board, to agitate against separate electorates and for
any agreed solution that you thought fit. And as a member perhaps
you would have been more effective. In any case you will earn
universal thanks if you can procure even an agreed solution for
Bengal.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

1
This appeared as reply to a letter to the editor from Basant Kumar Chatterjee,
which read : “Gandhiji has often declared that he is not in favour of temple-entry by
the Harijans, unless the majority of Hindus of the upper castes are in favour of the
innovation. If, however, the Anti-untouchability Bill is passed, it will secure templeentry to Harijans, even though the majority of Hindus of the higher castes are against
such temple-entry. Will Gandhiji kindly state whether he is against the Antiuntouchability Bill ?”

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

263

308. LETTER TO SURENDRANATH CHATTERJI
P ATNA,

August 3, 1934
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 18th ultimo. The question you
raised baffles a decisive answer. The vote of a majority cannot bind a
minority, in religious matters, but that must surely mean that the
minority secedes from the majority. As to legislation, it is necessary
when law prevents the growth of religion. Legislation was the rule of
the day during the pure Hindu period.
S URENDRANATH C HATTERJI
65 L ALIT GHAT, B ENARES
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

309. LETTER TO MULKRAJ
P ATNA,

August 3, 1934
DEAR LALA MULKRAJ,

I have your wire to which I sent a reply yesterday. Your budget
of expenses was signed by Panditji, some days back, but pressure of
work prevented my sending it to you.
Panditji has promised to send you the cheque at once on
hearing from you. If there is any delay you will please write to me.
Meanwhile, I would like a copy of the Congress Resolution, trustdeed,
and deed appointing the Committee of manager[s].
Panditji desires that the work should be started forthwith and
that a report of the progress with expenses should be sent from month
to month.
I leave for Wardha tomorrow morning.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
LALA MULKRAJ
JALLIANWALA BAGH C OMMITTEE
AMRITSAR, P UNJAB
From the Manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

310. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
P ATNA,

August 3, 1934
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,

I have your letter. I have given to Mantreswar public answers to
your questions. I have come to no agreement with Malaviyaji and I
have no authority either, but I have suggested1 that Malaviyaji should
be satisfied if two or three of his nominees, being all Congressmen, are
left uncontested. He won’t be satisfied with less than 22 seats. I have
said that would be impossible. I myself could not agree to any such
proposal. I fancy that we could not object to expression of dissent on
the part of the members of general committees, but we could and
should resist such action on the part of members of Working
Committee, or such committees. These latter are the executives
pledged to carry out the programme of provincial majorities.
Though I am somewhat broken up since you left us, I share
your confidence that I shall pull through the fast. I have no objection
to the Parliamentary Board meeting, but Sardar would insist on
protecting me from it.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G.
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

311. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
August 3, 1934
CHI. LILAVATI,

I got your letter. What you say is correct. Follow Narandasbhai’s advice. Sushilabehn also is there now. You may consult her
too. Now think over my argument. Do you want a degree or knowledge? Do you want education which brings you knowledge or to
work for some sort of degree? Do you know that a degree does not
serve the purpose of knowledge2 ? . . .
From Gujarati: C.W. 9873

1
2

Vide “Letter to Madan Mohan Malaviya”, 2-8-1934
The rest of the letter is illegible in the source.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

265

312. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
August 3, 1934
CHI. SHARMA,

I have your letter. There is no longer any necessity, I suppose,
of answering all your letters. But you may send me those you want to
be dealt with.1
I do not see any impropriety in accepting from one’s brothers
the financial help they can offer without hesitation. So they may give
what help they can.
It is not right that you should feel yourself exiled there. This
attitude, if not corrected, is bound to have a bad effect on Ramdas.2
Why do you think we have all hampered your work? For myself,
I have endeavoured to give you as much encouragement as I could.
You must tell me if I have unwittingly done something to the
contrary.
How is it that Devi3 is suffering from typhoid, and, if he is, don’t
you have any treatment for it? You may treat the children as you
think best, I have no wish to interfere unduly.
Blessings to all from

BAPU

[PS.]
Shirshasana or ardha-sarvangasana are effective in case of
invol-untary emission, so also siddhasana and pranayama.
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha,
1932-48, between pp. 82 and 83

1

Hiralal Sharma used to send daily reports to Gandhiji who would return them
with his suggestions. On this occasion due to indisposition Gandhiji had returned all
the reports without comments.
2
Ramdas was under the addressee’s treatment at Khurja.
3
Deviprasad, addressee’s son

266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

313. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
August 3, 1934
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

Your letter. I am unable to draw any conclusions till Damodardas sends a reply to your letter. I must state this much that whatever
I say must be regarded only as a suggestion. It should be followed
only if acceptable both to the mind and the heart, not otherwise. This
being my attitude you are certainly at liberty to follow your own
inclination. I am awaiting Damodardas’s letter in order to find out if I
have to alter my opinion in any way so that I may inform you.
You must be keeping well. It is good that you have reached a
compromise at Delhi but nothing should be done at the cost of your
health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2416

314. SPEECH AT BIHAR CENTRAL RELIEF COMMITTEE
MEETING, PATNA1
August 3, 1934
It is in the fitness of things that we are having a resolution
recording confidence and not expressing any elaborate appreciation.
There were two reasons, one being that the report is not yet in the
hands of the public and, secondly, the general committee in
eulogizing the work of its Managing Committee would be eulogizing
itself. But the resolution is necessary in order to tell the public that the
Managing Committee retains their confidence and that the general
committee wants it to go ahead with its work. It is worth nothing that
the Committee has expended just little less than half of the funds as its
disposal; not that it could not spend it all, but it knew its limitations.
Thus it might have attempted to clear the sand-covered areas and sunk
1

The source had reported that the first general meeting of the Earthquake Relief
Committee, after its reconstitution, was held in Wheeler Senate Hall. Rajendra Prasad
presided. Gandhiji spoke after moving the following resolution : “The general
meeting of the Bihar Central Relief Committee, having received the report of the
Managing Committee regarding work done up to the 30th June, records its confidence
in the Managing Committee.”
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

267

the whole of the funds in sand. I am in a position to move this
resolution because though I have not been able to go through the
report, I have been in constant touch with the actual work of the
Committee.
There is a complaint that the Committee has not been mindful
of the interests of the middle classes inasmuch as it has spent
something like twenty-two thousand rupees for helping the middle
classes. The complaint is hardly just because the total amount allotted
is Rs. 5 lakhs and I am here to give the assurance that the balance will
be spent for the middle classes. The critics must remember that those
responsible for distribution of relief themselves belong to the middle
classes and could not be accused of neglecting them. Besides,
Government has distributed Rs. 22 lakhs for their relief, the
Government being in a better position to ascertain the condition of
these classes. The Bihar Central Relief Committee had naturally to
concentrate its attention to the relief of the poorer classes inasmuch as
it knows their condition and their grievances better than any other
agency. It was well that there was a natural division of functions
between the official agency and our agency. There was also another
reason why relief to the middle classes could be deferred for a while,
for they had much more staying power than the poor. I can assure
you that not only the balance of Rs. 4,80,000 would be expended for
the help of the middle classes, but that even more will be voted if it is
needed and is available. I would ask everyone, who could afford, to go
in for a copy of the report and study it. Every little contribution has
been acknowledged. I would invite everyone to study the report
critically and pass on his criticism to the Committee.
I am thankful to the railway companies and the Tata Company
for the concessions and the help they have extended to the Committee
but I associate myself with Babu Rajendra Prasad that they should
continue these concessions unless they have strong reasons not to do
so.
I am thankful that we had a band of volunteers and workers to
help us in the work. Volunteer work is done ever so much efficiently
and honestly than paid work. I hope and pray that the presentcalamity
will have taught us the lessons of resourcefulness and self-help so that
in case of future emergencies we may not be found wanting.
I am sorry that we are not ready with the full audited accounts
today. This is a thing that public organizations can illafford to neglect
268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and we should always be ready to account for our receipts from
minute to minute and from day to day. No care in this matter would
be too great.
In conclusion, I would ask you to note that the committee is not
making a further appeal for funds mainly at my instance. It is not that
we don’t want more money. The sum of Rs. 83 lakhs received for the
Viceroy’s Fund and by the Bihar Central Relief Committee is hardly
enough for our needs but we cannot appeal for more so long as we
have not disbursed all the funds at our disposal. Let the public,
however, remember that we may have to make an appeal in future and
let them be prepared to pay as generously as they have done
especially when they know that all the monies are well spent and every
pie is accounted for.
The Searchlight, 5-8-1934

315. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS1
P ATNA,

August 3, 1934
INTERVIEWER: Are you now in a position to say what your programme will be
in the very near future ?

So far as I am aware this month will be devoted to
fasting and convalescence. Thereafter what is in store for me in
September I have no notion. But I can say this much. I am in no
hurry to find myself in a prison. On the contrary, I shall try to avoid it
to the best of my ability. If it becomes possible for me to avoid
imprisonment for any length of time, I hope to be able to devote it
undoubtedly to the continuation of the Harijan work and the rest of
the constructive programme of the Working Committee, for I swear by
that programme, and I am positive that if we are to mount to freedom
through really non-violent means, the workers will have to
qualifythemselves for such constructive work and devote themselves
whole-heartedly to it.
Though I am mainly responsible for the coming into being of
the Congress Parliamentary Board, I have always insisted that it is the
least part of the national programme. It will be useless, in terms of
swaraj, without the backing of the constructive programme, not one on
GANDHIJI:

1

Accorded jointly to The Hindu and The Hindustan Times

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

269

mere paper but in solid substantial Indiawide work. If God enables me
to do so I hope to be able to show in its fulness the marvellous
potency of the Working Committee’s resolution1 on swadeshi, passed
at Benares.
But what about the split between Pandit Malaviya and Mr. Aney on the one
hand and the Working Committee and the Parliamentary Board on the other?

You may call it a split if you like. In spite of Herculean efforts
on either side to prevent the parting we saw that there were
fundamental differences which were not to be overcome and we have
parted as friends and hope to remain as such although we might be
fighting.
Indeed I am not without hope that the fight could be avoided.
How it will be, I do not know. How it can be, I do know. I have
submitted my proposal2 to Pandit Malaviya. If it comes to anything it
will have to go to the Working Committee and the Parliamentary
Board. I have no power whatsoever to come to any agreement.
But rumour has it that you and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel have agreed to divide
half the available seats with Panditji and those who represent his point of view.

I can give you a summary contradiction of that rumour. Indeed,
any such division will be a betrayal of trust. After all, the Working
Committee’s resolution enunciates a very big principle. If the
members of the Working Committee had no confidence in the
correctness of their position they would have been wrong to lose the
co-operation of such men as Pandit Malaviya and Mr. Aney. The
Working Committee and the Parliamentary Board have, therefore, to
work out the comprehensive resolution on the White Paper and the
Communal Award to its full extent and know, as also demonstrate, the
efficacy of all its parts. That surely cannot be done by a surrender of
half the available seats to the representatives of the view for which
Pandit Malaviyaji stands. I would, therefore, urge the public to
discount all rumours.
Pandit Malaviya is a seasoned servant of the nation. He is one
amongst the very few of the oldest of Congressmen with an unbroken
record of brilliant service and sacrifice. I have no manner of doubt
that he will do nothing to undermine the Congress influence whether
they put up a fight or it becomes possible, as I hope it will be, to come
to an honourable understanding. But let me not anticipate.
1
2

270

Vide “Resolution on Swadeshi”
Vide “Letter to Madan Mohan Malaviya”, 2-8-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

We have read the Working Committee’s resolution1 on discipline. There are
Congressmen whose views coincide with those of Pandit Malaviya. In such cases,
where they are members of Congress Committees, should they retire, as Mr. Aney has
done ?

I personally do not think so. Disciplinary action in such matters
can only extend to bodies corresponding to the Central Working
Committee. Thus, the Provincial Congress Committees have members
who may represent Malaviyaji’s point of view and advocate it in the
Press or on the platform without being considered guilty of
indiscipline, even as members of the All-India Congress Committee
expressing views opposed to those held by the Working Committee
will not be. But every Provincial Congress Committee has or should
have its own Executive Committee corresponding to the Central
Working Committee. That is the real Executive which has to carry out
loyally and without murmur the whole of the Congress programme.
And if any of the members has no faith in the programme he should
retire from the Executive. But so long as he is in it, he may not
criticize the programme either in the Press or on the platform. This is
the view I have always held. Any other attitude will break to pieces
any organization.
Is it likely that you will devote any time now or in the near future to a special
effort at tackling the terrorist problem? What special methods do you contemplate
employing to bring revolutionary young men under control?

Indeed I am a determined opponent of the cult of violence. Not
a day passes when I do not do or think something about this question
which is one of life and death to me. But I would like to do ever so
much more than I am able to at present. For that, however, I need help
from outside, both Indian and English, official and non-official. The
cult of violence is not going to die easily. I entertain no extravagant
dreams about the establishment of the kingdom of non-violence on
the earth. If I get the atmosphere for the work that I need, I would
love to bury myself for some time in Bengal and see what possibility
there is for me to battle with violence. But I have patience. God will
open the way for me, if he wants me to work more actively than I am
doing in that direction.2
It is a matter of great thankfulness for me that the tour was
1

Vide “Resolution on Discipline”
According to the source, Gandhiji was then “asked to give his impressions
about the Harijan tour”.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

271

finished without interruption and according to the programme that
was settled from time to time. The impression left on my mind is that
untouchability is on its last legs. Millions who attended the meetings
were not all utterly ignorant of all I had to say to them. They were
certainly not indifferent. The intensive propaganda carried on by
sanatanists had left no room for ignorance or indifference. Nothing
was left undone to prejudice the mass mind against the movement.
The grossest falsehoods were broadcast. It would be wrong, therefore,
to say that the attendance of multitudes at the meetings was purely a
personal compliment to me and had no reference to my message. I
am quite sure that the message has appealed to the reason of the
masses. I am also fully aware that all of them are not yet ready to
translate their beliefs into practice. But I consider it a tremendous gain
that the masses have begun to believe in the truth of the message. It
makes the task of the workers easier than before. To show how
heartily the masses have taken part in the movement. I should mention
that the eight lakhs of rupees collected during the past nine months
represent contributions from the poorest. It has occupied hours, from
day to day, of our accountants to count coppers and small coins,
whether collected at public meetings or at railway stations. People are
not known to contribute to the cause which they have utterly disliked.
The third thing I should say about the tour is that a demonstrable
awakening, on a large scale, has taken place among the Harijans.
Many of them have made unsolicited statements before me that the
position had considerably advanced and that they had confidence that
untouchability would be a thing of the past in the near future. I share
their confidence. If the movement goes on as it is doing at present—
and I have no doubt that it will go on—it must cause daily increasing
awakening among Harijans and when they fully realize how they can
substantially help themselves, and how in many cases the law is with
them, whether savarna Hindus like it or not, Harijans would make
good their position. I would, of course, hope that savarna Hindus will
realize the wickedness of untouchability as it is practised today and
get rid of it themselves rather than that they should be compelled to
do so by circumstances beyond their control. Whatever happens,
untouchability cannot survive for many years.
Much mischievous agitation has been led on this question in
spite of my having cleared the position at the beginning stage of the
Harijan tour. No temple was opened where there was not a virtual
consensus of opinion, in favour of opening, on the part of those who
272

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

were in the habit of visiting those temples. Nobody has ever suggested
that when practically the whole congregation is in favour of such
opening, the temple should not be opened. As to the Temple-entry
Bill, I hold that it is a legal necessity. But I have declared times without
number that I would be no party to forcing the Bill through the
Assembly by the vote of a mixed majority. It is, therefore, that Mr. C.
Rajagopalachariar is ascertaining independently Hindu sentiment in
the legislature and if Hindu sentiment is against the Bill, so far as I am
concerned, it will be withdrawn. With all these reservations, therefore,
all agitation against the measures ought to die, unless I commit a
breach of faith. How I wish that the undivided attention of all Hindus
was concentrated on the ameliorative measures that have been adopted
by the Harijan Sevak Sangh !
Let me finally add that no money has been spent during these
nine months in connection with the temple-entry agitation or the Bill.
No temple has been built out of Harijan purses.
The Hindu, 3-8-1934

316. TELEGRAM TO HIRALAL SHARMA
MUGHALSARAI,

August 4, 1934
DR. S HARMA
KHURJA
NO

TEMPERATURE.

BOTH 1

WELL.

HOPE

RAMDAS

STRONG.

BAPU
From a facsimile: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha, 1932-48,
facing p. 83

1

Gandhiji and Kasturba, who had fallen ill at Banaras

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

273

317. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
August 4, 1934
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

I thought I would write a few lines before the fast which
commences in two days’ time. We are in a train just now. We shall
reach Wardha tomorrow morning. Devdas had come to Kashi. He
parted from us at Allahabad.
This time it may be said that I have already begun the fast; but
how can I claim merit for it? Not being well during the last two days I
have not taken milk for four days. For two days I have been eating
only fruit, and that too in small quantity. Even so, my strength and
weight have remained satisfactory. That means that the body has lost
nothing yet except the toxins. There is, therefore, no cause at all for
worry. By the time you get this letter, everything will have been over.
Hence it even seems unnecessary to write all this. But I thought you
should know my condition as it is today.
Sushila seems to be giving you excellent help. If she had a
stronger body, she could have done much more. But what she is able
to do is quite satisfactory. You must have received the name selected
for Arun and sent to you.
Ramdas’s health causes anxiety. He has become very much
emaciated. If you can get passes for him and Dr. Sharma, I would
send them over there. But don’t ask for them as a special favour. If
they can be obtained in the natural course, it is all right.
With me are Ba, Mahadev, Prabhavati, Valjibhai, Kakasaheb,
Thakkar Bapa and Prithuraj. The others have gone to Wardha in
advance.
I hope Manilal has been able to make a good collection.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4824. Also C.W. 1236. Courtesy:
Sushila Gandhi

274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

318. TALK ON RAMANAMA 1
August 4, 1934 2
Ramanama to me is all-sufficing. There are as many names of
God as His manifestations, but sages have, as a result of their lifelong
penance, devised names to be uttered by the devotees, in order to be
able to commune with the Nameless. There are other mantras than
Ramanama, but for me that is supreme. It has become part of my life.
When [I was] a child, my nurse taught me to repeat Ramanama
whenever I felt afraid or miserable and it has been second nature with
me with growing knowledge and advancing years. I may even say that
the work is in my heart, if not actually on my lips, all the twenty-four
hours. It has been my saviour and I am ever stayed on it. In the
spiritual literature of the world, the Ramayana of Tulsidas takes a
foremost place. It has charms that I miss in the Mahabharata and even
in Valmiki’s Ramayana.
Harijan, 17-8-1934

319. INTERVIEW AT JABALPUR 3
August 4, 1934
Mahatma Gandhi, in spite of weakness, appeared cheerful. Interviewed, he said
that at present he was quite well and his temperature was normal. He also stated that he
would commence his seven days’ fast from August 7. He also inquired about the local
political atmosphere and party quarrels.
Replying, Seth Govind Das said that though the atmosphere is tense with
party feelings, efforts are being made to bring about a satisfactory compromise
between the rival groups of the workers, adding that in the event of a satisfactory
compromise not being arrived at, he along with his friends had decided to retire from
political arena and patiently wait for the time when his service will be required by the
motherland.
Mahatma Gandhi expressed approval of Seth Govind Das’s views and said that
in order to avoid conflict and friction, he had always advised loyal Congressmen to
retire from the field of party-feeling and to devote their energies in other constructive
and solid programme.
1

This is extracted from “The Purification Week” by Mahadev Desai, who had
explained that “two days before the fast” Gandhiji was talking to a friend who was
travelling with him.
2
ibid
3
Gandhiji was on his way to Wardha.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

275

Mahatma Gandhi also appealed to the public to contribute towards the Harijan
Fund and collections were made on the spot.

The Bombay Chronicle, 7-8-1934

320. MESSAGE ON BIRTHDAY1
August 5, 1934
I cannot understand how anyone who has even a drop of pity
for the semi-starved millions living in seven lakh villages, can oppose
spinning or khadi.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 7752

321. OF “HARIJAN”
[August 6, 1934] 2
With the completion of the tour and the year of probation
during which I was to devote myself wholly to the Harijan cause and
take no active part in politics, many have begun to speculate about my
immediate future activity. Happily, the fast is to predetermine my
course during it and for some time after. But, even apart from the fast,
I should like to say that, whilst it is open to me to speak and write on
politics, I propose to keep myself aloof from them as much as
possible. The joy of the past self-restraint is too fresh to fade from the
memory and to induce volubility of political speech. My partiality for
Harijan and kindered causes persists and will persist, I hope, to the
end of my life.
And what is true of my general attitude is truer still of Harijan.
No doubt I shall have to do more political work. I may be compelled
to resort to civil resistance. But the Harijan will remain what it has been
ever since its inception. It will rigorously eschew all politics. But now
that I expect to have some time for them, it will, I hope, deal with
constructive causes, more especially those that have direct connection
1

The Bombay Chronicle, 15-8-1934, had reported this under the title,
“Mahatma’s Birthday”. Presumably, the message was given in connection with
Gandhi Jayanti Celebration from September 15 to October 7, 1934.
2
In Harijan, 17-8-1934, giving an account of Gandhiji’s day-to-day
activities in “The Purification Week”, Mahadev Desai had explained under this date
that “though thoroughly exhausted [Gandhiji] wrote a few letters and the two articles
for the last [week’s] Harijan”. The “two articles” referred to are this and the
following.

276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with Harijans. It will, therefore, consistently with the Harijan interest
and as time permits and occasion arises, deal with communal unity,
khadi and all the processes leading to khadi, other branches of
swadeshi, temperance and the constructive side of prohibition and the
condition of the so-called criminal or aboriginal tribes, who live on
the border-line of untouchability.
Harijan, 10-8-1934

322. SWADESHI
[August 6, 1934] 1
Early in the year, if not immediately after my convalescence last
year, I was called upon by those who were interested in swadeshi to
frame a definition so as to answer the many difficulties that faced
them. I had to bear in mind the various shades of swadeshi in textiles.
I put together the definitions that were suggested. I had correspondence with Shri Shivarao and Shri Jalbhai Naoroji and well as others.
I failed to frame a definition that would suit all cases and found that it
was impossible to frame an exhaustive definition . As I was travelling
far and wide, I had the opportunity of observing things and of seeing
how swadeshi organizations were functioning. I came to the
conclusion that the existing practice was an unconscious fraud upon
the public and that many workers of ability were wasting their energy
in a vain effort. They were practising self-deception. This strong
language, whilst it correctly describes my mental attitude, is not
intended to cast any reflection whatsoever upon the workers in
swadeshi organizations. They were doing their best without realizing
that they were moving in a vicious circle and labouring under selfdeception.
Let me explain what I mean. We were holding exhibitions of
things that were in no need of special help or of advertisement for
their sale. In their case, our interposition can either stimulate the prices
of their wares or set up unhealthy rivalries between flourishing but
competing firms.
We may profess to gratuitously help textile, sugar and rice mills
and, respectively, kill the village spinning-wheel, the handloom and
their product, khadi, the village cane-crusher and its product, the
vitamin-laden and nourishing gur or molasses, and the hand-pounder
1

Vide the preceding item, footnote 1.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

277

and its product, unpolished rice, whose pericarp, which holds the
vitamins, is left intact by these pounders. Our clear duty is, therefore,
to investigate the possibility of keeping in existence the village wheel,
the village crusher and the village pounder, and, advertising their
products, discovering their qualities, ascertaining the condition of the
workers and the number displaced by the power-driven machinery
and discovering the methods of improving them, whilst retaining their
village character, to enable them to stand the competition of the mills.
How terribly and criminally we have neglected them ! Here, there is no
antagonism to the textile or the sugar or the rice mills. Their products
must be preferred to the corresponding foreign products. If they were
in danger of extinction from foreign competition, they should receive
the needed support. But they stand in no such need. They are
flourishing in spite of foreign competition. What is needed is
protection of the village crafts and the wokers behind them from the
crushing competition of the power-driven machinery, whether it is
worked in India or in foreign lands. It may be that khadi, gur and
unpolished rice have no intrinsic quality and that they should die. But,
except for khadi, not the slightest effort has been made, so far as I am
aware, to know anything about the fate of the tens of thousands of
villagers who were earning their livelihood through crushing cane and
pounding rice. Surely, there is in this work enough for an army of
patriots. The reader will say, ‘but this is very difficult work’. I admit.
But it is most important and equally interesting. I claim that this is
true, fruitful and cent per cent swadeshi.
But I have as yet merely touched the fringe of the question. I
have merely sampled three big organized industries and shown how
voluntary swadeshi agencies need to concentrate their attention solely
on the corresponding unorganized village industries that are dying for
want of voluntary and intelligent, organized help.
There are numberless other village, and even town, crafts that
need public support, if they are to live and thus maintain the
thousands of poor artisans depending upon them for their daily
bread. Every ounce of work in this direction tells. Every hour given to
this work means the sustenance of some deserving workers.
It is my certain conviction that, if work is done on a systematic
basis in this direction, the department doing it will become selfsupporting, new talent will be stimulated, the educated as well as the
uneducated unemployed will find honourable employment without
displacing anyone and crores will be added yearly to the wealth of this
278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

country, which is getting progressively impoverished.
Here is enough profitable and entertaining work and to spare
for all the swadeshi leagues put together. The recent resolution1 of the
Working Committee on ‘swadeshi’ means all this and much more. It
provides limitless work for the creative genius in the country.
Harijan, 10-8-1934

323. TELEGRAM TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
WARDHA, 2

August 6, 1934
BRIJKRISHNA
KATRA KHUSHALRAI
DELHI
NOTHING WRONG

WITH

ME.

HAVE

FAITH.

KEEP

WELL.

WORK ON.

3

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2417

324. A LETTER
August 6, 1934
4

MY DEAR. . . ,

Jamnalal and Swami Anand report that you have made different
statements to different persons, that you have not fulfilled many of
your promises to Swami Anand and that their strong suspicion almost
amounting to belief is that you have made up the story about the girl.
This seems to me to be unbelievable. And yet if you cannot give me
the name of the girl, I must also reluctantly come to the conclusion
that Jamnalal or Swami are fast coming to.
Your concern about the girl is surely needless. You will be
surprised to learn that . . . 5 and his wife are sitting by me while I am
writing this. It would be a great shock to me if I discover in you a
young man in the prime of life capable of connections involving the
honour of girls of tender age.
1

Vide “Resolution on Swadeshi”
This place-name is not reproduced in subsequent items.
3
The addressee was anxious about Gandhiji’s intended fast and had desired to
join him.
4
The names have been omitted.
5
ibid
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

279

May God be your guide and help.
Love.
BAPU
From the Manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

325. LETTER TO RANCHHODLAL A. SHODHAN
August 6, 1934
CHI. RANCHHODLAL,

I was shocked when I heard about your financial condition from
Jamnalalji yesterday. I had never imagined that money deposited with
you would be unsafe in any circumstaces. In my view, you credit was
higher than that of the Bank of India. Is that true no more? If not,
why not? Why did you not even breathe a word to me about the
matter? If you wish to be as a son to me, you must always tell me
about things like this. In such a situation Jamnalalji would most
certainly have told me.
Let me know the details in brief. Do this thing now. Don’t keep
back a single pie. Hand over even the house and the furniture and the
jewellery to the creditors. If anything is held in Motibehn’s or Rama’s
name, they and you should regard that as belonging to the creditors.
The gifts given to relations in times of prosperity should be looked
upon as deposits on behalf of creditors to be used in the hour of
misfortune. Difficult times come to all. He alone will have lived well
who preserves his honour even at the cost of his wife and children, as
Harishchandra did. I hope that you will not—I bless you that you may
not—shrink from heroism such as Harishchandra’s.
Do not worry about my fast. Reassure me by giving me proof of
your uprightness.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

326. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
August 6, 1934
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I had your telegram, and the letter too. A telegram has been sent
in reply 1 to yours. It is regrettable that you show such impatience.
1

280

Vide “A Letter”, 6-8-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

How can I encourage it? Even in such things you have to exercise
self-control. What service can you render? The Ashram is full of
people ready to serve. I am keeping out all those who are not here. I
have stopped Mehta and Bidhan too. Now, how can I allow you? You
can do there what you can. You may clean the Harijan locality and
take with you whosoever wishes to join. Has the Municipality done
anything? Have you not received Damodardas’s reply by now? What
does it mean? Tell me promptly. His remarks are such that I cannot
leave matters at that.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2418

327. STATEMENT ON FAST 1
August 6, 1934
As I enter upon the seven days’ fast from tomorrow (Tuesday),
I would like to re-emphasize the necessity on the part of Harijan
workers helping the cause by greater personal purification and greater
concentration on the work before them. The monster of untouchability will not be killed without constant and ceaseless effort on the
part of workers who have faith in the mission and who have by patient
toil built up personal purity and integrity. Let everyone also realize
that fasting is not for everyone and for every occasion. Fasting
without faith may even lead to disastrous consequences. All such spiritual weapons are dangerous when handled by unqualified persons.
I would like to utter a word of warning to Congressmen and
Congress workers. During the coming seven days I shall be filled with
thoughts about them as I have been during the past month. The
acrimony with which Congress elections have been fought in some
places and the unclean methods adopted by Congress workers by
manipulating votes and grossly abusing the rule about habitual
wearing of khadi have filled me with horror and dismay. The
constitution provides for truthful and non-violent methods. In some
provinces, at some elections, truth and non-violence have been
conspicuous by their absence. Though my fast has nothing to do with
these unclean methods, how I wish Congress workers will detect my
1

Extracted from “The Purification Week”. According to Mahadev Desai this
was written by Gandhiji “towards the evening”.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

281

anguish in the words I have written and lighten it during the
purification week by resorting to self-introspection and resolving to
make the Congress an organization in keeping with its creed, so that
anyone who cares may without difficulty find it to be a living
embodiment of its creed. I shall certainly be praying for its
purification. Purity of this, the greatest national organization cannot
but help the Harijan movement, since the Congress is also pledged to
the removal of the curse.
Finally, I ask all friends, whether in India or outside, no matter
to what faith or race they may belong, to pray that God may bless the
forthcoming little penance.
Harijan, 17-8-1934

328. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
August 7, 1934
CHI. MIRA,

At 6 a.m. I entered upon the fast. It is now 7 a.m. I do hope that
you would not be disturbed during the week. There is no cause for
uneasiness. But what is the use of my saying all this? Ere this reaches,
the fast would have been twice over.
You are quite right in repeating your warning. (At this stage I
felt too sleepy to write, so I slept. It is now 7.30 a.m.) So long as you
feel like giving the warning, you should go on doing it, in ever so
emphatic terms. Some day it may have its full effect. Partial effect
there is even now. It keeps me on my guard. If . . . 1 copied me, he
had surely a corrupt mind. For there is no warrant for thinking that
any other person was similarly affected unless of course I have been
kept in the dark or unless you suggest that every fall in the Ashram
was due to my practice. So far as. . . 2 is concerned, Jamnalalji and
Swami Anand with whom. . .3 had long talks have almost come to the
conclusion that . . .4 has concocted the whole story for the purpose of
blackmail. They are both finishing the chain. But this is all by the
way. You should not disturb yourself over this. I don’t. I take the
necessary steps and forget all about it. You have given a whole
1
2
3
4

282

The name has been omitted.
ibid
ibid
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

paragraph to the matter. Hence this reply.
Many changes are taking place in my mind just now. The
corruption in the Congress is preying on me as it has never before
done. I am conferring with friends as to the advisability of leaving the
Congress and pursuing its ideals outside it.1 It is good that the
corruption agitates me. I shall take no hasty step but there it is. And
I feel that the girls’ institution here should be closed unless I am
prepared to sit down in Wardha or Vinoba takes the sole responsibility
of its management. He will think over it during the fast. These are the
two things that are uppermost in my mind.
The rest you will have from Mahadev or Pyarelal both of whom
and Bal, Bapa, Devraj and Prithuraj are here. I insisted upon Jamnalalji
going to Bombay for his ear trouble. Ba, Prabhavati and Om are of
course here. And Vasumati and Amtul Salaam have insisted on
coming here. The latter is somewhat better but by no means overwell.
Your work there is certainly voluminous. You are putting forth
extraordinary energy. What more can you do? Take your time. Do
not get ill.
Kamlani’s2 mental derangement is sad news. I hope you had
time to be able to go to him. Your very presence may do him good.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
I have not been able to write to Maxwell. Sorry.
From the original: C.W. 6294. Courtesy: Mirabehn . Also G.N. 9760

329. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
Unrevised

August 7, 1934

DEAR AGATHA,

Your love-letters continue to pour in on me. And as you have
been hearing regularly from someone or other of the (now) many
companions, I do not write to you. This is to tell you I entered upon
the little fast at 6 a.m. today and to ask you not to worry. But where is
the meaning in asking you not to worry when I know that this letter
1
2

Which he ultimately did on September 17, 1934
A. S. Kamlani, Secretary, Friends of India League, London

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

283

would reach you only after the fast will have become a faint memory?
That the fast is a fitting finish to the Harijan tour I have no
doubt. It is a great spiritual instrument. That Protestantism has
virtually discarded it is a distinct loss to it and the world seeing what a
power it is today in the world. However, I must not argue about it. If it
is a desideratum of the soul, there are too many seekers after truth
among Protestants not to feel the want of it sooner or later.
During this month I shall be resting in Wardha and collecting
my thoughts. What is in store for me in September I do not know. But
this I do know. To go to the Frontier Province or to Bengal or to both
alternately is a craving of the soul. Where to go first I do not know. If
the so-called Red Shirts are violent, I must know them and disown
them. If they are not, I must defend them against the slur cast on
them. Those who are not given to lying and are well able to judge
have testified to their non-violence. These are Khurshed Naoroji, a
much-travelled woman of exquisite purity and honesty, Elwin whom
you know and Devdas whom too you know are the three eye-witneses.
And yet the British official testimony is equally emphatic the other
way. It cannot be all manufacture. The mystery can only be solved if I
am permitted to go and live in their midst. This is a fundamental
necessity—greater perhaps than that of going to Bengal from one
point of view. I go to the Frontier to find the truth and act
accordingly. I go to Bengal not to find any truth but to try to wean
terrorists from terrorism. Detention of Abdul Ghaffar Khan and
Jawaharlal is a great disturbing factor and a wholly unnecessary
irritant. But this detention, while it worries me, does not just now
appeal to me as a cause of war. Now you have an analysis of my mind
as it is likely to be at the end of the month. What occupies my mind at
present is how to achieve the purity of the Congress and to rid the
Ashram here of subtle untruth and breaches of brahmacharya. Perhaps
you are not sufficiently interested in such things. Here I was
interrupted by an army of doctors. They have overhauled the system
and say I must not do any writing even this first day of the fast. So
goodbye and much love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1478

284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

330. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING, WARDHA1
August 7, 1934
I can say from experience that fasting is an essential part of
Ashram life. The assault on Lalnath was certainly the occasion of the
fast, but as I have said in my public statement2 , this fast is intended for
the purification of many. If I were to have regard to all the incidents
and happenings that have prompted me to take such a step, I should
have to go on a much longer fast. But I am painfully aware of my
own physical and spiritual limitations and hence could not think of a
longer fast.
Our Ashram was certainly in my mind when I made the decision
to fast. There are two enemies against which we must guard—untruth
and impurity. Purity of the mind is essential for the observance of all
the vows. If the mind is not pure, no amount of physical restraint
would avail. The Gita teaches us that the man who restrains the organs
of action, whilst he allows the mind to run after the objects of the
senses, is a hypocrite.3 We may fail to restrain the mind, but let us not
be hypocrites. If we fail, let us own up, rather than be guilty of the
double sin of untruth and want of restraint. For not only telling lies is
untruth, but guilty silence or hiding one’s state of mind from one’s
guardians is also untruth. Let my fast spur you on to further selfpurification and self introspection.
We have also to remember that one of the objects of the Ashram
is the abolition of untouchability, it is one of our eleven vows4 . Now
an effective observance of that vow is impossible without an
observance of the other vows, especially of truth and non–violence. In
fact, no worker in the cause of removal of untouchability—and we are
all workers in the cause—is fitted for it, unless and until he is pledged
to observe truth and non-violence in thought, word and deed. In a
word, no service is possible without self-purification. If, therefore, we
think more and more of self-purification as a result of this fast, we
should be able to bring about the proper atmosphere. I shall be
constantly thinking of you this whole week and I want you to cooperate with me. I am hoping that God will pull me through this
ordeal, and I know that all of you will help me with your prayers.
Harijan, 17-8-1934
1

This is extracted from “The Purification Week” by Mahadev Desai, who had
explained : “Fast began at 6 a.m. after the morning prayers and the last feed at 5.30.
At the conclusion of prayer, Gandhiji addressed a few words. . .”
2
Vide “Statement on Fast”, 6-8-1934
3
Bhagavad Gita, III. 6
4
Vide “Satyagraha Ashram” 14-6-1928
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

285

331. SILENCE-DAY NOTE
[August 13, 1934 ]
Tell Janakibehn not to be so unreasonable. Most probably I will
go there at the time of the operation1 . I shall regain strength in three
or four days. Even if I can’t go, we must not take the risk of delaying
the operation. I wish to send a wire2 immediately today. God willing,
we shall both be present there, but the operation need not be
postponed on that account.
[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 126

332. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
August 13, 1934
JAMNALALJI
P OLYCLINIC, Q UEENS R OAD, B OMBAY 8
AM QUITE FIT. LISTENED
OPERATION
IRRESPECTIVE

SHOULD
OTHER

BE

LETTER REPORTED. AM
PERFORMED

CONDITIONS.

ON
WIRE

DATE
FIXED

DEFINITELY
FIXED

BY

OPINION
DOCTORS

DATE.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 126

1
2

286

For Jamnalal Bajaj’s ear trouble
Vide the following item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

333. TELEGRAM TO NARANDAS GANDHI 1
August 14, 1934
NARANDAS GANDHI
OPPOSITE MIDDLE S CHOOL
R AJKOT
THANK

GOD.

BROKE

FAST.

AM

WELL.

BAPU
From a microfilm: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8407. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

334. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
August 14, 1934
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Though you are now under distressing circumstances, your
release 2 takes a great load off my mind, as it is three-fourths medicine
for Kamala. I have missed you greatly during all the momentous steps
I have taken. But of these when we meet.
I am well, though the last day proved the most trying of all the
days and washed me out thoroughly. But I have no doubt that I shall
pick up quickly.
This is however to suggest to you that you should not make any
public political pronouncement. I have felt that in cases of domestic
illness or sorrow the Government has acted in a becoming manner. I
do feel therefore that we ought to recognize this fact by not using the
liberty thus obtained for any other purpose not inconsistent with that
of the Government. I feel that this is due to them and to ourselves,
especially when civil resistance is suspended. If my argument appeals
to your reason, you will announce your self-restraint in a fitting
manner. When Kamala is better I expect you to come here. I shall be
in Wardha up to the end of the month, except that I might have to go
to Bombay to attend the delicate operation that Jamnalalji might have
1

An identical telegram (C.W. 7968) was sent to G. D. Birla, Birla Mills,
Delhi, on the same day.
2
The addressee had telegraphically informed Gandhiji : “I have been permitted
to stay with Kamala. The position is not clear. Hope you are well.”
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

287

to go through during the month.
I hope Mama is doing well and so Krishna. You will let me
know how you have fared this time in jail.
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1934. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

335. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
Unrevised

August 14, 1934

CHI. SHARMA,

I am sorry for the mistake I made in addressing the letter. 1 It
should not have occurred. Send me your views about Ramdas’s
condition.
Your sending the money to Amtussalaam was not right. No
longer do you have any funds to make donations. Moreover
Amtussalaam is in no such predicament as to warrant any help. I
pointed out to her that she should not have taken money thus and she
has understood. Friendship never implies that we pamper our mutual
weaknesses. Its aim is to ennoble one another. I regard it as a subject
of study for the nature-cure practitioner. The naturopath recognizes
physical, mental and spiritual ills and treats them mainly by
developing inner powers. He takes the help of earth, water, ether, fire
and air. It should be an impossibility for him to be instrumental in
spiritual degeneration. Consider the case of Amtussalaam from this
viewpoint. She has a weak heart. It is a disease. She has a weakness for
squandering money yet feels reluctant in accepting funds from the
family. Sending her money is contributing to her downfall, while not
sending it will help her progress. So a naturopath would not send
money.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha,
1932-48, between pp. 86–7

1

288

Gandhiji had wrongly addressed the letter ‘Khurda’.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

336. DISCUSSION WITH GUJARAT VIDYAPITH TEACHERS 1
[AfterAugust 14, 1934] 2
The real work of the Vidyapith lies in the villages. I have been
stressing this point ever since the inception of the Vidyapith, but until
a couple of years ago, when it was declared an illegal organization and
most of our professors and boys were imprisoned, we laboured under
the impression that the work could be carried on only through a
central institute situated in the capital town of Gujarat. But under the
altered conditions, and now that we have some breathing time to put
our heads together and to collect our thoughts we shall do well to hark
back to the original conception and think of our future work in its
terms. Each member of a live institution must be a living embodiment
of the ideals of the institution, wherever he may be, and when such a
state of things is brought about, it is the same thing whether the
institution has a habitation and a corporate existence or not.
I would, therefore, expect every one of you who has cherished
the ideals of the Vidyapith and who is pledged to serve it to go
straight to the villages and start living those ideals there. Each one of
you will thus be a peripatetic Vidyapith, teaching the ideals by means
of his own personal example. It is quite conceivable that a host of
workers, after having lived the life in the villages according to the
ideals of the Vidyapith, re-establish the central institute in a village.
But we are not in that position today. We have yet to gain all that
experience on which alone you can build the new Vidyapith.
The centre of this village worker’s life will be the spinningwheel. I am sorry I have not been able yet to bring home to anyone
the message of the spinning-wheel in all its implications. The reason is
that my life itself is not a true echo of the message. But it came home
to me again and again during my nine months’ peregrinations in
India. We have not yet sufficiently realized that hand-spinning is a
supplementary industry of universal application and scope in India.
The village weaver cannot live but for the spinning-wheel. He gets his
yarn no doubt from the mills, but he is doomed to destruction, if he is
1

The discussion appeared under the title “What Is Village Work” as a summary
of Gandhiji’s talk, with the following introductory note by Mahadev Desai : “During
his convalescence after the fast, Gandhiji has been giving part of his time each day to
workers coming with their doubts and difficulties. Among these were some of the
professors of the Gujarat Vidyapith.” Gandhiji broke his fast on August 14, 1934.
2
ibid
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

289

to remain for ever dependent on the mills. Today, the spinning–wheel
has established itself in our economic life only to the extent that it is
needed to minister to the clothing needs of the new class of khadi
weavers that has sprung up during the past decade. But a large body
like the Spinners’ Association cannot justify its existence to fulfil that
limited object. The idea at the back of khadi is that it is an industry
supplementary to agriculture and co–extensive with it, that it is the
life–breath of millions of Harijan weavers who derive their sustenance
from it. The spinning-wheel cannot be said to have been established in
its own proper place in our life, until we can banish idleness from our
villages and make every villge home a busy hive. Unemployment and
idleness of millions must lead to bloody strife. Khadi is the only
alternative to this and not the so–called socialism, which presupposes
industrialism. The socialism that India can assimilate is the socialism
of the spinning–wheel. Let the village worker, therefore, make the
wheel the central point of his activities.
The worker will not be spinning regularly but will be working
for his bread with the adze or the spade or the last, as the case may be.
All his hours minus the eight hours of sleep and rest will be fully
occupied with some work. He will have no time to waste. He will allow
himself no laziness and allow others none. His life will be a constant
lesson to his neighbours in ceaseless and joy–giving industry. Bodily
sustenance should come from body labour, and intellectual labour is
necessary for the culture of the mind. Division of labour there will
necessarily be, but it will be a division into various species of body
labour and not a division into intellectual labour to be confined to one
class and body labour to be confined to another class. Our
compulsory or voluntary idleness has to go. If it does not go, no
panacea will be of any avail, and semi–starvation will remain the
eternal problem that it is. He who eats two grains must produce four.
Unless the law is accepted as universal, no amount of reduction in
population would serve to solve the problem. If the law is accepted
and observed, we have room enough to accommodate millions more
to come.
The village worker will thus be a living embodiment of industry.
He will master all the processes of khadi, from cotton–sowing and
picking to weaving, and will devote all his thought to perfecting them.
If he treats it as a science, it won’t jar on him, but he will derive fresh
joy from it everyday, as he realizes more and more its great possi290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

bilities. If he will go to the village as a teacher, he will go there no less
as a learner. He will soon find that he has much to learn from the
simple villagers. He will enter into every detail of village life, he will
discover the village handicrafts and investigate the possibilities of their
growth and their improvement. He may find the villagers completely
apathetic to the message of khadi, but he will, by his life of service
compel interest and attention. Of course, he will not forget his
limitations and will not engage in, for him, the futile task of solving
the problem of agricultural indebtedness.
Sanitation and hygiene will engage a good part of his attention.
His home and his surroundings will not only be a model of
cleanliness, but he will help to promote sanitation in the whole village
by taking the broom and the basket round.
He will not attempt to set up a village dispensary or to become
the village doctor. These are traps which must be avoided. I happened
during my Harijan tour to come across a village where one of our
workers who should have known better had build a pretentious
building in which he had housed a dispensary and was distributing
free medicine to the villages around. In fact, the medicines were being
taken from home to home by volunteers and the dispensary was
described as boasting a register of 1,200 patients a month! I had
naturally to criticize this severely. That was not the way to do village
work, I told him. His duty was to inculcate lessons of hygiene and
sanitation in the village folk and thus to show them the way of
preventing illness, rather than attempt to cure them. I asked him to
leave the palace-like building and to hire it out to the Local Board and
to settle in thatched huts. All that one need stock in the way of drugs
is quinine, castor oil and iodine and the like. The worker should
concentrate more on helping people realize the value of personal and
village cleanliness and maintaining it at all cost.
Then he will interest himself in the welfare of the village
Harijans. His home will be open to them In fact, they will turn to him
naturally for help in their troubles and difficulties. If the village folk
will not suffer him to have the Harijan friends in his house situated in
their midst, he must take up his residence in the Harijan quarters.
A word about the knowledge of the alphabet. It has its place, but
I should warn you against a misplaced emphasis on it. Do not proceed
on the assumption that you cannot proceed with rural instruction
without first teaching the children or adults how to read and write.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

291

Lots of useful information on current affairs, history, geography and
elementary arithmetic, can be given by word of mouth before the
alphabet is touched. The eyes, the ears and the tongue come before
the hand. Reading comes before writing and drawing before tracing
the letters of the alphabet. If this natural method is followed, the
understanding of the children will have a much better opportunity of
development than when it is under check by beginning the children’s
training with the alphabet.
The worker’s life will be in tune with the village life. He will not
pose as a litterateur buried in his books, loath to listen to details of
humdrum life. On the contrary, the people, whenever they see him,
will find him busy with his tools—spinning-wheel, loom, adze, spade,
etc.—and always responsive to their meanest inquiries. He will always
insist on working for his bread. God has given to everyone the
capacity of producing more than his daily needs and, if he will only
use his resourcefulness, he will not be in want of an occupation suited
to his capacities, however poor they may be. It is more likely than not
that the people will gladly maintain him, but it is not improbable that
in some places he may be given a cold shoulder. He will still plod on.
It is likely that in some villages he may be boycotted for his proHarijan pro-clivities. Let him in that case approach the Harijans and
look to them to provide him with food. The labourer is always worthy
of his hire and, if he conscientiously serves them, let him not hesitate
to accept his food from the Harijans always, provided that he gives
more than he takes. In the very early stages, of course, he will draw his
meagre allowance from a central fund where such is possible.
I have deliberately left out the question of the cow. The village
worker will find it difficult to tackle the question and will not attempt
it, except to the extent of educating the people in the theory of it. We
have not yet hit upon the best way of curing dead cattle’s hide and
dyeing it, as also the best means of protecting the cow. In Gujarat the
buffalo problem complicates the situation. We have got to make
people realize that to encourage the buffalo is to allow the cow to die.
But more of this some other time.
Remember that our weapons are spiritual. It is a force that works
irresistibly, if imperceptibly. Its progress is geometrical rather than
arithmetical. It never ceases so long as there is a propeller behind. The
background of all your activities has, therefore, to be spiritual. Hence
the necessity for the stricktest purity of conduct and character.
292

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You will not tell me that this is an impossible programme, that
you have not the qualifications for it. That you have not fulfilled it so
far should be no impediment in your way. If it appeals to your reason
and your heart, you must not hesitate. Do not fight shy of the
experiment. The experiment will itself provide the momentum for
more and more effort.
Harijan, 31-8-1934

337. “GOD BE PRAISED”
[August 15, 1934] 1
Happily nobody questioned the propriety of the fast just
finished. On the contrary, those who have written about it have
recognized the necessity of it. Its spiritual value for me has been
inestimable. Why, I do not know, but it is a fact that man clings most
to God when he is in distress, even as a child clings to its mother when
it is in suffering. Though I was cheerful, I had my due share of
physical suffering attendant upon all fasts except when required by
ill-health.
I was able during the seven days to understand more fully than
hitherto the implications of what I had meant when from a hundred
platforms I had declared that untouchability was not to be removed
without the workers showing in their lives great purity of character.
Therefore, so far as the fast was directed towards myself, it has, I hope,
served its purpose. That I may fail to come up to the standard I
visualized during the fast is possible, nay, probable. But no fast has
ever proved an insurance against human frailties. We can only mount
to success through failures.
The fast was primarily and nominally intended as a penance for
the hurt caused to Swami Lalnath and his friends at Ajmer at the
hands of sympathizers with the movement. But in reality, it is a call to
all the workers and sympathizers to be most exact and correct in
approaching opponents. Utmost consideration and courtesy shown to
them is the best propaganda for the movement. The fast was taken to
impress upon the workers the truth that we can only win over the
opponent by love, never by hate. Hate is the subtlest form of violence.
We cannot be really non-violent and yet have hate in us. The dullest
brain cannot fail to perceive that it is impossible by violence to wean
1

Vide “Interview to the Press”,16-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

293

millions of caste Hindus from the evil of untouchability, which they
have hitherto been taught to regard as an article of faith.
Evidence so far received shows that the fast has operated to
quicken the conscience of many workers. Time alone can show the
extent of its influence. It is not for me to measure the influence of the
fast. It was for me humbly to perform what was a clear duty. God be
praised that He permitted me safely to go through the fast. Let the
reader join me in the prayer that He may give me greater purity and
strength of purpose of fulfil the mission He has entrusted me with.
Harijan, 17-8-1934

338. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
August 15, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,

This is my first letter after the fast. I am in very good health. I
drank some milk today. Blood-pressure is excellent. Please, therefore,
do not worry about me. Let Janakibehn stay there as long as she
pleases. But it may not be necessary to keep Om there for a long time.
It is good that Mahadev and Madanmohan are going there. I hope
you will welcome them. I thought it necessary that they should go.
They may, if they can, return immediately tomorrow. There will be no
difficulty here. Keep your mind fixed on Rama as they give you
chloroform. All are well here. It is God’s will that you should be
spared for more service and many more sacrifices still.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2937

294

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

339. TELEGRAM TO MOHANLAL SAXENA 1
[ On or before August 16, 1934 ] 2
HOPE

ALL

CONGRESS

CONGRESS

MEN

WILL

RESPECT

THE

MANDATE.

The Bombay Chronicle, 17-8-1934

340. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Not revised

August 16, 1934

CHI. MIRA,

I wrote 3 to you on Tuesday, 7th, after commencing the fast.
Today is Thursday, the third day of the breaking of the fast. The last
day was one of physical torture. It was well perhaps it was so. What
was the penance worth, if it did not cause me any physical suffering?
The phrase joy of suffering has no meaning if there is no suffering
felt. I knew on Monday more fully than before the meaning of the
phrase joy of suffering. I am the richer for the treasure which I would
not have missed for a kingdom.
There it was. As I am writing this I feel the strength slowly
coming. I have settled down to this after having walked a few, paces
on the terrace with Vasumati’s help. She and Amtul Salaam and
Amala have been with me all the time. Prabhavati is of course there.
She has slaved during these day. I cannot understand where she gets
all the strength from. She seems never tired. Amala is as mad as ever.
But she is better with me than elsewhere.
Don’t be sorry or angry that I have not yet written to Mr.
Maxwell about the prisoners. The thing has never been out of my
mind but want of time has prevented me from doing it.
You remember the green canvas bag which contained my
dictionary, Gita, Bhajanavali and such other things. That and the
green khadi bag I can’t trace anywhere. I thought that you had put
them together with the other things in Wardha. The bundle of khadi
too which you put at Lady Thakersey’s is missing.
1

The telegram was reported under the date-line “Cawanpore, August 16” as
sent by Gandhiji “on the eve of the opening of the election campaign of the
Parliamentary Board of U.P.”.
2
ibid
3
Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 7-8-1934
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

295

It is strange you have not been keeping quite fit there. I do
hope you are not denying yourself the fresh fruit and salad which are
necessary there to keep oneself in a fit condition for strenuous work.
Your account of your visit to your Oxford cousin1 is
entertaining. Somehow or other the oval Italian face2 is very attractive
to me. Your beautiful description of the baby therefore does not
surprise me.
Jamnalalji will be having an operation for his ear trouble today
in Bombay. Janakibehn, Om and Mahadev have gone to Bombay for
the purpose. This letter will probably contain the result of the
operation.3
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6295. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9761

341. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
August 16, 1934
JAMNALALJI
S HREE, B OMBAY
THANK

GOD.

HOPE

RESTFUL.

LOVE

FROM

ALL.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 129

1

In the original the addressee had encircled this word in pencil and written

“uncle”.
2

Mirabehn explains : “The ‘oval Italian face’ refers to my aunt who, though
English, has that type of countenance.”
3
Gandhiji had perhaps hoped to include news about the operation. Vide also
the following four item.

296

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

342. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
August 16, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have just received the wire about the operation. A heavy load
of anxiety is off Janakimaiya’s head. Do not worry about me. I am
quite well. I can eat. I won’t run up there in undue haste. I won’t go
anywhere else either, till I have regained full strength. Don’t worry,
therefore, and get well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2938

343. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[August 16, 1934 ] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

Today is the third day after I broke the fast. Health is
satisfactory. I started taking milk only yesterday. I have regained
fairly good strength. You must have probably read the details in the
papers.
For some time I shall be confined here. It will take sometime
before I regain strength fully. Let us see what happens at the end of
this month.
I will expect regular letters from you.
How is Jamnadas? I hope Santok has taken up some work.
I have just received a wire informing me that Jamnalalji has been
successfully operated upon for his ear trouble. There was some reason
for worry. The wound is likely to take about six weeks to heal. Write
to him. Mahadev has gone there. He will return in a day or two.
I will not write more today.
Blessings from

BAPU

1

From the reference to the fast and Jamnalal Bajaj

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

297

[PS.]
My respectful greetings to Father and Mother. Why has Jamna
become silent?
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8408. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

344. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
August 16, 1934
CHI. MARY,

I had your note. Thank God, the fast went off well though not
without causing acute discomfort the last day. I am picking up well.
Jamnalalji is in Bombay. He underwent the ear operation today quite
successfully. I am here for some days. Mira is working away in
England. Do write regularly.
Love.
BAPU
S HRI MARY BARR
KHEDI, N EAR BETUL, C.P.
From a photostat: G. N. 6025. Also C.W. 3354. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

345. LETTER TO RAMABEHN JOSHI
August 16, 1934
CHI. RAMA,

Thanks even for your two lines. Are you calm now? How do
you spend your time? Read about the rest in the other letters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5366

298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

346. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
August 16, 1934
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

Your letter. I am doing well. The rest you must have seen from
the newspapers. Jamnalalji has undergone in Bombay today a
successful operation of the ear.
Without your consent I will not write anything to Keshu and
others about Damodardas. His argument is without substance. I find in
it neither the dharma of friendship nor any other. My distrust of
Damodardas as also of Keshu and others is increasing. That is why
unless I am fully confident of the truth I cannot remain perfectly
neutral and that undermines my capacity for serving Keshu’s people.
It is a matter of regret that Damodardas fails to understand this clearcut dharma. But whether he does or not, you at any rate ought to
understand it clearly. You have one more duty. It is not possible for
you to hide anything in this world from me. Therefore those who
discuss things with you should know that ultimately it will all reach
me. How to use that knowledge depends on me. If this is clear you
should let me have your opinion. You may acquaint Damodardas with
this letter. What more shall I say? I can give you this assurance that I
will not write anything to Keshu and others without your consent.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2419

347. INTERVIEW TO THE PRESS
August 16, 1934
I am all right.
Thus returned Mahatma Gandhi, with a winning smile, my greeting and my
query about his progress. . . . He had been reading What Marx Really Meant by G. D.
H. Cole, which Gandhiji said he had been reading during his fast and he had not yet
finished. When asked about his future programme, Gandhiji continued in a low voice:

I have no plans ready. My immediate concern is to pick up
strength.
He added he was making satisfactory progress and for the first time after eight
days he had been at his charkha yesterday for about half an hour. He also wrote an
article1 yesterday for this week’s Harijan and did some walking too. He hoped to
1

Vide “God Be Praised”, 15-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

299

regain his energy and strength soon. He said he would continue to stay in Wardha
during convalescence unless some pressing engagement took him out of it.

If you ask me whether I thought anything about the Congress
during the seven days, I can say as I have stated in the columns of
Harijan That I constantly thought of Congressmen. I was not thinking
in terms of politics and therefore not of what the Congress had to gain
in the wake of independence, but I was concentrating on the great
necessity of achieving internal purity.
Letters have been coming to me from Congressmen confirming
my fears about corrupt methods that have crept into the Congress
ranks over Congress elections and the like. How I wished, during all
the seven days that I was lying on my bed, that every man and woman
belonging to the Congress would realize that he or she was in it, not in
order to mount to office and fame, but to render mute service to the
country ! I cannot understand the mutual mudslinging and violence of
speech toward one another.
Civil disobedience is certainly not for those who have not learnt
the art of voluntary obedience to law, even when it is irksome. This
elementary principle seems to have been altogether forgotten, or else
one could not witness spirit of indiscipline and disobedience to laws
and rules which we have ourselves enacted and to which we have
voluntarily pledged ourselves to render obedience.
For me, therefore, every other thing has paled into insignificance before this prime necessity of achieving internal purity, for I
do feel that just as without the purity of Harijan workers untouchability would not be removed so also do I feel that the Congress, as a
powerful national organization, will perish unless it is sustained by
internal purity of those who compose that organization. At present, I
have no other message to give, for my mind is still preoccupied with
this predominant feeling.
The Hindu, 16-8-1934

300

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

348. LETTER TO N. C. KELKAR 1
[ On or before August 17, 1934] 2
The Congress candidates will be selected by the Parliamentary
Board for each consituency wherever Congress wishes to give a fight.
If a Congressman wishing to enter the Legislature had conscientious
scruples about the acceptance of the resolution3 of the Congress
Working Committee relating to the Communal Award he will so state
his objections in his letter or application to the Board and if the Board
approves of his nomination as otherwise desirable it will respect
hisscruples and nominate him as a candidate. Refusal or acceptance of
the application will depend solely upon the discretion of the Board.
Mr. Aney knows this position.4
The Hindustan Times, 18-8-1934

349. TELEGRAM TO B. C. ROY
WARDHA,

August 17, 1934
DOCTOR BIDHANROY
36 WELLINGTON S TREET
C ALCUTTA
SHOCKED
LEARN
FROM
SATISBABU
YOU
BLOOD PRESSURE. HOPE
SPEEDY
RECOVERY.

HAD

HIGH

GANDHI
From a copy: B. C. Roy Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
1
The letter was reported under the date-line “Nagpur, August 17” as “a reply to
the addressee’s telegram urging Gandhiji to bring about a compromise between the
Congress and the Nationalists and grant freedom of conscience to the Congress
members regarding voting on the Communal Award”.
2
ibid
3
Vide Appendix “ Resolution on White Paper and Communal Award”,
18-6-1934
4
In The History of the Indian National Congress, Vol. I, pp. 576-7, Pattabhi
Sitaramayya explains that the compromise was not accepted by M. S. Aney and M.
M. Malaviya. Consequently they resigned from the Congress parliamentary Board
and summoned a conference of Congressmen and others at Calcutta on August 18 and
19 under the presidentship of Malaviya, which announced the formation of
Nationalist Party with the object of carrying on agitation in the Legislatures and
outside against the Communal Award and the White Paper, and to put up candidates for
the Legislative Assembly to promote that object.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

301

350. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
Unrevised

August 17, 1934

MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

Your passionate and touching letter 1 deserves a much longer
reply than my strength will permit.
I had expected fuller grace from the Government. However
your presence has done for Kamala and incidentally for Mama what
no drugs or doctors could have done. I hope that you will be allowed
to remain longer than the very few days you expect.
I understand your deep sorrow. You are quite right in giving
full and free expression to your feelings. But I am quite sure that
from our common standpoint a closer study of the written word will
show you that there is not enough reason for all the grief and
disappointment you have felt. Let me assure you that you have not
lost a comrade in me. I am the same as you knew me in 1917 and
after. I have the same passion that you knew me to possess for the
common goal. I want complete independence for the country in the
full English sense of the term. And every resolution that has pained
you had been framed with that end in view. I must take full
responsibility for the resolutions and the whole conception
surrounding them.
But I fancy that I have the knack for knowing the need of the
time. And the resolutions are a response thereto. Of course here
comes in the difference of our emphasis on the method or the means
which to me are just as important as the goal and in a sense more
important in that we have some control over them whereas we have
none over the goal if we lose control over the means.
Do read the resolution about ‘loose talk’ dispassionately. There
is not a word in it about socialism. Greatest consideration has been
paid to the socialists some of whom I know so intimately. Do I not
know their sacrifice? But I have found them as a body to be in a
hurry. Why should they not be? Only, if I cannot march quite as
quick, I must ask them to halt and take me along with them. That is
literally my attitude. I have looked up the dictionary meaning of
socialism. It takes me no further than where I was before I read the
definition. What will you have me to read to know its full content? I
1

302

Dated August 13; vide “Letter from Jawaharlal Nehru”, 13-8-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have read one of the books Masani1 gave me and now I am devoting
all my spare time to reading the book recommended by Narendra
Deva.
You are hard on the members of the Working Committee. They
are our colleagues such as they are. After all we are a free institution.
They must be displaced, if they do not deserve confidence. But it is
wrong to blame them for their inability to undergo the sufferings that
some others have gone through.
After the explosion I want construction. Therefore now, lest we
do not meet, tell me exactly what you will have me to do and who you
think will best represent your views.
As to the trust2 , I was not present. Vallabhbhai was. Your attitude
betrays anger. You should trust the trustees to do their duty. I did not
think there was anything wrong. I was too preoccupied to concentrate
on it. I shall now study the papers and everything. Of course your
feelings will be fully respected by other trustees. Having given you
this assurance, I would ask you not to take this matter so personally as
you have done. It more becomes you generous nature to give the
same credit to your co-trustees for regard for Father’s memory that
you would take for yourself. Let the nation be the custodian of
Father’s memory and you only as one of the nation.
I hope Indu is well and likes her new life. And what about
Krishna?
Love.
BAPU
Gandhi-Nehru Papers, 1934. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Also A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 117-9

1

M. R. Masani ; the reference is perhaps to What Marx Really Meant; vide
“Letter to Brijkrishna Chandiwala”, 16-8-1934
2
Trust for Anand Bhawan
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

303

351. TELEGRAM TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
August 18, 1934
JAMNALALJI
S HREE, B OMBAY
MAHADEV
ALLOWED.
AM

GAVE

GOOD

NEWS

PARLIAMENTARY

GAINING

ABOUT

BOARD

YOU.

NO

MEETING

TALKING
POSTPONED.

STRENGTH.

BAPU
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 172

352. TELEGRAM TO HIRALAL SHARMA
August 18, 1934
DR. S HARMA
KHURJA
DO

WHAT

YOU

THINK

PROPER

ABOUT

RAMDAS. 1

BAPU
From a facsimile: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha, 1932-48,
facing p. 88

353. LETTER TO SHERWOOD EDDY
August 18, 1934
DEAR DR. EDDY,

I hope this will be in your hands in due time. If you have to go
away without our meeting, I shall be very sorry indeed. During
convalescence after the recent fast medical friends would not hear of
my leaving Wardha quite so soon, and I do not feel like overriding
their advice. If, therefore, we do not meet, you will please put down on
paper as much as you can of what you intended to say to me. I know
what a poor substitute it would be for a heart-to-heart conversation.
But a letter from you will have its own value for me.
1

Hiralal Sharma explains that Ramdas had made considerable progress in
health. He was eager to go back to Wardha. But the addressee did not favour this idea
lest he (Ramdas) might impair his health there. Rather, he wished him to be sent
abroad and engaged in some different type of work. He had, therefore, written to
Gandhiji to advise Ramdas accordingly.

304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I hope you had a good voyage, and that the same good fortune
will accompany you during the balance of your journey.
Yours sincerely,

DR. S HERWOOD EDDY
BOMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

354. LETTER TO H. A. POPLEY
August 18, 1934
DEAR REV. POPLEY,

I thank you for your letter. I wish it was possible for me to go to
Bombay if only to see Dr. Eddy. But medical friends forbid any such
movement, and I do not feel the call to override their advice. By as
much conservation as possible of the energy being daily gathered I
am trying to regain lost strength as quickly as possible.
My fast was a rich experience for me. You have perhaps come
across my reflections1 on it in the current issue of Harijan.
R EV. H. A. P OPLEY
ERODE (S. I NDIA)
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide “God Be Praised”,15-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

305

355. LETTER TO BHASKAR MUKHERJI
August 18, 1934
MY DEAR BHASKAR,

I have read your letter to Mahadev of the 15th instant. I cannot
help thinking that you have closed down the scavengers’ schools
much too hastily. The Section 91 that you quote, I certainly do not
read in the manner you do. It does not prohibit the Corporation from
using even a part of the lakh of rupees for education among
scavenger boys and girls. On the contrary, I should read the Section to
compel the Corporation to use a part of the funds amongst the
scavengers. The Section to be of any use can only mean that the
Corporation will begin by spending the money among the poorest,
and surely not among the fashionable suburbs of Calcutta for
instance. Has the Corporation taken legal opinion on the
interpretation of the Section in question? If, therefore, there is any
chance of the Corporation retracing its steps in the matter, I ask for its
reconsideration.
With reference to the penultimate paragraph of your letter I
would like you to tell me in detail what work the Corporation has
done, and is doing, for Harijans and what sum is spent during the past
twelve months in their behalf.
That I am dictating this letter shows that I am gaining strength.
Jawaharlal’s release has brought relief to poor Kamala and
relieved Jawaharlal’s many friends of a great burden of anxiety over
Kamala’s ill-health.
My love to baby and children. I hope you are doing well in
every respect.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

356. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
August 18, 1934
CHI. SHARMA,

Jamnalalji has been operated upon and he is in a Bombay
hospital. About Ramdas, I have wired1 that the proper thing may be
done. I do not feel it would be your dharma to come away leaving
Devi in this condition but I cannot insist on my view in this matter.
Every man forms his own code of conduct as a father. What more can
I write? We can continue the discussion in person or through letters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha,
1932-48, facing p. 89

357. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
August 19, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,

You seem to be progressing satisfactorily. Do not be impatient
about the healing of the wound. It will heal in its own time. Do not
worry about work at all. You must not talk either. If you wish to say
something, you may write it down. If you follow this rule, it will help
you very much.
You should not worry about things here at all. Nobody gives me
any trouble. I do not exert myself too much. My weight has reached
96 lb. You need not worry about the Ashram. Let Madanmohan stay
there.
Blessings from

BAPU

1

Vide “Telegram to Hiralal Sharma”, 18-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

307

[PS.]
This was written before 4 a.m., some time after that Kamalnayan
came and saw me. If doctors advise you against sleeping on the side
on which the operation has been performed, it would be advisable to
lie on one side only despite any discomfort that you may experience.
[ From Gujarati ]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 130

358. LETTER TO UMADEVI BAJAJ
August 19, 1934
CHI. OM,

I get your letters. Do not be remiss in writing to me. Fix a
certain hour daily for writing, so that you will do no other work at that
time. Write slowly and in a careful hand. Give me all the details about
what Jamnalalji can eat and drink, how he sleeps, what is the condition
of the pain, what is the progress of the healing, who are the visitors,
etc., etc. You should not make him talk. If any people come to talk to
him, you should not let them. If these rules are observed, the healing
will be quicker.
Give me an account of how you spend the time. Where do all of
you sleep? Give a description of the hospital. Who are the other
patients there?
Gopi is still here. Her health is as poor as ever. Write to her.
Madalasa comes regularly to do your share of the daily work. I give
your letters to her to read.
It is about 4 a.m. just now. I sat down to write this letter after
cleaning my teeth.
I felt glad after reading Janakimaiya’s letter. She must be
feeling happy now.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 336

308

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

359. LETTER TO CALCUTTA CONGRESSMEN
August 19, 1934
I am afraid that your optimism is ill-grounded, for I have seen
nothing as yet to shake my confidence in the correctness of the
Working Committee’s resolution. The utmost limit within which
accommodation was possible was prescribed in Benares. There it
stands. Nobody approves of the Award—much less has anybody
acquiesced in it. Everybody condemns it. But a Congressman, because
he is a Congressman, can neither accept it nor reject it because if he
did one or the other he would be taking sides and therefore not
represent the whole nation. I can easily respond to your optimism but
if it is based on the belief that I shall any way influence the Working
Committee to reconsider the resolution, I am afraid that your
optimism is ill-grounded.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 24-8-1934

360. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
August 19, 1934
I have your letter enclosing copy of your letter to the Press in
answer to a sanatanist’s letter about the elections. I think your reply is
perfect. But I do not suppose that it will produce any effect upon the
sanatanists who never want to be convinced. But it will steady the
waverers.
I suppose you have heard that the Parliamentary Board is not
meeting here. They have postponed the meeting indefinitely.
S JT. C. R AJAGOPALACHARI
MADRAS
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

309

361. LETTER TO P. G. DATE AND OTHERS
August 19, 1934
DEAR FRIENDS,

I saw your letter of the 12th August only yesterday. It is
certainly regretable if your votes were not registered at the elections
referred to by you. But the proper course for you to adopt is to lodge
your complaint with the Secretary of the Bombay Provincial Congress
Committee and, if you fail to get relief, to send your appeal to the
Working Committee.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. P. G. D ATE AND OTHERS
C/ O THE BOMBAY S TUDENTS’ BROTHERHOOD
F RENCH BRIDGE, C HOWPATTY
BOMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

362. LETTER TO MOTILAL ROY
August 19, 1934
DEAR MOTIBABU,

I thank you for your letter. I am slowly regaining lost strength. I
would like you to send me a detailed report of your activities, and
then if I have any suggestions to make of course I shall do so.
With Love.
M. K. GANDHI
S HRI MOTILAL R OY
P RABARTAK S ANGH
C HANRANAGORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy ; Pyarelal

363. LETTER TO N. R. NADIG
August 19, 1934
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. It is beyond my power to give you any help;
nor can I make any suggestion as to the way in which you should go
about your work.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. N. P. N ADIG
W. T. SANITORIUM
MIRAJ
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

311

364. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
August 19, 1934
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

You may start writing to me now. I am daily increasing the
amount of work I do. I write a good many letters. Thakkar Bapa used
to read out to me your letters to him. You seem to be succeeding well.
You are on the right path. Is Rama calm? Personally I liked Dhiru’s
going there. Can he think and understand things now? How is Vimu?
You may write to me whatever you wish to.
Maganbhai must be giving you other news. I, therefore, don’t
write about those things here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5524

365. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 19, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. I understand what you say regarding
Siddhimati. She shouldn’t have left like that. I am of the opinion that
she should not be re-admitted all too easily.
Has Jamnadas gone out in search of a job? I tried to persuade
him to stay with me, but he did not. His anger does not seem to have
subsided yet. Didn’t he and others read the circular letters which I
wrote to you ?
I am glad that Lilavati is doing well. If Kusum is getting fever,
wouldn’t it be advisable for her to go to Ranavav? She always gets
better there. Chimanlal’s case also is pitiable. His health doesn’t
improve at all. Do not put too much trust in Amala’s letter. She is
very cheerful here. She is even improving a little. So long as I live
here, it will not be advisable to shift her from here. Even when I leave
this place permanently, I will burden you with the responsibility for
her only if I think that she can safely go there. I am sure that, if she is
likely to improve under anybody, she would do so under you.
If Keshu succeeds in his experiment regarding the spinningwheel, it will be a great achievement. He should continue the experiments. The time-limit cannot be extended now, but, if he succeeds in
312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

inventing a spinning-wheel which would have deserved the prize,
everybody will welcome it. He should not, therefore, worry. We have
not so far received any model which would deserve a prize.
I have still not been able to decide anything about the dairy. I
wish to discuss the matter also with Jamnalalji who is in hospital. I
gathered your viewpoint to be that it should be run as an independent
activity and should not be handed over to the Harijan Ashram. Is this
impression of mine correct ?
Has there been any change in Harilal’s mod of life? Does he
exercise self-control there or does he continue to live in the same
manner?
It is exessively humid here. The rainfall has been quite heavy. If
possible, I don’t wish to shift you from there for the Kanya Ashram.
You have been doing excellent work there. It is desirable that you
should put everything in perfect order. In case of absolute necessity
here, you will of course be available. Vinoba has agreed to take up
complete responsibility. I see that I shall have to call you here once
before I decide anything. I hope I shall be able to give you fairly long
notice.
I am regaining strength fairly well. Even if the progress is rather
slow, I am satisfied.
Narahari, Kishorelal, Maganbhai, Soman and Kakasaheb are
here at present. I have been discussing 1 with them plans for proper
organization of villages.
I hope you read the Harijan carefully. I suppose you know that
Krishnamachari and Sulochana are here. Amtussalaam and Vasumati
are with me, and of course Prabha. Ramdas may come back in three
or four days. There is an epidemic of cholera in Khurja.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8409. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

1

Vide “Discussion with Gujarat Vidyapith Teachers”, 14-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

313

366. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
August 19, 1934
CHI. MANUDI,

You seem to have forgotten Grandma, and me too? Is that
proper? Write to me and let me know what you are studying and
where. Bhai 1 is there at present. I hope you don’t feel afraid. How is
aunt’s health? Who else are there just now?
Give me all the news. Vidya is still here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1531. Courtesy: Manubehn S.
Mashruwala

367. LETTER TO VALLABHABHAI PATEL
August 19, 1934
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your messages. Please see if you can come here after you
have got all right. Andrews is coming on the 25th. I think it will be
good if you are here then. I do get here as much rest as I need.
Nobody bothers me. The chowkidars also follow Jamnalalji’s
instructions to the letter. I am sure that you, too, will get more peace
here than you do there. But you can think of that only after you have
completely recovered from fever and regained peace of mind. If you
come, Mani will definitely benefit at any rate.
I understand that nothing can be done about your nose trouble
just now. If anything can be done by staying on there for some time, I
think it will be worth while to do so. Let us see if it helps. There will
be no risk at all in getting it done just now. The only thing is that you
will have to keep to the bed for some time. That need not matter.
I had a long letter from Jayaprakash yesterday. He is very
unhappy. He has read much but does not seem to have digested all
that he has read. And he certainly has no experience. But he can pour
out in speeches what he has read. That impresses educated people,
which fact increases his enthusiaasm and he leaves home and family,
neglects his health and does about rousing people. He has, however,
1

314

Harilal Gandhi, addressee’s father
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

said in his letter that he will come and see me. Let us see what
happens.
There is no possibility of my leaving the Congress immediately.
But I share my agony with you.
How can I leave the Congress till you and others permit me to
do so. Personally, however, I do feel that there is no other way for me.
I seem to be obstructing the growth of the Congress. To cling to the
means without faith in it or to fail to act according to one’s faith—
what a pitiable and frightful conditon to be in ! Is it not your duty to
save the Congress from it? There may be no harm [in my remaining
in the Congress] so long as I can think of some means of fighting the
rot, but what can I do if I cannot think of any way except leaving the
Congress? My doing so will rid it of hypocrisy. If the attitude of the
ordinary Congressman is that no distinction need be made between
truth and falsehood, violence and non-violence, khadi, calico,
jagannathi 1 and muslin, then it is best that he should act accordingly.
But that won’t be possible till I leave. These restrictions cannot be
removed with my consent, for I would never consent to their removal.
If the Congress removes them despite my opposition, would not that
amount to expelling me? Would it be desirable to let things go that
far? I want to make you, Raja and others think about all these points.
If you can come over, we shall discuss them at leisure.
We shall also have to think what I should do in September or
after I have regained strength. It is an issue to which we must give
thought. The time is drawing near for taking a decision. Jawaharlal’s
explosion is not as frightening as it seems from the flames. he had a
right to let off steam, which he has exercised.2 I think he has calmed
down now.
About the unfortunate cultivators of Gujarat, I will do what you
want, but I have definite views of my own in the matter.
What you desired regarding the Parliamentary Board has
happened, though the reason for postponment was quite different.
I have written enough, I think, for today.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 115-6

1
2

A variety of fine cotton cloth
Vide “Letter from Jawaharlal Nehru”, 13-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

315

368. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 20, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I forgot to reply to one question of yours. I can reply to. . . ’s 1
letter immediately, but then we ought to think about . . . and others
also. Moreover, do you fully agree with the views which I hold on this
subject? Personally I think they alone are correct. What does it avail a
thief’s mother to hide her face?2 If, therefore,. . . and others want us to
keep silent, we may do so, or alternatively we may issue statements in
keeping with what we regard to be the present policy of the Congress.
Or I may publish my personal view on my own responsibility. I will
prepare a draft 3 and send it to you after you have called . . . to you
and come to some decision and infromed me. Meanwhile I am writing
to . . . and informing him that I am in correspondence with you, and
that I will reply to him in detail later. He is in needless hurry. I don’t
think there is any urgency.
I understand about sending Mahadev to Prayag. I am thinking.
Shouldn’t I wait for a reply to my letter?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 117

369. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
August 20, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,

After Vinoba had left yesterday, I received a reassuring wire
from Dr. Jivraj, from which I learnt that there was no recurence of
bleeding and that the pain also had subsided. Even then I think it is
good that Vinoba has gone there for a short visit. You must have
learnt that Kamalnayan himself was the cause of Vinoba’s going
there. He was very much disturbed by what you had to endure on
Saturday and, therefore, immediately on arrival here, he sent me a
1
2
3

316

The names are omitted in the source.
A Gujarati saying, which means : ‘to bear one’s suffering in silence’
vide “Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, Before 5-9-1934.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

message through Mahadev. I welcomed the suggestion and sent a
message to Vinoba who immediately got ready to go. Madalasa also
wanted to go but, being obedient, she stayed back on learning that
Vinoba wished to go. She will be duly rewarded for her self-control. It
is good that she has stayed back. If your pain has subsided now and
your mind is at peace, give leave to Vinoba to return soon. But he can
stay as long as he is needed. The management of this place is being
organized carefully. Vinoba is busy with the task day and night.
Your promise regarding facilities for education will certainly be
kept. I write this to reassure you. Do not try to discuss this matter with
Vinoba and exert yourself. Just now your chief aim should be to get
all right. You need not worry about anything here or elsewhere. And
certainly not about me, for my affairs are going on well enough.
Radhakisan and Shivaji keep a strict watch over me. I hope you do not
talk much. It will be advisable to use with caution any freedom that
the doctors may permit. One should follow their advice as long as it is
not against dharma. But it is a different matter when they permit any
freedom to satisfy us.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Jajuji came and saw me and gave a report. Do not be in a hurry
to send back Madanmohan. You may rest assured that ;nobody here is
inconvenienced in any way.
[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 131

370. LETTER TO UMADEVI BAJAJ
August 20, 1934
CHI. OM,

I don’t want you to write to me if you do so merely as a task,
writing the letters in a careless hand, just to keep your promise. One
should keep one’s promise both in spirit as well as letter. If your heart
is not in keeping the promise, you cannot earn the merit of keeping it
by doing so outwardly. I don’t want anybody to keep a promise in
such manner. Haven’t I taught you to do everything as well and as
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

317

neatly as you can? You should not do anything perfunctorily, no
matter whether it is an important or an unimportant thing.
Do not waste a single moment of your time.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 336

371. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
CHI. MIRA,

August 21, 1934

You do not now need to be told how I am getting on. This letter
will be enough evidence of the progress made. The food is almost
normal.
Your letter is revealing. But I do not want to change my course
of action. The cause will be compromised by no one except ourselves.
Let them all do their little bit or their utmost there. It is enough for us
that they are all well meaning. As you know, I have not set much store
by the work that is being done there. Though I do not want to take
any action on the strength of what you say, I would like you to have a
frank and full discussion with both Agatha and Muriel and hear what
they might have to say. So far as the big folk are concerned, I entirely
agree with you that you shoudd seek interviews yourself directly. I an
quite sure that they will all see you. If they do not, you need not
mind.
The question of Dara is different and difficult. One does not
know how to help. He has always appeared to me to be mysterious.
Brockway 1 is supposed to be the leader. But he did not seem to me to
lead. He was apologetic about Dara and in no way enthusiastic. I am
afraid we can do very little for him. Of course there is no difficulty
about carrying on correspondence with him. We do no more for the
friedns or the fellowship group. We pay nothing. Agatha is paid and
that is all. It is well to follow Shakespeare’s adivce: “Give thy ear to
everyone, thy voice to none.” You will gather all the information and
we shall confer when we meet, if we do at all. ‘If’ clause is merely
precautionary. Nothing hangs by it. I have no present plans except the
convalescence. Andrews reaches Bombay on 25th. He should be with
1

318

A. Fenner Brockway
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

me on 26th.
The news about Jawaharlalji and the others you will get from
Mahadev and Pyarelal whoever may be writing.
Today is exactly one week after the breaking of the fast.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6296. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9762

372. LETTER TO SISTER AMATA
August 21, 1934
MY DEAR AMATA,

I had your precious letter just after the completion of the fast.
God bless you all the larks1 . I must not try to write too many letters as
yet though you will be glad to know that I am slowly but surely
regaining the lost strength. Only I have need yet to be careful.
Love to you all.
BAPU
S ISTER AMATA
EREMO, F RANCESCANO
TREVI (UMBRIA)
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

373. LETTER TO G. R. SAHGAL
August 21, 1934
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your offer. What are you doing there? What are
you getting there? What are the things you can teach and what is the
salary that you would expect? Are you married? What is your age?
1

Sisters of the Italian Convent of St. Francis; vide “Letter to G. D. Birla”,
24-11-1932
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

319

Have you dependants? If you have, who are they? What is your father
doing?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI G. R. S AHGAL
C/ O GURUKULA
S UPA, via NAVSARI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

374. LETTER TO S. GANESAN
August 21, 1934
MY DEAR GANESAN,

I am glad that your venture is making steady progress. Don’t be
in a hurry, but build on a solid foundation.
If the boy in question was merely a nominal convert and knew
nothing of Christianity or of any religion in fact, in my opinion he
never ceased to belong to the relegion of his birth. And then there is
no question of reconversion. If, however, he was a bona-fide convert it is
none of your business to reconvert him. His faith must be personal to
him and he has to be answerable to God for what he actually is. I hope
this is quite clear.
There can be no objection to your admitting Christian boys, but
they cannot be a charge on the ordinary Harijan Funds. You have to
procure scholarships for them from personal friends, if the students
are otherwise deserving. It would be a pity if they had to be turned out
for want of funds. And yet it would be wrong to disburse their
expenses out of the Harijan Funds which are intended solely for
Hindus.
Yours,

BAPU
S HRI S. G ANESAN
8 P YCROFTS R OAD
TRIPLICANE, M ADRAS
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

320

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

375. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
August 21, 1934
CHI. PREMA,

I got your letter. Your generosity of heart knows no bounds.
You would not mind if I don’t write. But I don’t wish just now to take
advantage of your generosity. All the same, you deserve compliments
for it. I am glad that you went and saw Jamnalalji and also that you
prayed with him. It was very good of him indeed to offer on his own
to meet your expenses. May your future be as good as your
beginning is. There can be no end, of course.
In saying1 that we are born every day I didn’t wish to show up
your childishness. I had no such thought even in my dreams. On the
contrary, I tried to express my appreciation of your having asked for
my blessings. You may, therefore, continue to ask for my blessings
for your birthday.
I feel no pain at all if somebody slanders the Ashram. But I do
feel pain if anybody doubts the reason which I have given for
offering it as sacrifice. How could I offer as sacrifice something which
I did not regard as pure? I hope you have explained this properly.
But it is our duty to bear everything serenely.
I am very glad that you met Father and that his anger has left
him. I have no doubt that this understanding between you two will
endure.
Things are going on all right with me. I am regaining strength.
Write to me from time to time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10358. Also C.W. 6797. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

1

Vide “Letter to Premabehn Kantak”, 1-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

321

376. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
August 21, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,

Yesterday I got excellent reports about your health the whole
day. In the evening I got a joint wire from Dr. Jivraj and Dr. Rajabali.
If this progress is maintained, you will get all right soon. But you
should not be impatient. Let things go on as they may. Do not be in a
hurry to attend to the various problems. Tell Om that there was no
letter from there today. Perhaps I may get a wire today.
Convey my vandemataram to Dr. Rajabali. His caution is beyond
praise. You will find enclosed a cutting meant for Dr. Jivraj.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 2939

377. LETTER TO LILAVATI MUNSHI
August 21, 1934
CHI. LILAVATI,

I did get your letter. I have been trying to give effect to one of
your suggestions—about bringing Kumarappa into this. I am afraid it
will be difficult for me to write for Swadeshi. I cannot ride two horses
at the same time. You must have read about my decision to widen the
scope of Harijan. Whatever ideas occur to me will, therefore, go into
it. Since my store is limited, I cannot write the same thing in several
journals. For the present, therefore, please be satisfied with what I write
in Harijan. However, continue to send me copies of Swadeshi. Has the
new policy been fully accepted there? Lallukaka said that there was
no change. Have you fully grasped the new form? Do you feel
interested in it? Can you understand it?
Is Jagadish fully ready now? Are both of you fully restored?
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7551. Courtesy: Lilavati Munshi

322

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

378. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
August 21, 1934
BHAI MUNSHI,

My health is improving so well that my capacity for work is
increasing every day. I had glanced through the note you gave to
Shankerlal. It need not be used publicly just now. I liked your
suggestion regarding the Congress elections. But it is incomplete.
Draft whatever improved rules seem necessary to you. Draft the byrules also. For giving effect to some of the suggestions, it will be
necessary to amend the Constitution. Don’t hesitate to suggest such
changes too. You will have to find time for this. Do so if you can.
If you send me cuttings of what you have been writing in
newspapers, I will try to find time and read them. No hour has been
fixed when even Mahadev or Pyarelal can give me their substance
after reading them. Everybody is so busy with his own work that he
can get no free time. And even if one of them can do so, he will not
find me free.
The work of the Bombay Congress is certainly difficult. The
picture you have drawn is quite correct. It is not an easy job in such
circumstances to work so as to enhance the prestige of the Congress.
Do the best that you can.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7552. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

379. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 21, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have received a letter from. . .1 in which she has poured out her
grief. I thought I should send it to you and am, therefore, doing so. A
summary by me would not have served the purpose. Try to heal her
wound. There seems to have been some misunderstanding. She has
become very sensitive. She has suffered a good many blows recently
and is likely to have to suffer more still. We don’t know when the
1

The name has been omitted.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

323

problem will be solved. Meanwhile we should try to soothe her as
much as we can.
I hope you got my previous letter1 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8410. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

380. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 21, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter. I understand the need for you to remain there.
You alone can judge which need is more important. Whether here or
there, we have to do the same sort of work. We should stay where the
need is greater. You may, therefore, do what you think proper. About
the Congress work in Bombay, my view is that those who have
undertaken the responsibility should do the job in their own way or
give up control of the organization. How long will they be able to
hide the truth ?
The problem of purifying the Congress is a big one. We can
discuss it in detail only when we meet. I agree with what you write
about. . . 2 . The Congress must decide its policy. Let us send for . . .32
and discuss the matter with him and have done with the problem. I
had a letter from . . . 43 , to which I have replied saying that he may
come in the first week of September and may fix the date through
you. If it is impossible for you to come then, I will argue out the
matter with them. I will not give anything in writing without showing it
to you.
I fully understand your impatience regarding Gujarat. Do what
you think best. We must have our eyes on the future.
When Andrews comes there, have a frank and full discussion
with him about everything. I will write to you or ask somebody to
write to you about what happens here.
1
2
3
4

324

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 19-8-1934
The names are omitted in the source.
ibid
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Mahadev is going to Prayag today. He will return before
Saturday.
Please don’t overwork and fall ill again.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I forgot to write about Kaka. He had taken the decision1 with my
consent. I liked it. It was not taken in resentment but was inspired by
his sense of duty. I myself suggested to him that he should write to
you. I didn’t even ask myself whether you had a right to be
consulted.2 Kaka felt very unhappy, and rightly, for having written 3
that he had consulted trustees when he had not done so.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 118-9.

381. LETTER TO ANNAPURNA
August 21, 1934
CHI. ANNAPURNA 4 ,

I have a letter from you after a long time. How much do you
spin daily? What speed have they all attained? What is the count ?
I hope all are keeping well.
Some attempt should be made to construct pucca roads in the
rural areas. Rural development can be brought about at a very low
cost if the vilagers lend a helping hand.
Thakkar Bapa must have replied to Father’s letter. I have now
started writing little by little. You may write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI ANNAPURNA KUMARI
BAREE, C UTTACK
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2786
1

Of resigning from all trusts
The reference is to the transfer of the Gujarat Vidyapith Library to the
Ahmedabad Municipality without consulting Vallabhbhai, who was one of the
Trustees; vide “Discussion with Vallabhbhai Patel”, 30-7-1934
3
To the Collector of Ahmedabad
4
Daughter of Gopabandhu Chowdhry
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

325

382. TELEGRAM TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
August 22, 1934
S IR P RABHASHANKAR P ATTANI
BHAVNAGAR
HOPE

YOU

ILLTREATMENT

ARE

DOING

HARIJANS

NEEDFUL

REGARDING

ALLEGED

TALAJA.1

GANDHI
From a photostat: G. N. 5934. Also C.W. 3250. Courtesy: Mahesh P. Pattani

383. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
August 22, 1934
SUJNA BHAISHRI,

I got your wire. As long as God wishes to take some service
from this body, He will preserve it. When it is no more needed, would
not even a yawn suffice to end life? I am regaining strength. I am
gradually returning to work.
Read the accompanying. If the facts stated in it are correct, take
whatever measures you would for a friend or relation in a similar
plight.
Yours,

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
After I had written the above, I received a wire from Bhavnagar
giving more details. I, therefore, sent a wire 2 and post this letter to
follow it.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5935. Also C.W. 3251. Courtesy:
Mahesh P. Pattani

1
2

326

Vide also “Terrible Oppression”, 2-9-1934.
Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

384. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
August 22, 1934
MY DEAR AGATHA,

This is merely to tell you that I am slowly rebuilding the body.
The seven days’ rest was good at the price of seven or eight pounds of
flesh. I knew your anxiety which you showed in your letter and cable.
I could not avoid the fast. Friends have to put up with that part of me.
For this last may not be the last of my fasts. I can survive discredit by
the world and not by myself.
Of the current events you will know from Mahadev and Pyarelal
and the cuttings that Chandrashankar may be sending you. These
letter(s) are not, I think, duplicated to Mira. Whatever you may
consider necessary, you will pass on to Mira. She seems to be going
about in a business-like manner. Anyway you must give your own
impressions.
Poor Kamlani!1 I expect to have full accounts from you and
Polak.
C.F. Andrews reaches Bombay on 25th. He may be here on
26th. Till then do not be anxious about the future. I have no cut and
dried plan. Of course Bengal and the Frontier with Abdul Ghaffar
Khan as the centre-piece are there. But I see no clear line of action. I
want to precipitate nothing. But things may become impossible for me
any moment. I must have room to move. The Black Hole will
suffocate anybody—much more me, an open-air creature. A most
unnatural condition is becoming naturalized in this unhappy land.
This is written to give you my mental condition, not to expect more
from you than you are doing. What can you the handful do, if we
here can do nothing? And I admit that we are doing nothing or not
enough. It is in this atmosphere that I have to act when this
convalescence in finished. You must not be alarmed. What I have
described is nothing new. You know these things. I have put them
here in order to show that the things are about the same as when you
left India. Not even all the ordinary civil disobedience prisoners have
been discharged. And extraordinary treatment is being meted out to
Jawaharlal. He may be pounced upon any day. They have put him
out. Without seeming indecent he can’t find himself in prison and
they tell him he may be taken away any moment. This gives no
1

Vide “Letter to Agatha Harrison”, 7-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

327

chance to poor Kamala for whose sake Jawaharlal is discharged. This
is cruelty double distilled. And in spite of their declarations, many
prisoners are still being detained without the slightest cause.
Attachments of land still going on for fines ! My ahimsa is on its
mettle. But I do not want to act. I am passive till God wants me to act;
not my will but His shall be done.
You should share this with Mira and Muriel without fail. Of
course Polak and any other you like.
Love to you and your sister to whom I was unable to wrtie when
her little note was received.
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 1479

385. LETTER TO MURIEL LESTER
August 22, 1934
MY DEAR MURIEL,

I take this up after a long letter 1 to Agatha. Hence I must be
brief now. I am getting on as well as might be after a fast of seven
days.
I would like you to give me your experiences of Russia if you
can spare the time.
I have never forgotten the commission you gave me about
writing out my thoughts on non-violence for Rajkumari Amrit Kaur.
But there has been no time left for me to do the work and I do not
know whether I shall ever get the time for it. I can only promise to
bear the commission in mind.
You remember you were to go specially to Rome in order to
unravel the mystery of that interview.2 You were to meet the Editor of
that journal and find out from him what he actually had said and what
he had to say to you. This thing may have no value now for the
outside world. But it was for you and one who wants merely to serve
Truth and nothing but It.
1

Vide the preceding item.
A fake interview with Gandhiji published in an Italian paper was reported by
The Times correspondent in Rome. Vide “Letter to Sir Samuel hoare” , 6-3-1934 and
“Fragment of stattement”, 15-3 1934
2

328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

How has Mira shaped according to your view ?
My love to you and Doris1 and the rest of the growing family.
MISS MURIEL LESTER
BOW, L ONDON
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

386. LETTER TO S. N. GANGULI
August 22, 1934
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. You are quite right in saying that I have not
been able to discover any royal road to physical brahmacharya. All
that I can say is that you have to persevere along the lines suggested
by me. Pure food, fresh air and moderate amount of exercise are to
yield the desired result. Pranayama and some asanas have been
reported also to produce good results. Hipbaths are also valuable.
Mustard oil is a condiment which should be eschewed. In fact, I would
advise you to eschew all oils. Vegetables should be boiled. Starchy
vegetables should be avoided, and so should be pulses. You need not
worry about milk. Honey is no substitute for milk. You should take a
fair quantity everyday. And above all you should persevere in praying
and have faith that your prayer will be answered.
S HRI S ATYENDRANATH GANGULI
ATHARABARI
MYMENSING DISTRICT
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Addressee’s sister

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

329

387. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 22, 1934
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,

Here is a problem for you to solve. Kaka wishes to go and work
in the South. This has no connection with his resignation as trustee.1 I
have been telling the teachers 2 who have assembled here that they
should go and live in villages and, through constructive work, do what
they can to organize village life and educate the people. The teachers
like this idea and those who can be relieved are ready to take up such
work. Kaka is one of them. We of course wish to utilize the Vidyapith
buildings for meeting the needs of the city. . . . 3
Mahadev left yesterday evening. He will reach Prayag tonight.
Mathuradas will certainly go to receive Andrews on Saturday.
Send some others, too, who can go. If possible, put him up with you
and, if he wishes, let him leave for Wardha on the same day.
I got your letter after I had written the above.
It was good that you could meet. . . 4 . Let him, the Chronicle, The
Free Press, etc., agitate for the release of prisoners. We may remain
silent on minor issues, but why should we do so on an important one?
Dahyabhai should ask Natarajan5 also to attend. According to a wire
received from Ghanshyamdas, he intends to leave on Monday for
Wardha.
I believe Andrews will stay for three or four days at least. But it
is also likely that he might want to leave immediately for Santiniketan.
You may yourself ascertain his intention.
I cannot write more today.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 119-20

1

Vide “Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 1-8-1934
Vide “Discussion With Gujarat Vidyapith Teachers”, 14-8-1934
3
Omissions as in the source
4
ibid
5
Editor, The Indian Social Reformer
2

330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

388. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
Unrevised

August 22, 1934

CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I have your letter. You may certainly summon Damodardas if
you so wish. It is unnecessary to consult me on such matters; how can
I even object to it? I have no desire to curtail your independence in
any way. But I do want your consent, if I can have it, to my making
use of the remarks made by Damodardas regarding. . .1 and others in
order that I may be able to do them justice. This matter is hurting me
like poison because now I am terribly embarrassed while writing to. . .
and . . .. This is probably the first occasion in my life that I heard
something against them which affects me yet I may not let them
know. It will be enough if I am released from this restriction.
I will never involve myself in the Delhi Congress controversy.
Such matters are now beyond my strength.
Since I have your permission I am sending your letter to Sardar.
The reference to Damodardas is of course there.
By now you must have realized the point about your writing to
Prabhavati about the marriage. It was not as if this subject could not
have been discussed at all but that it should never have been discussed
with Prabhavati. This has never been nor can it ever become her
sphere till she has gained some independence in such matters. A
discussion about any girl of the Ashram can take place only with
Jamnalalji, Vinoba or myself; and in such affairs Vinoba and I give
precedence to Jamnalaji. What need was there to write to Prabhavati
when the right thing was to contact Jamnalalji?
You may, by all means go to Mussoorie for your health’s sake.
We shall see afterwards.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2420

1

The names have been omitted.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

331

389. STATEMENT TO ASSOCIATED PRESS OF INDIA 1
[ On or before August 23, 1934 ] 2
What was offered was freedom of speech and vote to elect
candidates who had real conscientious scruples over the acceptance of
the Working Committee’s resolution on the Communal award. This
would not satisfy Panditji. He desired full freedom of action for all.
This amounted to a nullification of the Working Committee’s
resolution which the Committee could not do. It was a mistake to
suppose that the Working Committee’s resolution was a virtual
acceptance of the Award. The Committee neither accepted nor
rejected the Award and thus proved its impartiality and national
character. It was the only way to arrive at an agreed solution which
was sure to come if Congressmen, Hindus,
Mussalmans and others,
loyally and seriously worked out the resolution.
Mahatma Gandhi was then asked if Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya’s new
organization could run the elections in the name of the Congress. He replied that the
Parliamentary Board was the only authorized body which could function in the name
of the Congress.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 24-8-1934

390. TELEGRAM TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
August 23, 1934
ANAND HINGORANI
S AHITIPUR
KARACHI
HOPE

RINGWORM

PILES

OPERATION

CURED.

UNDER

SURGICAL

ADVICE

UNDERGO

IMMEDIATELY.

BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

1

The source had reported : “As some confusion appears to have been created
over Gandhiji’s offer of compromise regarding the Communal Award Resolution of
the Working Committee, he was asked to clear the position.”
2
The statement was reported under the date-line, “Wardha, August 23”, 1934.
Vide also “Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”,23-8-1934

332

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

391. TELEGRAM TO ABUL KALAM AZAD
WARDHA,

August 23, 1934
ABUL KALAM AZAD
19 A BALLYGANJ
C IRCULAR R OAD
C ALCUTTA
ISSUING 1

AM
WHO

ALONE

SOMETHING
CAN

ISSUE

BUT

BETTER

AUTHORITATIVE

ASK

VALLABHBHAI

REPUDIATION.

GANDHI
From a copy: B. C. Roy Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

392. LETTER TO W. S. BARLINGAY
WARDHA,

August 23, 1934
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. If it is merely a matter of resumption of
practice, I hardly think you need any interview because I am clearly
of opinion that those Congress pleaders who want to resume practice
are entirely at liberty to do so. Indeed I have pressed some pleader
friends to resume practice rather than suffer pangs of poverty. I hope,
therefore, that you do not want me to send you an appointment for
this purpose. I still do need to conserve energy, and I am giving
interviews only where it is absolutely necessary.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI W. S. BARLINGAY
C/ O TILAK VIDYALAYA
NAGPUR
From a copy: W. S. Barlingay Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library
1

Vide “Statement to Associated Press of India”, 23-8-1934 and also “Letter to
Vallabhbhai Patel”, 23-8-1934
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

333

393. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
August 23, 1934
MY DEAR ANAND,

You have given me a tragic tale of your woes. That a little
ringworm should develop into a frightful thing passes comprehension.
Generally speaking it yields to simple treatment inside of two or three
days. Have you not placed yourself under a competent doctor? And
you ought not to trifle with your piles. It is a very simple operation,
and if a competent surgeon advises that you should go through the
operation at once you should do so without demur.
I see that your letter is dated the 16th instant. It was received
only yesterday. Evidently the letter takes a long time to reach Karachi
and therefore I am sending the following telegram:
Hope ringworm cured. Under surgical advice undergo piles operation
immediately.

You can publish the message on God. If you like you can copy
the full text from Young India. As you know, selections from Young
India have been published in book form. This message is among the
selections.
I am not writing separately to Vidya, but she ought to. I hope
she and Mahadev are all right.
Unless you are in a hurry I want to delay sending funds till
Jamnalalji is discharged from the hospital or till he is in a position to
transact business.
Love to you both.
BAPU
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

394. LETTER TO C. F. ANDREWS
August 23, 1934
MY DEAR CHARLIE,

This is just to greet you.1 I hope you had a fair voyage. Take the
next train if you can.
Love.
MOHAN
C.W. 9683. Courtesy: Viswa Bharati Library, Santiniketan
1

334

The addressee was to arrive from England on August 25; vide p. 342.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

395. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
August 23, 1934
That you need not write to me and I to you is a great deal. Now
that I have written to you, you should write to me. Give Mr. Andrews
his letter 1 .
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 151

396. LETTER TO N. R. MALKANI
August 23, 1934
MY DEAR MALKANI,

I remember that letter which, at your instance, I sent to a Sindhi
friend. When I receive the draft, I shall send the receipts as suggested
by you.
As to the Hampton Institute pamphlets, my own impression is
that I passed them on to Thakkar Bapa after I had read them. But in
such matters my memory is not to be relied upon at all. I know that I
did not destroy them and I must have dealt with them as per your
instructions. Nevertheless I have asked Devraj to make a search, and if
the pamphlets are traced they will be sent to you.
I hope that you will get a suitable plot of land for the welfare
centre. Brijkrishna wrote to me about it.
I am slowly regaining lost strength.
You remember the Agra friend who prepared a note containing
hints on tanning. I returned that note for amplification. Whether I sent
it to you or to Thakkar Bapa or to Ghanshyamdas I cannot quite
recollect. But I would like you to make a search and see whether it was
sent to the writer for amplification. If it was, I would ask you to
remind him that I am still waiting for that note with the necessary
amendments made.
I hope you had a good time in Sindh.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide the preceding item. The addressee was to receive Andrews; vide p. 342.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

335

397. LETTER TO H. A. LALVANI
August 23, 1934
MY DEAR LALVANI,

I have your letter. Why did you not bring the mistake to my
notice at once? You can understand the difficulty of making refund
in cases of this character. Surely you must have discovered the
mistake at once. I would advise you now to forget the 100-rupee note
altogether. A big organization like Harijan Sevak Sangh cannot afford
to rectify such mistakes. If, however, you are not satisfied with my
advice, I would like you to refer to Jairamdas, and if Jairamdas thinks
that this is a case in which refund should be granted I will advise him
to write on your behalf to Thakkar Bapa. If you propose to approach
Jairamdas, you would show this letter to him.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI H. A. LALVANI
HYDERABAD
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

398. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
August 23, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I got your letter and also letters from Om, Janakimaiya and
Madanmohan. I got a report about you from Vinoba also and just
now I received a wire from Dr. Shah. We can expect now that the
wound will have completely healed in a few days. But do not build
castles in the air. Be patient and stay there as long as necessary. There
is no urgent problem at all which requires your immediate attention
and nothing to worry about. Radhakisan1 is able to look after
everything here and he and many others keep guard over me.
Can a remark be called a “joke” if you have to explain that it is
written in “joke”? Which is better, Janakimaiya’s angry complaints
or your suppressing your pain and building castles in the air? When
Janakimaiya complains, we know that she suffers. But you keep things
1

336

Addressee’s nephew
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in your own mind and so others are deceived. Tell me now, who
deserves to be admired?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 132

399. LETTER TO UMADEVI BAJAJ
August 23, 1934
,
Your letter was a good one. The handwriting should be better
still. Now that you are giving up sleeping for sewing, what will the
poor tailors do? But they will have no cause for fear because in a few
days you will be found sleeping on the sewing machine itself.
Madalasa continues to do your share of the work daily,and as
she has no other work to do, kills flies2 during the rest of the time.
Continue to write to me regularly. You should not let him3 talk
much yet. When visitors come, Janakibehn should talk with them. She
is not happy unless she can talk. You also can join in their talk. Then
the visitors will have nothing to talk about with Father.
I was weighed today by Radhakisan. The weight was 98. If it
goes on increasing like this, who knows how far it will go up?
Do you recite the Ramayana properly? The scene between
Sumitra and Lakshmana is very moving indeed. But the Ramayana is
full of such scenes.
At what hour do you get up?
Gopi has gone to Jabalpur today to celebrate the Balev Day 4 .
She has promised to return soon. I regularly hear from Gajanan also.
CHI. OM ALIAS SLEEPING BEAUTY

1

Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 337
1

In 1933 the addressee, who was 13 years, accompanied Gandhiji on his
Harijan tour, and whenever she had time, she slept.
2
A Gujarati saying which means: ‘Idling away one’s time’.
3
Jamnalal Bajaj
4
A Hindu festival celebrated on the full-moon day of Shravana, when one
changes one’s sacred thread. Also known as Rakshabandhan when a girl ties a string
(called rakhi, rakhadi of raksha round the wrist of her brother and receives from him
some gift as a token of his readiness to protect her.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

337

400. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 23, 1934
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,

Enclosed is a letter from Brijkrishna regarding the dissensions in
Delhi. Read it and tear it up. I have categorically stated1 in my reply
that, even if they ask me, I will not intervene in this dispute. Every day
I receive nothing but such complaints. Everybody thinks only of
himself and nobody thinks of the country. I don’t know how, in such
circumstances, we can reach our goal.
I have received wires from Bengal, too, against Aney. I have
replied in plain words saying that nobody should doubt his
impartiality and that he should be fully trusted.
Malaviyaji has ordered The Hindustan Times to change its
policy on the question of the Award. Ghanshyamdas has resigned
because of this, giving reasons in his letter of resignation which reveal
his disagree-ment with Malaviyaji’s views. Let us see what happens
now. I don’t know what has happened to these two.
On receiving a wire from Rajendrababu, I have sent a statement2
to the Associated Press. You will read it in the papers. If a copy has
been preserved, they will send it to you. It would help if you also
issued such statements from time to time from Bombay. I had a wire
from the Maulana asking me what the formation of the Congress
Nationalist Party meant. I have wired back saying that it is the
President who should reply to his question, and that, though I would
write about it to you, he should send a wire to you. If you receive one,
give him a suitable reply.
I received a letter from Rajaji today, which you should read.
Tear it up after reading it. If you wish, write to him. If you regain
sufficient strength to travel to Madras and if you can get time, you
may go there. I have not seen the cutting from The Statesman. I f I
find it, I will send it too. Whatever it writes, how can we hide the truth?
Prafulla Ghosh has arrived here. He has a painful tale to tell of the rot
in Bengal.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 120-1
1
2

338

Vide“Statement to Associated Press of India”, 23-8-1934
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

401. INTERVIEW TO KHADI WORKERS1
[On or before August 24, 1934] 2
Khaddar in a sense is purely an economic proposition. A
khaddar organization must be a business concern before everything
else. The democratic principle, therefore, cannot apply to it.
Democracy necess-arily means a conflict of will and ideas, involving
sometimes a war to the knife between these different ideas. There can
be no room for such conflict within a business organization. Imagine
parties, groups and the like in a business concern. It must break to
pieces under their weight. But a khadi organization is more than a
business concern. It is a philanthropic institution designed to serve
demos. Such an institution cannot be governed by popular fancy.
There is no room in it for personal ambition.
“In reorganizing your khadi production, you should not forget
that the science of khadi, in some respects, works on diametrically
opposite lines to that of ordinary business.You know how Adam
Smith in his Wealth of Nations, after laying down certain principles
according to which economic phenomena are governed, went on to
describe certain other things which constituted the “disturbing
factor” and prevented economic laws from having free play. Chief
among these was the ‘human element’. Now, it is this ‘human
element’ on which the entire economics of khadi rests; and human
selfishness, Adam Smith’s “pure economic motive”, constitutes the
“disturbing factor” that has got to be overcome. What applies to the
production of mill-cltoh, therefore, does not apply to khaddar.
Debasing of quality, adulteration, pandering to the baser tastes of
humanity, are current staple in commercialized production; they have
no place in khadi, nor has the principle of highest profit and lowest
wages any place in khadi. On the contrary, there is no such thing as
pure profit in khadi. And there should be no loss. Loss there is,
because we, the workers, are still incompetent novices. In khadi, the
prices realized return to the prime producers, the spinners, the others
getting no more than their hire.
1

This appeared under the title “Khadi—A New Orientation” as a “gist of
Gandhiji’s remarks” to prominent khadi workers of Andhra, including Pattabhi
Sitaramayya, Sitarama Sastri and Narayana Raju, The discussion continued for two
days.
2
From The Bombay Chronicle, 26-8-1934, which had reported that Pattabhi
Sitaramayya left Wardha for Madras on August 24, 1934.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

339

Then, take the question of standardization. You cannot enforce
it in khaddar. As Rajagopalachari once remarked, a poor, ordinary
spinner cannot always spin thread of a uniform quality. She is not a
machine. Today she may be unwell, tomorrow her child may be ill
and her mind will be distracted. If you have love for the poor spinner
or her child, you will not insist on having smooth, even thread always,
but be satisfied with what she can give, so long as she gives her best in
the condition in which she finds herself at the moment. The sacred
touch of her hand gives life and history to khadi which the machinemade yarn can never give. The art that is in the machine-made article
appeals only to the eye, the art in khadi appeals first to the heart and
then to the eye. I would, therefore, deprecate the bleaching of khadi.
It adds to the cost of production, affects the durability of cloth and
makes the detection of fraud ever so much more difficult. We must
not pamper the popular fancy, but seek to cultivate a new taste. A few
washes in the ordinary course will suffice to make khadi perfectly
white and give it a softness which bleaching destroys. We must make
everybody contribute his or her mite to reduce all unnecessary cost.
If, then, we treat khadi, not as an article of commerce, but as one
necessary for the sustenance of semi-starved millions, we must
penetrate the spinner’s home had induce her to wear khadi made
from her own yarn. This at once reduces the cost of production and
ensures automatic distribution. So far, we have simply tried to
manufacture khadi for the city people. From insignificant beginnings, the production of khaddar has grown to several lakhs per year.
We have multiplied varieties. But that does not satisfy me now. Khadi
was conceived with a much more ambitious object, i.e., to make our
villages starvation-proof. This is impossible, unless the villagers will
wear khadi themselves, sending only the surplus to the cities. The
singular secret of khadi lies in its salability in the place of its
production and use by the manufacturers themselves.
Our overhead charges are today much too high for me. If we
concentrate attention on the central mission of khadi, they will be
consi-derably reduced. The rules governing the reduction of the
price of khadi are somewhat, if not wholly, different from those that
apply to purely commercial articles produced chiefly for profit. In
khadi, there is a limitation to the improvement of tools. But there is
no limitation to the improvement fo human intelligence and honesty.
If we despair of these two, we must despair of khadi. In khadi,
therefore, we reduce cost by eliminating middlemen as far as is
340

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

consistent with the smooth running of the organization, which itself
will be unnecessary when khadi is self-supporting and self-acting.
The science of khadi is still in its infancy. It is a developing
scie-nce. With every new discovery that I make in it, the realization
comes to me all the more vividly how little I know of that science.
There is no other country in the world , with the possible exception of
China, that is potentially so rich as India, with its inexhaustible,
untapped reserves of man-power. Tap these reserves, and you at once
banish poverty from this country; and hand-spinning is the means by
which this could be done. All that we have done so far in khadi was
necessary. Without it we could not have reached the present stage. But
we have yet only touched the fringe of the problem. We heve now
need to take another step. If , therefore, you will have autonomy for
Andhra khadi, you can have it for the asking and without much
trouble about the discharge of your obligations. There is nothing to
prevent you from working along the lines suggested by me.
Harijan, 21-9-1934

402. NOTES
I TS PHYSICAL EFFECT
A few words about the physical effect of the recent fast will not
be out of place. No matter how much spiritually inclined a person
may be, a physical act cannot but produce its corresponding physical
effect. The latter may be regulated or reduced by the spiritual effort,
but it can never be completely overcome. And as I have often fasted
for health reasons, i.e., for physical effect, I have not failed to study
from that standpoint all the fasts that were taken from spiritual
motives. During all the four fasts undertaken for the Harijan cause, I
have noticed a particular dislike for water, whether wlith or without
soda or salt, and whether hot or cold. I have been able to bear, but
only just bear, aerated water. This inability to drink water has been the
greatest drawback in my fasts. I must mention that, being largely a
fruitarian and having abstained from condiments of every description,
except salt, practically for the past forty yeras, I rarely drink water
even in the ordinary course. All the liquid I need comes from the
fresh juicy fruit and the non-starch vegetables and honey and hotwater drinks. I have known many friends who have gone through long
fasts, but I do not know anyone who had had the dislike for water
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

341

that I had. Medical friends who have kindly helped me during my
fasts have not been able to suggest anything within the permissible
limits whereby they could make me drink water freely. They have
suggested and adopted remedies to reduce the evil effect of inability
to drink enough water. My purpose is to compare notes with those
who have any knowledge of fasting and to discover a means whereby
the dislike of water could be cured. Though I do not know them,
surely, there must be people who develop during their fasting periods
the same repugnance to water that I do. If any light can be thrown on
the question, it will help many persons like me. Much as I should like
to avoid having to fast, I cannot make myself believe that the recent
fast was the last in my life. It is a matter beyond my control.
THE AJMER INCIDENT

Although Shri Ramnarayan Chaudhri and Shri Durgaprasad
Chaudhri, captain of the volunteers in Ajmer, do not in any way wish
to be absolved from any blame that may attach to them for
forgetfulness or negligence in connection with the Ajmer incident,
they are most anxious to have the blame removed from the volunteers
who have been condemned in the Press and who they hold to be
utterly blameless. They have made careful investigations and find that
not a single volunteer was involved in doing injury to Swami Lalnath
or his party. The investigation papers have been sent to me. The only
deadly piece of evidence in favour of the theory of the gulit of the
volunteers has been utterly discredited. The confessor appears to have
been altogether a fictitious person, no trace can be found of him. The
newspaper that published the confession has failed to produce the
name of the writer, and the Editor has made such acknowledgement in
his paper and expressed regret for having published an unauthentic
letter. All the evidence, therefore, that I have hitherto received goes to
show that no volunteer was involved in the affray. My own statement
has nothing in it to warrant the inference that the volunteers had
actually assaulted Swami Lalnath or any of his party. I had simply
said that Swami Lalnath had said that volunteers were involved. But in
this belief he was evidently mistaken. No trace was found of the
volunteer described by him.Since the Ajmer volunteers have come in
for a great deal of public criticism, it was necessary to give my own
opinion in the matter. The fact, however, that in my opinion no
volunteer seems to have committed the assault does not imply that the
fast was in any way unnecessary. That the assault was committed is not
342

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to be denied, nor can it be denied that those who took part in the
affray were of the reformer group. The fact also remains that Shri
Ramnarayan Chaudhri forgot to give the necessary instructions and
take adequate precautions against the mishap. The fast was, therefore,
clearly necessary, and I am thankful to God that He gave me the
strength to take and go through it. Those who handle purity
movements cannot be too vigilant. The legal maxim has it that ‘Law’,
i,e., God, ‘helps the wakeful, never the sleepy.’
AN E NGLISH F RIEND’S WARNING

An English friend sends the following message :
We, English people, do not understand this fasting of yours. We were hardly
able to tolerate your previous fasts. But you will be discredited, if you repeat any more
of these.

I know that this warning has been sent out of concern for my
reputation. I know the Protestant dislike for fasts. But, inspite of all the
wish to stand well with my English friends, I am really helpless in this
matter. I am not responsible for these fasts. I do not undertake them
for my amusement. I would not torture the flesh for the love of fame.
Though I bear joyfully the pangs of hunger and many other physical
discomforts of fasting, let no one imagine that I do not suffer. These
fasts are bearable only because they are imposed upon me by a higher
Power and the capacity to bear the pain also comes from that Power. I
can only plead with that Power that He may not put me through any
more ordeals of that nature. But if my pleading goes in vain and
another fast comes my way, I must take it, even though I may have to
risk a wreckage of all the reputation I may possess for sanity and
what not. ‘For, what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole
world and lose his own soul?’
Harijan, 24-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

343

403. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
August 24, 1934
CHI. MARY,

I was glad to hear from you so soon in reply to my postcard 1 .
Jamnalalji is doing exceedingly well. The operation itself was a
prolonged affair because it had to do with the bony parts of the ear
and there were some tough bones to be chiselled and hammered. But
the convalescence has been exceptionally easy. He was allowed to
walk yesterday and is almost on normal diet. Even the stitches were
taken off. That of course does not mean that the bones where cuts
were made were healed. That must take some time, but not so much as
the doctors had expected. They say that the operation was successful
and very cleverly done.
Mira had a sudden call from within. One fine morning she came
to me and said that she felt an irresistible call to go to England. I
asked her, “when”; and she said, “as soon as I can pack and go”. I
did not resist her. On the contrary I encouraged her because I felt
that it must do her good and be a rich experience, though she might
be able to do nothing. I have confidence that she will not make any
serious blunder by talking nonsense. She is too well-balanced to do
that. She does not expect to be away for more than four months, but I
have written to her not to hurry back and that she should stay longer
if it was necessary. Her programme is very elaborate. She is leaving
practically no friend unvisited and she is booked to go to Scotland
also. She has been sending long letters and she herself is more than
satisfied with the way she is being received. I fancy that she will return
in October. Is it not strange that the English climate is not suiting her
as well as the Indian climate ! She told me that she was freezing in
Wales ! If you want to see a sample of her very long but interesting
letters I will gladly send you a specimen.
I hope you are now thoroughly restored. Do you hear from
Duncan?
Love.
BAPU
Form a photostat: G.N. 6026. Also C. W. 3355. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

1

344

Vide “Letter to F. Mary Barr”, 16-8-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

404. LETTER TO T. M. ZARIF
August 24, 1934
DEAR TAYEBBHAI,

I have your letter. It is difficult for me to give you a firm
opinion. I can conceive circumstances under which a Congressman
will be justified in accepting appointment as honorary magistrate.
Each case has, therefore, to be judged on its own merits. But I would
like to state generally that every Congressman should, in such matters,
act according to his conscience. More generally still, if he can avoid
accepting honours from Government it is well. It will go hard what
any person to justify a departure from a very safe road.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI T AYEBBHAI M. ZARIF
14 S UKEAS L ANE
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

405. LETTER TO KSHITISH CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
August 24, 1934
1

DEAR KSHITISHBABU ,

I understand that you have difficulty in reconciling yourself to
the Working Committee’s resolution2 on the Communal Award as also
to the position3 I have taken up regarding the Parliamentary Board.
You have a right to strive with me when you cannot see eye to eye
with me. You must not think of sparing me for the sake of my health.
I may not be able to straightaway reply to your letters; but it would
hurt me to think that you had formed, without arguing with me, an
adverse opinion on any step that I might have taken. You know how
I have valued your silent service of the country and your equally
silent co-opreation. I do not want to forfeit the confidence of valued
co-workers like you.4
S HRI KSHITISH C HANDRA DAS GUPTA
C ALCUTTA
Form a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

Brother of Satis Chandra Das Gupta
Vide “Resolution on White Paper and Communal Award”
3
Vide “Speech on Manifest of Congress Parlimentary Board, Benares”,
29-7-1934
4
Vide also the following item.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

345

406. LETTER TO BIRENDRA NATH GUHA
August 24, 1934
MY DEAR BIRENDRA,

I was glad to have your letter with a copy of the manifesto. You
should continue to send me such information as you may
thinknecessary for me to possess. I doubt not that Kshitishbabu will, in
the end, see what to me is the obvious truth.1

SHRI BIRENDRA NATH GUHA
VIDYASHRAM
B-76 COLLEGE S TREET MARKET
C ALCUTTA
Form a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

407. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 24, 1934
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,

Since Kaka has resigned his place on the Board of Trustees of
the Vidyapith, all of us have come to the decision that you should be
the Chairman of the Board.We have already appointed you to the
post. I did not remember what my legal position was in the Vidyapith,
so I enquired about it and was told that I had none, but that, morally
speaking, they regarded me as its Chancellor and all the teachers had
agreed among themselves that I should be permitted to intervene in its
affairs whenever I wished to do so. But this is no way of running an
organization. You are the only person who can be the legal chairman.
I am satisfied with whatever moral position I have and have neither
the desire nor the strength to shoulder greater responsibility than that.
Another decision which they have arrived at on my advice and
subject to your approval is that Narahari should take over
management of the Harijan Ashram and that as many teachers from
the Vidyapith as he may need should be made available to him. The
expenditure over Narahari and other teachers from the Vidyapith who
may be assigned to the Ashram should be met from the Vidyapith
1

346

Vide also the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

funds as long as they last. I am of the view that this burden should not
be put on the Harijan Sevak Sangh for the present, in view of the
policy of the Sangh that it should pay caste Hindus from its funds in
as few cases as possible. The ideal is that 95 per cent of the receipts
should go directly into the pockets of Harijans. If we wish to realize
it, we should set an example with our own workers. The third decision
we have taken—and this also subject to your approval—is that the
remaining teachers should, if they agree, spread out in villages for
rural reconstruction work and for service in villages, and start work
according to the scheme or plan which I have put forward. Narahari
will explain it to you. If you do not approve of any item in it, exclude
it unhesitatingly. Kakasaheb, Kishorelalbhai, Maganbhai, Soman and
Narahari were present when these decisions were taken and they have
agreed with them. About Narahari, I have discussed the idea with
Thakkar Bapa also. The Harijan Ashram cannot be run on the best
lines unless it gets the services of a person like him. I am sure that , if
we run it well, we shall advance the cause of Harijans considerably.
Only then will the gift of the Satyagraha Ashram have been justified.
Though I know, therefore, that we can take many other services from
Narahari, I think this is the best use we can make of him at present,
and he himself is interested in this work and is fully confident of
being able to make a success of it. Please, therefore, let Narahari be
sacrificed for the Harijan Ashram.
Blessings from
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 122-3.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

347

408. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 24, 1934
BHAISHRI VALLABHBHAI,

I got your letter and wire. I am not sending a wire in reply to
your wire, since I have already written to you yesterday on that very
subject.1 If you have not issued any statement as suggested in that
letter, you may state as follows :
I have read the proceedings of the new party formed by
Pandit Malaviyaji and Shri M. S. Aney. I have read telegrams
and letters asking me to clarify certain points. In my opinion it
is not proper to use the Congress name without the Congress
authority.The party may be called the National Party of
Congressmen if its composition strictly confirmed to Congressmen. But without the authority of the Congress duly received it
cannot with propriety be called the Congress National Party
especially when it is formed deliberately to propagate a policy
in direct contradiction to that which is the official policy of the
Congress. The adoption of the Congress name cannot but
confuse the popular mind and I would respectfully urge Panditji
to reconsider the position and adopt another name for the party
which he had a perfect right to form for the education of
Congressmen and others. There other point I should like to
emphasize is that no one but the Congress Parliamentary Board
can run elections in the name of the Congress. Lastly in the
midst of the unfortunate differences between Pandit Malaviyaji
and Sjt. Aney and the Working Committee I hope that all
Congressmen will loyally support the policy enunciated in the
resoultion of the Working Committee regarding the Communal
Award.2
If you wish to make any changes in this, you may do so.
Rejendrababu’s letter was rather strange.There can be only one
reply to it. The Congress certainly cannot assume responsibility for
providing the money and we cannot raise funds at present through
private efforts. That is the responsibility of Bhulabhai and others.
Discuss this matter with him.
1
2

348

Vide “Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 23-8-1934
This paragraph is in English in the source.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I will write to Bhulabhai regarding the A.I.C.C.
He wants a meeting of the Working Committee to be called. I,
therefore, think that it will be best to call it. You may hold it either in
Bombay or Wardha, as you wish. He wants it to be called early in
September.
Rajaji will arrive here the day after tomorrow or on Sunday.
Pattabhi and others are here . . .1 and others have arrived. They
will leave today.
I understand your view regarding Kaka. Jawaharlal has been
arrested. There was a wire from Mahadev to that effect. He could see
him. He is arriving here tomorrow.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 124-6

409. LETTER TO BHULABHAI J. DESAI
August 24, 1934
If you wish to get elected to the All-India Congress Committee, I
would advise you to control the desire. You may get elected to it when
they all want you there with one voice. You will then be joining it with
honour. Even if you are not a member just now, you are as good as
one. That is enough for the present and in the prevailing atmosphere.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

1

The name is omitted in the source

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

349

410. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
August 24, 1934
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

I was glad to have your letter. Your suspicion about that woman
seems to me well-founded. I myself saw her spinning in the presence
of many people. No such purdah is observed in the Punjab. You did
well in cautioning Jamnaprasad. Write to Shankerlal. I think he also is
vigilant.
I have written to Balram. I am all right. Ask Surendra to write to
me.
Blessings from

BAPU
Form the Gujarati original: C. W. 372. Courtesy: Bhagwanji P. Pandya

411. LETTER TO KASHI GANDHI
August 24, 1934
CHI. KASHI,

In respect of the fast 1, God’s grace itself rained on me. I am
gaining strength well enough. One just would not believe that you
have entered the fifty-second year of your life. Krishna, too, thought
it unbelievable. May you live many many more years still. If you two
are not worthy of my blessings, who else would be? Convey my
greetings to your revered mother. It is good that she is there. About
the rest, I think Krishna must be writing to you. During the fast, she of
her own accord, asked to be permitted to nurse me and did it
extremely well.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI KASHIBEHN GANDHI
UDYOGALAYA
VIJAPUR
BARODA S TATE
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33079
1
Undertaken by Gandhiji from August 7 to 14, 1934 to mark the end of his
Harijan Tour. For Gandhiji’s statement on the fast, vide”Statement on Fast”,
6-8-1934

350

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

412. TELEGRAM TO RAJENDRA PRASAD1
[On or before August 25, 1934]
GRIEVED
FOR

OVER

RELIEF.

FLOODS.
HOPE

YOU
FLOODS

WILL

USE

EARTHQUAKE

FUNDS

SUBSIDING.

The Searchlight, 29-8-1934

413. TELEGRAM TO ABUL KALAM AZAD
WARDHA,

August 25, 1934
ABUL KALAM AZAD
19 A BALLYGANJ
C IRCULAR R OAD
C ALCUTTA
HOPE

YOU

HAVE

WIRED

PRESIDENT

AM

FORWARDING.

GANDHI
From a copy: B. C. Roy Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

The telegram was in reply to the addressee’s published under the dateline,
“Patna, August 25”, 1934, which read: “Simultaneous flood in the Ganges and the
Sone causing rush of water between Chapra and Arrah . . . . Great loss of human life
and cattle apprehended . . . . Trying to organize relief but realize human helplessness
in the face of tremendous on rush of water.”
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

351

414. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
August 25, 1934
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,

Yes, I have recovered from the effects of the fast in the sense
that there is no untoward consequence. I am steadily but slowly
regaining strength.
I have no desire to have a meeting of the Working Committee.
But, if it is needed by the Parliamentary Board, I have no doubt that
Sardar Vallabhbhai will call it. But have you need for it? I have a
telegram from Maulana Saheb and Sardar sardul Singh who evidently
desire a meeting of the Working Committee at the same time as the
Parliamentary Board meeting. If such is also your feeling, then of
course the Working Committee must meet. I am loath to be dragged
to Bombay just now. Jamnalalji from his sick-bed has been warning
me not to leave Wardha before I have reached 110 lb. I am now 98 lb.
1
and I am gaining at the rete of less than 2 lb. a day. Supposing that I
keep up that pace, it would not be before the 20th September that I
can leave Wardha. But of course Jamnalalji is exacting and he can be
over-ruled if both the meetings must take place in Bombay, and that
in the early part of September and if my presence is a necessity. All
these things I leave to you to decide and then move Sardar
Vallabhbhai accordingly.
Of course the appropriation of the name ‘Congress’ by
Panditji’s party is a bad job. No one can act in the name of the
Congress without due authority. I believe Sardar Vallabhbhai would
be issuing a statement1 in the matter. You must have seen the brief
statement 2 that I have issued.
I hope you do not want the Working Committee to lay down the
procedure at the present stage to be followed by Congressmen in the
Assembly. If an amendment of the character you describe is brought
before the meeting just now I think it would be better not to say
anything. But the Parliamentary Board is the best judge to decide as to
what is necessary. But should an amendment be moved, you have
correctly interpreted my own opinion as to the clear duty of Congress
members. They must vote against a resolution or amendment
1
2

352

Vide “Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 24-8-1934
Vide “Statement to Associated Press of India”, 23-8-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

accepting the Award. And since they cannot vote for rejection,
naturally they must abstain from voting in regard to a resolution or
amendment rejecting the Award.
I am glad that so many districts had undisputed elections. I wish
the rest of the districts would follow the good example set by the
overwhelming majority of the districts. But if a fight is inevitable, I
think that the decisions of Mr. Aney should be loyally followed.
Yours sincerely,

DR. B IDHAN C HANDRA R OY
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

415. LETTER TO MANGHARAM SANTDAS
August 25, 1934
MY DEAR SANTDAS,

I have read your little note to Jairamdas at the back of Will
Haye’s letter. Though I have not been able to write to you I have
been closely following the course that Kamlani’s1 derangement is
taking. I have no doubt that he will be himself again, and when he
does regain his balance, subject to your approval, I would ask him, if
it is only for a time, to come back to India before he resumes his
work. Life in England, especially for a man with a tender
consciencelike Kamlani, is a very difficult job. I hope you are not
worrying. After all Kamlani and all of us are in God’s hands. We can
but work and pray.
S HRI M. S ANTDAS
HYDERABAD
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”,7-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

353

416. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
August 25, 1934
CHI. NARAHARI,

Since Kakasaheb has resigned from the Board of Trustees of the
Vidyapith, the question arises as to what should be done regarding the
village improvement scheme of Shri Nagindas Amulakhrai. As desired
by Shri Nagindas, I had appointed a committee to implement the
scheme. On thinking about it, I now feel that the committee should be
made completely independent of the Vidyapith, and that Sardar
Vallabhbhai should be appointed its President and Raojibhai its
Secretary. The latter should be appointed for one year.
Kakasaheb has rightly deposited the money of the Nagindas
Trust with Jamnalalji. After the latter is all right, we may, if necessary,
make some other arrangement. I have another fund also under my
control. Kakasaheb has deposited that amount, too, with Jamnalalji.
For the convenience of keeping accounts and from other points of
view I think it would be desirable ot amalgamate this amount with the
Nagindas Trust money.
The late Punjabhai had donated an ear-marked sum and, on my
advice, entrusted the Vidyapith with the responsibility of editing and
publishing Jain literature through a committee. I have a moral responsibility in this matter too. In view of the present circumstances, I would
suggest that that work also should be carried on independently of the
control of the Vidyapith. I suggest the following names as Trustees of
such an independent body:
1. Narahari Parikh
4. Maganbhai Desai
2. Valji Desai
5. Nilkanth Mashruwala
3. Ramniklal Modi
6. Gopaldas Patel
If, besides these, we can get a learned and pious Jain, I think it
would be desirable to invite him also to become one of the Trustees.
We shall have to look out for such a person. If you can think of any
name, please let me know.
In this programme, so far we have paid attention to publication
of material from the original sources of the Agamas together with a
transl-ation. If, instead, we make selections from this vast field of
literature which might be useful to the people, or get such selections
made, and publish them, I think the late Punjabhai’s object would be
better fulfilled.
354

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It was always Punjabhai’s wish that Shri Rajchandra’s birth
anniversary should be fittingly celebrated. We should assume the
respo-nsibility for this. But whereas in Punjabhai’s time people were
content with holding meetings on the anniversary day, I think it
would do greater credit to the committee and give greater peace to the
soul of Shrimad if some constructive work could be done on that day.
The committee should consider whether this should be done by
publishing some literature or arranging a lecture on the anniversary
day or in some other manner. The anniversary falls on the next Kartik
Purnima. We should, therefore, think and decide in time how it should
be celebrated on this occasion.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S. N. 9063

417 LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 25, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

You must have received my letter1 of yesterday. Mathurababu 2
brought your letter today. It was good that he came. I have sent an
emphatic message with him to the effect that they should fight the
elections only if the Parliamentary Board provides the money,
otherwise they should abandon the idea. They should expect no help
from you or me. Of course, if they have the courage to fight without
spending money they should certainly do so. If, however, that is not
possible, they should think twice before deciding to fight. If it is
possible anywhere in the country to fight elections without money and
solely on the prestige of the Congress, it is in Bihar. However, this
problem is outside my sphere. I haven’t the slightest idea how
elections are fought. If indeed they can be fought without money or
with very little money solely in the name of the Congress, there can
be nothing more creditable than that.
I have a wire from Bhulabhai saying that he is coming today
between 3 and 4. Mahadev is arriving in the evening .
Did I write to you that I had received three wires regarding the
1
2

Vide “Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 24-8-1934
Mathuraprasad, Rajendrababu’s co-worker in Bihar

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

355

Working Committee? I have merely wired back in reply that they
should ask you about it.
It will not matter if you find in impossible to come. We shall
meet through letters and be satisfied with that. I will keep you
informed about anything new which I come to know about.
Mirabehn seems to be doing good work. Probably it will bear
no result just now, but her trip [to England] will not have been in vain.
If you have not been getting letters regarding such matters, I will
arrange, after Mahadev’s return, that they are forwarded to you.
Muriel met Lloyd George. She talked with him for hours.Thus these
few friends have been doing the best they can. Mirabai and Agatha
have clashed with each other a bit. Partly Mirabai’s impatience and
partly her suspicious nature were responsible for this. Mahadev or
Pyarelal will give you the details of the incident.
You do not seem to have fully regained your strength.
Bhulabhai has arrived. Call the meeting in Bombay. That will drag me
there. Bhulabhai will be able to manage the A.I.C.C.
Blessings from

BAPU
S ARDAR VALLABHBHAI P ATEL
89 WARDEN R OAD, B OMBAY

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 127-8

356

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

418. LETTER TO UMADEVI BAJAJ
August 25, 1934
CHI. OM,

I have your letters. Your handwriting is all right though it is
not as good as I should like it to be. Does Kisan meet you often?
Every day you can find many things to write about. Heven’t I
suggested them? Who visits there? What food is given to you? How
much sleep do you get? If it is not enough, are you able to carry on
your work? You can certainly write about all this. If you read the
Ramayana daily, you can also write which [chapter] you are reading.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, pp. 337-8

419. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
August 25, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I see that your progress is quite fast. The sick are always cared
for like kings. That is the pleasant side of being ill. When, however,
the poor have the misfortune to fall ill, they do not get this pleasure.
A letter for Dr. Shah is enclosed. There is also one for Om.
Everything seems to be going on well here.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 132

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

357

420. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
August 25, 1934
CHI. MANI,

I read the couple of lines in your hand. You are perfectly right
in not writing to me at present. Take good care of your health and get
completely all right. When necessary, do write to me at length. You
need not now be very anxious to spare me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 117

421. LETTER TO G. R. SAHGAL
August 26, 1934
MY DEAR SAHGAL,

I was glad to receive your very prompt letter giving me all the
information I wanted except one. I wonder if with all your attainments
it would be proper for you, with wife and children , to give your
services to a Harijan institution for Rs. 150. And it is not so much the
small maintenance that you require as the fact that I cannot provide,
perhaps for some years, the scope that your abilities would need. I
have not in mind the bringing into being of a mighty Harijan
institution. It would be a small affair with big promise in a somewhat
distant future. Will you be content to allow your abilities to lie fallow?
You will just tell me what is the urge. And is your wife in hearty cooperation with you in coming down from Rs. 750 per month to Rs.
150, when I suppose even now you could command, if not Rs. 750
per month, something very near it?
Yours sincerely,

S HRI G. R. S AHGAL
C/ O GURUKULA
S UPA, via NAVSARI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

422. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
August 26/27, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

Mahadev must have replied to your letter. Raja arrived
suddenly today and was in a great hurry to return. Since I spent a
good deal of time with him I am late with the post. Aney also came
and saw me. All that I can say about him is that he brought a message
of love from Malaviyaji and asked me if I had any reply to give. I told
him that if they cared for propriety they should put up their
candidates after consulting us and should not put up anybody simply
to fight the Congress. He left soon, as he had to catch the train for
Nagpur, and said that he would come again. The new Party has
confused the situation, but apart from that I don’t think it will be able
to do much harm.
Bhulabhai came. I had a wire from the Maulana. He will have no
objection to the meeting being held in Wardha. He can easily be accommodated here. He says he will not mind if he cannot stay in a
hotel. I don’t think he will stop for more than two days. To me,
Wardha would certainly be more convenient. There will of course be
some burden on Radhakisan, but he has kept everything ready.
Recently Jamnalalji has added to the buildings. Hence there is
sufficient accommodation. I have been assured that all the
arrangements are perfect. Jamnalalji’s invisible presence has been
working behind all this, of course.
Bhulabhai will take care of all the necessary arrangements in
consultation with you. You may now do what is most convenient to
you. If you fix the meeting here, one advantage at any rate will be that
we shall be able to meet.
I have been discussing with Rajaji my intention of leaving the
Congress. He has come specially to discuss that. If possible, he wants
to run away on Tuesday.
Ramdas is returning from Khurja on Monday. It is because of
the cholera there. I shall know more when he comes.
I hope you are recovering your strength.
Mahadev has written to you everything about Jawaharlal. It was
very good indeed that he went. Jawaharlal felt much comforted.
Moreover, the old lady and Kamala were vere happy.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

359

I have dashed this off in great haste immediately on entering my
silence after the evening prayer. If anything is left out, I will supply it
tomorrow.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Morning, August 27, 1934
I have recollected one thing. It is not necessary for me now to
write to Ballubhai1 or anybody else about the matter concerning the
Munic-ipality. I should write to you only. Even if you decide to take
back the books belonging to the Vidyapith, there must be books
worth thirty to fifty thousand belonging to the Ashram, maybe a little
less or a little more. These books are lying unused. If they employ a
librarian, the books can be catalogued on scientific lines, rules for
lending them can be framed and they may then be loaned according
to those rules. I very much desire that something should be done.2
Andrews and Jones3 have arrived. I got your letter. Bhulabhai
will be seeing you tomorrow. You may certainly have the meeting at
Wardha. As regards Mahadev, see him when you come over. Andrews
and Raja are here.
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, pp. 128-30

1
2
3

360

Balwantrai Thakore, President of Ahmedabad Municipality
Vide also “Discussion with Vallabhbhai Patel”, 30-7-1934
Stanley Jones
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

423. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
August 27, 1934
BHAI BAPA,

I got your letter regarding Amalabehn. The Sangh needn’t have
incurred that expenditure. But I don’t write this by way of criticism.
Compassion is a wonderful thing. On the one hand, a trust, and, on
the other, compassion. Who can solve this conflict? But the expenditure ought not to be borne by the Sangh. I, therefore, assume
responsibility for that bill and for the ten rupees spent from Parikshitlal’s pocket. I will lay my hand on some other appropriate fund.
Please forget about that bill. I will send from here a hundi or money
order to Parikshitlal in a day or two.
I have asked Prithuraj to write to you and give you plenty of
other news. Somebody has given me a hundi to be spent as I like.
Prithuraj is sending it to you to be spent by you in the manner I have
suggested.
Vandemataram from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1140; also S.N. 22755

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

361

424. LETTER TO CHANDULAL MODI
August 27, 1934
BHAI CHANDULAL,

I got your letter. Tell Ramniklal that I have become impatient to
see him. Ask him to see me soon. But what would it matter even if we
can’t meet? After all, everything that we wish doesn’t happen. I do get
news about you through Tara. I am glad that you keep cheerful. That
is what one ought to do. I am regaining strength and weight. I was 94
immediately after the fast. Today it was 100. This gain in 14 days is
not bad.
During the fast, I also used to drink boiled water after it had
been cooled. The difference between boiled and unboiled does not
trouble me. I cannot tolerate water itself. Do you eat oranges during
the fast? Write to me about any other symptom that may appear.1
Let me know as soon as you have met Ramniklal. Most
probably he will be released before his time. I am trying. But we can
try only in a manner befitting us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4181. Also C.W. 1680. Courtesy:
Ramniklal Modi

425. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
August 27, 1934
CHI. SUSHILA AND MANILAL,

Since Manilal has not written to me but Sushila has, should her
name not be put first ?
I am awaiting your reply regarding a permit for Ramdas. 2
Medh has sent nothing as yet to Uncle. 3 . If he does mean to send it,
why doesn’t he send it directly to Uncle, or to me?
I think I have already written to you about saving at least Rs. 5
and sending it to me for Uncle. I have requested this contribution for
1
2
3

362

Vide also “Notes” sub-title Its Physical Effect
Vide “Letter to Manilal and Sushila Gandhi”, 17-7-1934
Madhavdas Kapadia, Kasturba’s brother
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

repaying the sum that I have got paid to him. I would be glad if he is
not given even that much as a gift. I don’t think he himself will be
able to repay the sum. If you two and Devdas pay every month, you
will feel no burden and the sum which I have borrowed from
Jamnalalji can be repaid. You should try and do this much.
Andrews has returned. We talked a great deal specially about
you. He has been very much disappointed. He complains that Manilal
has been writing articles about the Agent which are full of anger and
cont-empt. He doesn’t say that there should be no criticism of the
Agent, but that it should be kept within proper limits. I myself cannot
read Indian Opinion these days. I rarely see any newspapers. I
therefore don’t know. If however you have been writing anything in
anger or with contempt, you should change that. You should realize
that your respons-ibility is great. Since I have not read anything, I am
not writing this by way of criticism. I am only letting you know the
impression that Andr-ews has formed.
Who is the Swami from Bengal who takes so much of Manilal’s
time?
Ramdas is coming here tomorrow as cholera is raging in Khurja.
Kishorelal and Gomati are here at present. The former’s health
cannot be described as too good.
Devdas is all right, more or less. Lakshmi has always
beendelicate. Her daughter is doing fine. Andrews was full of praises
of Govind alias Arun.
I have regained sufficient strength. But I have still to take some
rest.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4825. Also C.W. 1237. Courtesy:
Sushila Gandhi

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

363

426. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
August 27, 1934
CHI. BRIJKISAN,

I have your two letters.
I can understand your predicament. Everything will turn out all
right if one remains patient. As long as I can I shall certainly point out
your duty. But I am inclined these days not to order anyone, only to
offer advice when solicited.
As you permit, I shall see Damodardas and shall then write to
Keshu. I shall ask Damodardas to come over here.
For the time being I am not going to move from here.
Stay on at Mussoorie as long as necessary and come down after
making yourself fit, Physically as well as mentally.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2421

427. EXTRACT FROM A LETTER1
[Before August 28, 1934]
That Mahatma Gandhi will not go to jail at least till the Bombay Congress
session is over, is indicated by a letter which he has written in reply to the Congress
Reception Committee’s query as to where he would like to stay during the
forthcoming Congress session. Mahatma Gandhi has stated in his reply that he would
like to stay in Congress Nagar together with the incoming and outgoing Presidents.

The Hindustan Times, 29-8-1934

1

This appeared under the date-line, “Bombay, August 28”, 1934, as reported
by Associated Press of India.

364

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

428. LETTER TO BALIBEHN M. ADALAJA
August 29, 1934
CHI. BALI,

I got your letter. I was pleased. I also believe what you say about
Harilal. I had a letter from him written from Porbandar. I heard from
him nearly after a year. I have of course cautioned him. I am glad that
Manu has shed her fear. How can we cure her irritability ?
Your health seems to have gone down badly. Kusum’s also is
none too good. But since both of you sisters know the sacredness of
service, you will not fail in it.
All are well here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1531.
Mashruwala

Courtesy: Manubehn S.

429. LETTER TO UMADEVI BAJAJ
August 29, 1934
CHI. OM,

You are an intelligent girl. It seems you write very good
Marwari. There is not much difference between Marwari and Gujarati.
Some even say that Gujarati is descended from Marwari and has
developed so well that now it excels the latter. Isn’t that why you look
upon me as your adopted father? Madalasa is standing by as I write
this and tells me that your Marwari is not very good. But one judges
another according to the measure of his or her own ability. Besides,
since when has little Madalasi become a teacher of Marwari or an
examiner in it? And so you pass in Marwari!
Blessings from
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 338

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

365

430. LETTER TO DR. B. C. ROY
August 30, 1934
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,

I understand that dispensation from adherence to the Working
Committee resolution on the Communal Award is being given to
Bengal Congress candidates on the ground of conscientious scruples.
Can that be so? If it is, I think we have not got the power to give the
dispensation. You would have seen my statement 1 to the Press
regarding that. I said that such was the offer made and it was rejected;
but that if Malaviyaji was disposed to accept it, the Working
Committee would probably make the offer again. But until the
dispensation becomes part of the Working Committee resolution no
one can grant it. And it cannot be granted even by the Working
Committee if the Nationalist Party continues to function. Those,
therefore, who want dispensation have simply to belong to the
Nationalist Party.
Yours sincerely,

DR. B IDHAN CHANDRA R OY
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers . Courtesy: Pyarelal

431. LETTER TO HARIBHAU PHATAK
August 30, 1934
MY DEAR HARIBHAU,

I have your letter. My position on the cow is not that the cow
might be superior to the buffalo in giving milk. If cow protection is
part of Hinduism, then we must abjure buffalo milk even if it is
superior to cow’s milk. Such is the conception of religion. You
cannot apply to it the bare rule of utility. If we would prefer buffalo
milk , then by and by the buffalo would become the object of worship
and the cow would disappear, as she is fast disappearing. Having said
this, I can say that all the information that I possess goes to show that,
all things considered, cow’s milk is superior to buffalo milk. But it is a
question whcih does not much interest me, because I am sure that it
would be possible to obtain medical testimony in favour of the
superiority of the cow’s milk over buffalo milk and vice versa.
1

366

Vide “Statement to Associated Press of India”, 23-8-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Therefore , in matters of this character, the safest thing is to steer clear
of expert opinion. If we worship the cow, we must give her preference
over all, irrespective of the quality of the different milk that different
animals may give.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
S HRI HARIBHAU P HATAK
S ADASIV P ETH, P OONA
From a photostat: G. N. 1372

432. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
August 30, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter. How can you afford to lose heart? One who
becomes a vaid has to talk and listen daily about diseases. It was good
that I sent you . . .’s 1 original letter. Your letter throws new light on
the matter altogether. In such circumstances, you should, in the first
place, acquaint me with all the facts and, secondly, do only what seems
right to you. You should follow my advice only if it appeals ot your
reason, or when I ask you to follow my instructions even if they do
not appeal to your reason. In this case, I hastily expressed my opinion
on the basis of . . .’s one-sided letter. You should act upon it only if
you also are convinced. But, on the contrary, you repudiate all her
allegations. That being so, there is no question of your acting upon
my suggestions. First you should discuss. . .’s charges in detail and
show that they are unjustified, and afterwards you should tell her
firmly what you think regarding money. Personally, I am willing, on
the basis of your letter, to write to her and reprimand her. But I am
not writing for fear that my doing so might be misunderstood.
I understand what you say concerning the dairy. We shall
separate it. Whom do you suggest for its trustees? I think we had
thought of some names,but I have forgotten them. Please, therefore,
send your suggestions. Ramdas and Dr. Sharma have returned here.
They will not have to go back to Khurja, for the house in which they
lived had to be vacated and, moreover, there is nothing special in that
place.
1

The name has been omitted.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

367

This place is fairly crowded just now. Andrews and Ghanshyamdas are still here. Sardar and Jairamdas are arriving today. Others
keep coming and going.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8411. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

433. LETTER TO VIMALA JOSHI
August 30, 1934
CHI. VIMU,

Why do you write with a pencil? Write with ink and make each
letter as beautiful as a carefully drawn picture. Surely you can be in
no hurry to finish your letter. It is good that all of you have settled
down there for the present.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—7: Shri Chhaganlal Joshine, p. 302

434. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
August 30, 1934
CHI. MANUDI

I did get your letter. Are you not attending Sushilabehn’s
school now? I am content with what you are able to study. I am very
glad indeed that you have shed fear of Bhai. Take care of your health.
Overcome anger, serve aunt and live happily. Ramdas is here now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1533.

Courtesy: Manubehn S.

Mashruwala.

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

435. A LETTER
August 30, 1934
,
Maganbhai gave me your message. If you ever had such a
thought, you have broken your vow that you would inform me right
from the beginning and perhaps your relations with . . .2 can be
considered improper. Yet if both of you are still willing and if the
elders bestow their blessings on you both, you will surely have my
blessings too. But give up your obstinacy of waiting for five years. I
like it. But if you get engaged you both will feel tempted. Understand
that it is the worst thing. So if you wish to have any engagement, then
get married now, that is as soon as . . . is released.
CHI . . .

1

Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4070. Also C. W. 21. Courtesy:
Shantabehn Patel.

436. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
August 30, 1934
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

Here is a letter received from Damodardas. This reveals
something altogether different. Now let me know precisely the
remarks made to you by Damodardas. I have written to him to come
to Wardha if he can. My going to Bombay is most uncertain. I will
not be going in September at any rate.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2422

1
2

The names have been omitted.
ibid

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

369

437. THAT ILL-FATED MEASURE
The ill-fated Temple-entry Bill deserved a more decent burial, if
it deserved it at all, than it received at the hands of the mover of the
Bill. It was not a Bill promoted by an individual for his personal
satisfaction. It was a Bill promoted by, and on behalf of, the reformers. The mover should, therefore, have consulted reformers and
acted under instructions from them. So far as I am aware, there was
hardly any occasion for the anger into which he allowed himself to be
betrayed or the displeasure which he expressed towards Congressmen.
On the face of it, it was, and was designed to be, a measure pertaining
to religion, framed in pursuance of the solemn declaration 1 publicly
made in Bombay at a meeting of representative Hindus who met
under the chairmanship of Pandit Malaviyaji on 25th September,
1932. The curious may read the declaration printed almost every
week on the front page of Harijan. Therefore, every Hindu, caste or
Harijan, was interested in the measure. It was not a measure in which
Congress Hindus were more interested than the other Hindus. To have,
therefore, dragged the Congress name into the discussion was
unfortunate. The Bill deserved a gentler handling.
Having not a moment to spare myself during the exacting and
swift Harijan tour, I had asked Shri Rajagopalachari, in pursuance of
the pledge given by me at public meetings and to sanatanist friends in
private and in these columns, to ascertain informally (as it could only
be done informally) the views of the Hindu members of the Assembly,
as, I thought , if it was discovered that the majority was opposed to it,
steps should be taken to have the Bill withdrawn. This was the very
simple issue on which the Bill could either have been dropped or
proceeded with. Both the sanatanists and the reformers would have
understood the position. Its fate ought not to have been decided on a
side issue. If C. Rajagopalachari or I had committed a mistake, we
should have been made to pay for it. But the Bill was above persons.
Right or wrong, it enunciated a great principle and, therefore, deserved
a more decent treatment than it received.
As for the part played by the Government, this journal’s policy
is to avoid as much as possible criticism of the Government. But I
should like to say that, with the material before it, the Government
1

370

Vide “Resolution at the Hindu Leaders Conference, Bombay”, 25-9-1932
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

could only have taken the course it did. But the public should know
that on behalf of the reformers there was not only no attempt made to
canvass public opinion but a decision was deliberately arrived at that
no attempt should be made to obtain signatures of the public in
general in favour of the Bill, it being left open to expert bodies to
send representations if they chose. This was duly announced in these
pages. My co-workers and I came to the conclusion that the questions
underlying the circulation were too technical for the public to decide.
Thus, the question was not whether Harijans should or should not
enter public Hindu temples precisely on the same terms as the others.
The question was whether there should be any legislation in the matter
and, if there should be, whether the Bill was good on its merits . In
my opinion, both these questions were too technical to be put before
the public. Surely, it is not impossible to conceive occasions when
legislative help or interference is indispensable even in matters of
religion. As a matter of fact, there are many cases of such legislation.
But it was difficult to get an intelligent vote from the public. Then, on
the merits, it was equally difficult to show to the public that the Bill
was purely of a permissive nature and that no temple could be opened
without the consent of the majority of the temple-going public. Such
public education is not impossible under congenial circumstances. But
it is well-nigh impossible when party feeling runs high and truth is at a
discount.
The temple-entry battle has to continue. The promise made to
Harijans must be redeemed and the temples have to be flung open. If
they can be, without legislative sanction, no one would be more glad
than the reformers. Not that they want a single temple to be opened
where the majority of savarna Hindus who are in the habit of using
them are opposed. Law’s assistance is invoked because lawyers opine
that the law prevents such opening even where an overwhelming
majority of temple-goers are agreeable. If such is the case, the
permissive legislation is peremptory. Law alone can undo what law
has done, whether it is judge-made or statutory or customary. But
reformers will wait till such time as the passing of legislation becomes
irresistible. But waiting is only for the wakeful. The hasty withdrawal
of the Bill teaches its own lesson. There is no cause for
disappointment. Redoubled effort is required. It is not necessary to
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

371

know or prove that Harijans want temple-entry. Removal of the sin is
necessary for the satisfaction of the savarna Hindus who have realized
that untouchability is a canker eating into the vitals of Hinduism,
which, if not removed in time, must kill Hinduism.
M. K. GANDHI

Harijan, 31-8-1934

438. LETTER TO P. N. RAJBHOJ
August 31, 1934
MY DEAR RAJBHOJ,

Your letter of 25th August astonished me, for you have now
taken up a position in connection with the work of the Harijan Sevak
Sangh which is contrary to what you had taken up some time ago and
in your correspondence and conversations with me. It may be that
experience has altered your view. If such is the case, I have nothing to
say except that you have based your criticism on insufficient data.
You know that I have repeatedly expressed my opinion that
Harijan Sevak Sangh is an organization of penitents. Therefore it
cannot be predominantly manned by Harijans. It has got to do the
repentance in the manner that the penitent savarnas may consider to
be the most suitable. It it does not appeal to the Harijans, it would be
no doubt unfortunate. Then the penitents must try again. But they
have got to learn the art of repentance from bitter experience.
As I have said to you personally so often, and you seemed also
to agree, the better and more effective method of influencing the
policy of Harijan Sevak Sanghs would be for local Harijans to form
representative Advisory Boards to study sympathetically the activities
of the local Sanghs, and then advise them, criticize them and make
concrete suggestions. If such Advisory Boards are formed everywhere,
the work done by the Harijan Boards will be naturally much more
effective than it is today. But even as it is, the Boards have nothing to
be ashamed of. If you will follow the columns of Harijan from week
to week, you will surely be astonished at the way the money all over
India is being distributed among Harijans. It can be shown from
records that many institutions managed by Harijans are being
substantially supported from funds collected by Harijan Boards. You
372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will find also, if you study the figures, that the extent of distribution of
funds directly among Harijans and Harijan institutions is progressively
increasing. Extraordinary precautions are being taken to ensure the
impartial distribution of funds.
You are altogether wrong in thinking that accounts of
distributions are not published. Reports by provincial branches are
published from time to time. They are available for inspection by the
public and you can test the accuracy to my statement by turning over
the columns of Harijan and even by application of local offices for
copies of their reports. I am asking Thakkar Bapa to let me have a
consolidated account for publication in Harijan, and you will be
yourself astonished at the amounts spent for Harijan institutions and
students all over India.
As to temple-entry, you will find that practically nothing has
been spent either on opening of temples or on the building of new
temples, and throughout the nine months’ tour, the reports of my
speeches in the columns of Harijan will show you conclusively that
the temple-entry question occupies the least part of them. The Harijan
Sevak Sanghs have concentrated on some of the very things that you
mention. If they have not tackled all the items, it is not for want of will
but for want of capacity to overtake all the items at once.
Your attack upon the Maharashtra Harijan Board comes with ill
grace. An out-and-out supporter of the Harijan cause, namely, Mr.
Devdhar, is the President of the Provincial Board. He began this long
before the Harijan Board came into existence, and probably before
the birth of many of us. So far as I am aware, he has never been
accused of lukewarmness over this reform. If you have any specific
complaints against the locl Board, don’t you think that your first
duty is to send those complaints to the local Board, and if you do not
get relief or satisfaction, to take your appeal to the Central Board?
And then if you find that your complaint has gone unheeded, you will
be justified in exposing the respective Boards in the public. As it is,
you have nothing but a vague allegation against the Maharashtra
Board which, in my opinion, has deserved a better treatment.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI P. N. R AJBHOJ
207 GHORPADE P ETH, P OONA 2
From a photostat: G.N. 786; also Harijan, 7-9-1934
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

373

439. LETTER TO SITARAMA SASTRY
August 31, 1934
DEAR SITARAMA SASTRY,

I have your letter. Although the matter you mention escaped
you, there is nothing new in it. We had the large sum spent on Andhra
because Andhra had given its due share during the khadi tour. But
that does not entitle Andhra to appropriate the sum for use at will. The
sum was given to the All-India Spinners’ Association just as Harijan
Funds have been given to the Harijan Sevak Sangh. These funds have
to be largely used in the province where they were collected. But they
are used under instructions of the central organization. Therefore so
far as the security is concerned, it has got to be obviously on the same
footing for both the funds. And under the proposed autonomy you
will be keeping the equivalent of both the funds in the shape of khadi
and furnIture. If you issue debentures and offer them as security, that
is totally a different proposition. If that kind of security appeals to
the Association naturally it will be accepted. I have not visualized the
debentures sufficiently to pronounce any opinion upon merits. I hope
this is perfectly clear.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI S ITARAMA S ASTRY
VINAYA ASHRAM
C HANDOL (GUNTUR DT.)
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

440. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL L. MAJMUDAR
August 31, 1934
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

You know that Ramdas has become weak. He feels happy in
Surendra’s company. He wants to try the treatment of Dr. Sharma
who employs nature-cure remedies. Because he is weak, Ba wants to
stay with him. Hence Ramdas, Ba and Dr. Sharma will leave this place
and go there. Take them in some conveyance from Sabarmati and
lodge them in any building that may be vacant. You should charge
rent at the rate that has been fixed. They will not require any other
374

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

attention. You will have no bedsteads there, of course. Beg one for
Ramdas from Budhabhai. They will probably get the necessary
provisions there. The expenses will be sent from here. If Ramdas stays
there for any length of time, the doctor’s wife and his two sons will
come there. If you encounter any difficulty, let me know. Ba will
cook. They will require one servant. If you can find one, do so. Show
this letter to Bhai Narahari.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4043

441. TERRIBLE OPPRESSION
I have been receiving reports from several quarters about the
oppression of the Harijans in the area surrounding Talaja. Even after
assuming an element of exaggeration in them and making allowance
for it, what remains is shocking enough. It is difficult to understand
how man can be so cruel.
The tragedy of it is that the Harijans were quite innocent.
Because there was an epidemic of the plague among cattle and they
died, it was supposed that this was the doing of the Harijans. And so
the latter were harassed and beaten almost to death, and in some cases
actually to death, with the result that, to escape this oppression they
left their homes and belongings and took shelter inTalaja.
It is all the more distressing that such things should happen in a
model State like Bhavnagar. I do not say this in order to blame the
State. I see from the letters and telegrams I have received that the
officials are alert, and I hope that these cruel happenings will be fully
investigated, the innocent Harijans will get justice and be resettled in
their homes, and the guilty will be forced to compensate the Harijans
who have been injured and make good the losses of those whose
belongings have been destroyed, and steps will be taken to ensure that
such things do not happen again.
What is specially lamentable is the fact that
even in a
progressive State the people are stony-hearted towards the Harijans,
treat them as less than animals and do not hesitate to beat them up
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

375

half-dead or dead and do not even fear being punished with hanging
or rigorous imprisonment. Many people seem to argue that they need
fear authority or God in beating or killing a Harijan no more then
they need to do so in beating or killing cats and dogs, and their
reasoning is not completely unjustified either.
The help that the Government or State can give in such matters
is not much. It can punish the guilty after the event and force the
guilty village to pay compensation. But where a strong public opinion
has not been cultivated against such things, the State cannot produce
big results. At the root of the Talaja atrocities are utter ignorance and
superstition. It is the duty of Harijan workers to dispel this darkness.
They should explain to the people that epidemics of the plague are
known to occur occasionally in all countries of the world, and that
outside India nobody is suspected when such an epidemic occurs. The
people in those countries merely regard it as a natural calamity,
employ blameless remedies for eradicating the plague and give
medicines to the cattle. This should be done vigorously and
ceaselessly in villages sunk in ignorance.
In this connection I have received a heart-rending letter from a
Harijan. Since it is worth reading by every caste Hindu, I reproduce
below its important part :1
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 2-9-1934

1

The letter is not translated here. The correspondent, who was serving
Harijans in as many ways as he could as atonement for the cruel treatment of them by
caste Hindus, had described the cruel lot of Harijans in Saurashtra and appealed to
Gandhiji to save them.

376

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

442. MODEST ATONEMENT
The author of this letter has given his name and address. I do
not give them lest doing so might detract from the worth of his silent
service. The fact that such service is being done in isolated places all
over the country serves partially as an antidote against the painful
reports regarding Talaja. 1 It is only through such service that
untouchability can be eradicated.
[From Gujarati]
Harijanbandhu, 2-9-1934

443. LETTER TO SAHEBJI MAHARAJ
September 2, 1934
DEAR SAHEBJI MAHARAJ,

It was indeed an agreeable surprise to me to hear from you. But
I am afraid that I must not accept your congratulations. I have no
talent for reproducing Dayalbagh2 in the different provinces of India.
My reference was to the loan of the excellent men you have sent to
Karachi, who are conducting in a methodical manner the Industrial
Institute founded by the Mohatta Brothres. Yours is a huge enterprise.
I know my limitations. My experience may be extensive in some
directions; but I do claim very little experience in the direction in
which you have built up Dayalbagh. Nor have I unlimited resources.
However, I do expect, when I am ready, to fall back upon you for
trained men, to assist the Harijan Sevak Sangh in establishing
industrial homes for Harijans. Necessarily therefore they have got to
be unambitious.
I am glad you have put up a tannery. Will your expert give me a
brief article describing the method of tanning so that an intelligent
reader may be able to make his own experiments in tanning? Does
your tanning include the treatment of carcasses, flaying them and
separating the skin from the bone and the flesh? And if it is, what is
being done with the bones, blood, the flesh, the entrails, etc.? For me,
1

Vide the preceding item.
A settlement of the Radhaswami sect founded over a century ago near Agra.
Covering over 500 acres of land, it was under the personal supervision of Sahebji
Maharaj, who was the fifth, head of the sect. Vide also “Letter to Chhaganlal Joshi”,
18-9-1929
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

377

tanning has a most important bearing upon the tremendous question
of cattle preservation, consistently with the Hindu belief in the sanctity
of the cow. And do you take any leather, or do you confine yourself
only to leather of dead cattle as distinguished from slaughtered?
Do I infer from your kind offer to include Dayalbagh in the list
of Harijan colonies, that the Harijan Sevak Sangh may send Harijan
boys to be trained there in the several departments? And if the Sangh
may, on what terms?
Mirabehn will be delighted, as I am, to learn that you have
succeeded in producing iridiumtipped gold nibs which are eleventwelfth swadeshi. I shall inform Mirabehn of the good news you have
given.
I thank you for your kind inquiry about my health. I am
making as good progress as can be expected after the fast.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S AHEBJI MAHARAJ
S HRI ANAND S ARUP, D AYALBAGH, A GRA
From a photostat: G.N. 2159

444. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
September 2, 1934
DEAR THAKKAR BAPA,

I had just a reminder1 from Hariji that at Chheoki where he met
us, I had approved of his suggestion that the 25% of the U.P.
collections should also be sent to the U.P. Board. That is to say, the
whole of the collections should be spent by the U.P. Board, naturally
subject to the approval of the scheme or schemes that might be
submitted by the Board.
S JT. A. V. THAKKAR
DELHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

378

Vide the following item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

445. LETTER TO H. N. KUNZRU
September 2, 1934
DEAR HARIJI,

I do remember our conversation at Chheoki and I remember
also that I entirely approved of your suggestion. But the matter was
forgotten entirely, and had it not been for your reminder, I would not
have written to Thakkar Bapa. I am now writing1 to him.
Yours sincerely,

P T. H RIDAY NATH KUNZRU
ALLAHABAD
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

446. LETTER TO BIRENDRA NATH GUHA
September 2, 1934
DEAR BIREN,

I am glad to know that Kshitishbabu has become softened a bit.
I wonder if he got my letter.2
I was sorry to learn that Dr. Indra Narayan Sen has been lost to
us. Let us hope that he has been lost to us only for some time to
come.
Yours sincerely,
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

447. LETTER TO UMADEVI BAJAJ
September 2, 1934
CHI. PANDITA OM,

You have given excellent advice in your last letter. But do you
yourself do what you advise? If I did not take sufficient rest and
proper care of my health, would I be gaining weight at the rate of half
a pound a day? If you were to compare how I work now with how you
saw me working, you would think I was a lazy man or an incurable
1
2

Vide the preceding item.
Vide “Letter to Birendra Nath Guha”, 24-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

379

sleeper. Isn’t it better that you are there and taking walks or idling
away your time in the Hanging Garden, and, in return for this
freedom, doing some nursing for Father? Do you know the story of
the Hanging Garden? I believe that it is not a place where poor people
like us can enjoy a walk. Only fashionable people go there. When you
go there next time, observe and let me know how many poor people
you saw. I went there once or twice and had enough of it.
I don’t mind your displaying your knowledge before me. An
adopted father cannot expect better treatment. But I hope you have
not alarmed Father there.
You have made a mistake. You have stated that Father’s weight
is 104. I shall probably overtake that in four days. Are you sure you
don’t mean 204? Do you read the Ramayana regularly?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, pp. 338-9

448. LETTER TO DRAUPADI SHARMA
September 2, 1934
CHI. DRAUPADI,

You must give up this fear of me. I said nothing to scare you, I
simply pointed out the parental duty. Nevertheless forget all that now.
Write to me without any fear.
Now, news from this end: Sharma, Ramdas, Kanu and Ba left for
Sabarmati today. It is all for the best. The account as given to me is
still maintained. How have you managed to charm Ramdas? You had
already charmed Amtussalaam? Tell me how you do it!
If you are to be called to Sabarmati it will only be after ten or
twenty-four days1 but it will be automatically dropped if Ramdas
leaves for South Africa. But in case he does not go you will have to go
over to Sabarmati. I say ten or twenty-four days because of the
fortnightly shipping service from South Africa. One boat is to reach
1

380

The source has “twenty-five”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

on Saturday. If no news comes by that mail it is bound to come after
fourteen days. And if that too brings no news Ramdas will not go at
all. I hope the children are doing well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha,
1932-48, between pp. 90 and 91

449. LETTER TO AMBUJAMMAL
September 3, 1934
CHI. AMBUJAM,

Your letters come regularly. I have not always been able to
acknowledge them. I am recovering fast. There is no cause for
anxiety.
Ba has taken Ramdas to Sabarmati.
It seems your Hindi lessons are progressing well.
You should abandon all sorrow. It is our duty to put up with the
condition in which God has placed us and to remain contented.
You may come here if you can. For some time now I shall be
here. Om is in Bombay with Jamanalalji.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Ambujammal Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

381

450. LETTER TO PREMABEHN KANTAK
3 a.m., September 3, 1934
CHI. PREMA,

Your letter was full of descriptions. It seems your work is going
on very well. Continue to send accounts of it in the same manner.
There is an article1 in Harijan about the work to be done in villages.
Read it. One and the same method will not work everywhere. This is a
virgin field of work. Hence there will probably be a great deal of
variety in the work to be done. The plan which I have and which I
have explained in Harijan is based on one line of approach only. But
to whom can I explain this, if not to you? Let me see now to how
many persons you can explain it.
I am not surprised to learn about your being harassed. I would
advise you not to mention the name of the Congress at all, let alone
civil disobedience. For the present, only explain to the village people
the pros and cons of your programme. Speaking of the Congress
serves no purpose if its programme is not carried out. If the
programme is carried out, there is no need to speak of it. The real
worshippers of Shri Krishna are not those who shout “Krishna,
Krishna”, but those who do His work. Our hunger is not appeased if
we keep shouting “bread, bread”. It is appeased by eating bread.
Your assumption is correct. If you receive an order to leave the
village, you should readily obey it. Only those who willingly obey
laws which they do not like earn the right sometimes to disobey a law.
This is rarely remembered by people.
Please do not assume that I shall attend the Congress. Many
plans are maturing in my mind. I don’t get time to write to you
about all of them. Wait and see what happens. You should be satisfied
that you have chalked out your work.
Kisan writes to me sometimes. Your letter to Amtussalaam was
a good one.
You know that Ramdas does not keep good health. He has gone

1

382

Vide “Discussion With Gujarat Vidyapith Teachers”, 14-8-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to Sabarmati along with Sharma. Ba has gone with him to look afrer
him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 10359. Also C.W. 6798. Courtesy:
Premabehn Kantak

451. LETTER TO S. A. BRELVI
September 3, 1934
DEAR BRELVI,

Mahadev showed me your letter about Shah. I would like him
to be elected. He will be a valuable representative. But I doubt the
propriety of a socialist standing for an avowedly capitalistic group. To
divide on this issue the Chamber which is struggling to make good its
position does not appeal to me. Nor does it appeal to me to oppose
Mathuradas if he is standing. If Shah cannot stand on behalf of a
popular constituency this time, he should wait. But if you and he feel
otherwise, of course you will put forth the case before the
Parliamentary Board. After all, the decision will rest with it. And I
neither attend your meetings nor do I try to influence its decisions in
such matters.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. A. B RELVI
BOMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

383

452. LETTER TO PARIKSHITL L. MAJMUDAR
September 3, 1934
BHAI PARIKSHITLAL,

I got your letter. We don’t want to start a public agitation in
newspapers about the Lakhtar1 matter as yet. After we have tried our
best to get the matter settled through somebody who knows the
Thakore, and, in csse we fail,we shall have no option but to take the
matter to the newspapers. I will see if I can find somebody who knows
him. The father of Ramdas’s father-in-law was a resident of that place.
He had good relations with the Durbar. He is dead now. I don’t know
if any responsible person is there now. Ask Ramdas. If he knows
somebody, he should write. I will ask Ramdas’s wife. Today, however,
is my silence day.
If Ramdas’s being there causes you inconvenience, do not
hesitate to let me know. He has gone there to have the benefit of
Surendra’s company.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4044

453. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
September 3, 1934
SUJNA BHAISHRI,

I got your letter only today.
You cannot take too strict measures regarding Talaja. Even after
making allowances for exaggeration, what remains is without doubt
terrible enough. See that such a thing never happens again in your
State. Nanabhai and Chhaganlal Joshi write and tell me that your
officers are indeed taking some steps.2
I was sorry to learn about the Prince’s illness. If my blessings
can be of any avail, you always have them for the asking. But it is
only the blessings of Harijans that will work. The sincere blessings
1

Where Harijans were forbidden form using the public reservoir; vide also,
“Letter to Chhaganlal Joshi”, 21-9-1934.
2
Vide also ”Terrible Oppression”, 2-9-1934

384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

which the poor subjects of a Ruler pronounce on him cannot but bear
fruit. It is only the blessings of the unhappy that help a Ruler or his
subjects. People like you or me may put their trust in the blessings of
the happy and the well-to-do, but you may be sure that they count
for nothing.
Please inform me when the Prince is well again.
MOHANDAS

[PS.]
I need not come to Bombay.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5936. Also C.W. 3252. Courtesy:
Mahesh P. Pattani

454. LETTER TO PRAGJI K. DESAI
September 3, 1934
CHI. PRAGJI,

Nothing has been stopped. What you wish is exactly what has
happened. One person at any rate remains. And one is enough. There
is no room for disappointment in this struggle, nor for despair. What
criticism, then, can you make? If you read my statement again, you
will find all this in it. I understand about your troubles. But troubles
are part of one’s lot in this life.
Blessings to you all from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5039

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

385

455. LETTER TO PREMLILA THACKERSEY
September 3, 1934
DEAR SISTER,

Ramdas is ill. Ba has taken him to the Harijan Ashram at Sabarmati. We have hoped that he will improve there. You have kept some
honey for me. Just now a friend in Calcutta has been insisting on
sending some honey for me, and so I have not given you trouble in
that regard. But now please send it to Ramdas, C/o Harijan Ashram,
Sabarmati. My blessings to all girls there. I can never forget their
services to me.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am regaining strength fairly rapidly.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI P REMLILABEHN THACKERSEY
P ARNAKUTI
YERAVDA, VIA P OONA
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C. W. 4834. Courtesy: Premlila Thackersey

456. LETTER TO MAHENDRA V. DESAI
September 3, 1934
CHI. MANU,

You have indeed taken good pains to improve your handwriting,
but there is room for plenty of improvement still. I have accepted
Kaka’s1 article. He should, therefore, send the second instalment. How
did you get conjunctivitis? Is the eye all right now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7467. Courtesy: Mahendra V. Desai

1

386

The addressee’s father
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

457. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR MORARJEE
September 3, 1934
CHI. SHANTIKUMAR,

Mr. Mung of Burma came and saw me two days ago. He said
that to Haji’s request he plunged into the Burmese question and
carried on such a powerful agitation that it even told on his health. He
has incurred, he says, an expense of Rs. 2,000. Since there has been
no result, neither the company nor Haji would now accept his
demand. They deny any understanding with him. He also expressed a
desire to see you. I have replied to him that everybody takes up such
work of his own free will and for the good of his people. If
somebody refuses to keep his promise, one should blame one’s own
stupidity. All the same, I have advised him to write to you. If Haji gave
a moral undertaking of any kind, I am of the view that Mr. Mung
should be reimbursed the expense which he has incurred. Please let
me know what the facts of the case are.
I hope you are doing well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4723. Courtesy: Shantikumar Morarjee

458. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
September 3, 1934
BHAI VALLABHBHAI,

Today I have crossed the limits in writing. My back forbids me
to go on any more. But I can’t obey the prohibitory order
immediately. I could read Narahari’s letter only today. I think some
injustice has been done to him. I see no reason at all why you should
have felt displeased with him in this matter. Since he could not put his
case before you in Bombay, he has stated it with the utmost humility
in his letter. The hope which he has expressed in it, that you would
dissuade Kaka and prevail over those who cannot co-opearte with him
to try and do so, is no doubt too much. However, it is only a request
that he has made. It betrays his ignorance of your nature. He should
have taken your letter to me as expressing your final view. It is qutie
clear and fully meets the requirements of the situation. I have told
Narahari that, if anybody can keep Kaka in Gujarat, it will have your
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

387

approval and your blessing. Kishorelal told me that you had written a
stiff letter to Narahari. If my argument appeals to you, please write a
soothing letter to him. In case you may want to read his letter again, I
am returning it.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—2: Sardar Vallabhbhaine, p. 131

459. SILENCE-DAY NOTE TO JAIRAMDAS DOULATRAM
[On or after] September [3] 1 , 1934
Send him papers and a brief account of what is going on. The
amounts to be sent to Anand I have forgotten. I told him there should
be some delay because of Jamnalal’s illness.2 But [if] you remember
them tell me.
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani.

460. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
September 4, 1934
CHI. ABBAS,

Write to Jutha Hirani and ask him what connection my not
going to the Harijan Ashram has with his self-purification. And tell
him that if self-purification could be brought about merely by
fasting, it would be as cheap as grass.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 6309

1

The first Monday of the month was on this date.
Vide also “Letter to Anand T. Hingorani”, 30-7-1934. “Letter to Anand T.
Hingorani” 23-8-1934.
2

388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

461. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
September 4, 1934
I got your letter. I chanced to see your writing on karmayoga
only yesterday and glanced through it. I will read it now if I get time.
What is this about music and cinema? Do they wish to turn the
Congress session into a Felix Circus or Barnum show? But, then, what
can I say in this matter? I do love music, but everything is good in its
place. If the three or four days of the Congress session are crowded
with such activities, the atmosphere of seriousness will disappear. Even
if they wish to arrange such programmes, somebody may be given a
contract for them. I am of the view, however, that no such
programmes can be arranged at the place where the [nation’s]
parliament meets. But we have turned the Congress into a tamasha.
Inclusion of genuine Indian music in a cent per cent swadeshi
exhibiton is legitimate. But only traditional instruments should be
used in such a programme. I can see no room at all for a band. You
may show this to Sardar. But if you wish to maintain discreet silence,
you may do so. You must have heard from Sardar about the step I am
contemplating. I will not, therefore, waste a few minutes of my time by
writing about it here.
Why inquire about my health? It was tested yesterday. I was
busy with the pen the whole day. There was no ill effect.
I dont’t know, however, if somebody here writes to you and
gives you a different report.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 152

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

389

462. DISCUSSION WITH DODD1
September 4, 1934
DR . DODD:

2

I have come to India , 10,000 miles, to see Taj which is a
monument of the past and Mahatma Gandhi which is a symbol of the future.
GANDHIJI : But why not become a living Taj than a dead Taj? And
why not a monument of the present than of the future ?
Is there any chance of your coming to America? Could we kidnap you to
America? We hear, you know, so much of kidnappers nowadays.

No, for the simple reason that I should be of no use there. If I
came there, it would be to demonstrate the secret and the beauty and
the power of non-violence. I should not be able to do it today. I have
not yet carried complete conviction to my own countrymen.
What is your main objective, Mr. Gandhi ?

The main objective is obvious and it is to gain independence,
not for the literate and the rich in India, but for the dumb millions.
I know. I have often come across that expression in your writings. What are
your methods?

Not many methods, but the one method of unadulterated truth
and non-violence. But you might ask me, ‘How are non-violence and
truth expressed and applied?’ I would say at once that the central fact
in my programme is the spinning-wheel. I know that Americans are
startled when I say this. What can be the meaning of this pet obsession,
they ask.
Not all Americans. Our daily paper one day criticized the spinning-wheel
programme and in the very next column had an article describing people working
with the shovel on a public thoroughfare, forty doing the work of a single machine.
In a letter to the editor, I drew his attention to the incongruity and told him that, just
as we were fighting unemp-loyment, India, too, was fighting unemployment. But
with you, Mr. Gandhi, it is moral and spiritual symbol, too?

Yes, of truth and non-violence. When as a nation we adopt the
spinning-wheel, we not only solve the question of unemployment but
we declare that we have no intention of exploiting any nation, and we
also end the exploitation of the poor by the rich. It is a spiritual force
1

This appeared as “A Talk with an American Friend” in Harijan. The date-line
and the first two paragraphs are reproduced from the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s
Diary.
2
Dodd was in charge of a girls’ college in America.

390

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

which in the initial stages works slowly, but as soon as it gets started, it
begins working in geometrical progression, i.e., when it gets into the
life of the people.When I say I want independence for the millions, I
mean to say not only that the millions may have something to eat and
to cover themselves with, but that they will be free from the
exploitation of people here and outside. We can never industrialize
India, unless, of course, we reduce our population from 350 millions
to 35 millions or hit upon markets wider than our own and dependent
on us. It is time we realized that, where there is unlimtied human
power, complicated machinery on a large scale has no place. An
Indian economist told me once that every American had 36 slaves, for,
the machine did the work of 36 slaves. Well, Americans may need that,
but not we. We cannot industrialize ourselves, unless we make up our
minds to enslave humanity.
Then, we have to fight untouchability. Untouchability of a kind
is everywhere. A coal porter coming from a coalmine would not
stretch out his hand to shake yours. He would say he would wash
himself cle clean first. But the moment a man has rendered himself
clean, he should cease to be untouchable. Here however we have
regarded a part of one population as perpetually untouchable.1 We are
trying to abolish that untouchability. Added to their untouchability is
unemployment, which they share in common with a vast number of
others. You, too, have got the unemployment problem, but it is of
your own creation. Our unemployment is not entirely of our creation,
but, however it came about, I am sure that, if my method was
universalized in India,we should not onlyfind work for those that exist
but for those to come. That is, we should easily be able to tackle our
population problem. The problem is to double the penny a day which
is the average income of a poor Indian. If we can achieve that, it
would be quite enough at least till we find a better method. The
spinning-wheel, by utilizing the idle hours of the nation, produces
additional wealth; it does not, it was never meant to, displace existing
employment. Give me a thing which would increase the daily income
of the millions of our impoverished people more than the spinningwheel, and I should gladly give up the spinning-wheel.
I quite see. We talk of shortening of the hours of work, but as to what they are
to do in their spare hours, we do not seem for a moment to trouble ourselves about.
1

This sentence is reproduced from the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary.

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

391

I would ask one more question, Mr. Gandhi. I have the opportunity of
speaking to many young men and women and I should like you to tell me what you
consider your most satisfactory achievement—I will not say your greatest
achievement, lest. I should embarrass you. In other words, what should I put before
the young people as a thing that they should aspire after in life?

It is a difficult question. I do not know what to say. I can simply
say this: I do not know whether you will call it an achievement or not,
but I may say that, in the midst of humiliation and so-called defeat
and a tempestuous life, I am able to retain my peace, because of an
undying faith in God, translated as Truth. We can describe God as
millions of things, but I have for myself adopted the simple formula—
“Truth is God’’.
I see it, I see it. You have achieved peace in a world of confusion and
turmoil.

But several American friends say to me, ‘You cannot have peace
unless you believe in Jesus.’ Well, I tell you I have peace, though I do
not believe in Jesus as the only son of God.
I am glad you said this. May I ask you to let me know your conception of
Christ ?

I consider him as a historical person—one of the greatest
amongst the teachers of mankind. I have studied his teachings as
prayerfully as I could, with the reverence of a Christian, in order to
discover the Truth that is buried in them. I have done so, just as I
have done about the teachings of other teachers.
In this connection, may I ask your opinion on the missionaries’ work in
India? Have they wronged India ?

I should not say intentionally. They, of course, come here as
critics, they exaggerate our social evils, they criticize our religion. But
that does not matter. All their criticism has but served to make us
more conscious of our weaknesses and more alive to our duties.
But that, I suppose, you say of missionaries as individuals, not of missionary
societies as such ?

I should not draw that distinction, for, missionary societies have
certain pre-conceived notions of our society and religion which the
members propagate. Thirty-five years ago, for instance, as I was
passing through Zanzibar, I went to the Bible Society to purchase a
copy of the Bible and with that I was given a report of work done by a
mission there. I was astounded to find therein that a missionary could
392

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

count his work in the terms of £. s. d. A convert meant so many
shillings, as to a recruiting agent a recruit means so many rupees. One
cannot think of a religion in the terms of the number of its adherents.
What, Mr. Gandhi, has been your greatest disappointment ?

Frankly, I have no sense of disappointment, excepting, perhaps,
that sometimes I am disappointed with myself, inasmuch as I cannot
control the fleeting thoughts as much as I should like to. That’s all.
What is the source of your ideals ?1

The source is truth or the uttermost identity with all life. Truth is
the realization of God.
One last thing, Mr. Gandhi. I am coming from the Congress of the Baptist
Christians in Germany. They took a firm stand on peace and racialism. I spoke there
on the ‘Gospel of the Day’ and spoke ‘on strict honesty and integrity in the business
of our life’ and ‘war as the most insane and unchristian thing on earth’. I made, in
conclusion, an appeal to all, coupled with my own declaration, that true Christians
everywhere should refuse to shoot down their Christian brethren whenever
Governments decided to go to war against any other nation. How much does that
proposition come near you ?

It would come very near me, if you were to drop out the word
‘Christian’ and said only ‘brethern’. I should refuse to shoot down
any human being, black or white, Christian or non-Christian. Your
declaration must apply to the whole humanity.
I mean it. I said ‘Christian brethren’, as I was addressing a group of Christians.

That is all right. I have to give this warning, because sometimes
it is thought that there is nothing wrong in shooting down so-called
savages.
No, no.
Harijan, 14-9-1934; also from the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary.
Courtesy: Narayan Desai

1

This and the following answer by Gandhiji, are reproduced from the
manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

393

463. LETTER TO VALLABHBHAI PATEL
[Before] September[5], 1934 1
DEAR VALLABHBHAI,

After much deliberation and discussions with friends who have
been to Wardha recently, I have come to the conclusion that the best
interests of the Congress and the nation will be served by my
completely severing all official or physical connection with the
Congress, including the original membership. This does not mean that
I cease to take any interest in an organization with which I have been
intimately connected since 1920 and which I have worshipped since
my youth. In spite of all I have recently said about the corruption that
has crept into the organization, it still remains, in my opinion, the most
powerful and the most representative nationl organization in the
country. It has a history of uninterrupted noble service and sacrifice
from its inception. Its progress has been unbroken and steady. It has
weathered storms as no other institution in the country has. It has
commanded the largest measure of sacrifice of which any country
would be proud. It has today the largest number of self-sacrificing
men and women of unimpeachable character.
It is not with a light heart that I leave this great organization. But
I feel that my remaining in it any longer is likely to do more harm
than good. I miss at this juncture the association and advice of
Jawaharlal who is bound to be the rightful helmsman of the
organization in the near future. I have, therefore, kept before me his
great spirit. And I feel that whilst his great affection for me would
want to keep me in the Congress, his reason would endorse the step I
have taken. And since a great organization cannot be governed by
affections but by cold reason, it is better for me to retire from a field
where my presence results in arresting full play of reason. Hence in
leaving the organization I feel that I am in no sense deserting one who
is much more than a comrade and whom no amount of political
differences will ever scparate from me.
Nor by retiring at this critical juncture am I less true to Babu
Rajendra Prasad who will in all probability be the President to the
1

Gandhiji had been having discussions on his withdrawal from active
leadership of the Congress; vide the following item. In his letter dated August 20 to
the addressee, Gandhiji had said that he would “prepare a draft” and send it to him.
This letter appears to be a draft of his “Statement to the Press” which was finally
released on September 17, 1934

394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

forthcoming Congress, and who unlike Jawaharlal shares most of my
ideals and whose sacrifice for the nation, judged whether in quality or
quantity, is not to be excelled.
Then there is the Congress Parliamentary Board which would
perhaps not have come into being, unless I had encouraged its
formation with my whole heart. It supplies a want that was felt be
many staunch and true Congressmen. It was necessary, therefore, to
bring it into being. Such services as I am capable of rendering will still
be at its disposal as at any Congressman’s. It must command the full
support of all Congressmen who have no insuperable objection to the
entry of Congressmen into the existing legislatures. I should be sorry
if the Board lost a single vote because of my withdrawal.
I fear none of the consequences dreaded by some friends, for I
know my ground. A tree is no more hurt by a ripe fruit falling from it
than would the Congress be by my going out of it. Indeed the fruit
will be dead weight, if it did not fall when it was fully ripe. Mine is
that condition. I feel that I am a dead weight on the Congress now.
There is a growing and vital difference of outlook between
many Congressmen and myself. My presence more and more
estranges the intelligentsia from the Congress. I feel that my policies
fail to convince their reason, though strange as it may appear, I do
nothing that does not satisfy my own reason. But my reason takes me
in a direction just the opposite of what many of the most intellectual
Congressmen would gladly and enthusiastically take, if they were not
hampered by their unexampled loyalty to me. No leader can expect
greater loyalty and devotion than I have received from intellectuallyminded Congressmen even when they have protested and signified
their disapproval of the policies I have laid before the Congress. I feel
that for me any more to draw upon this loyalty and devotion is to put
an undue strain upon them. I wish that those who strongly disapprove
of my method would outvote me and compel my retirement. I have
tried to reach that position but I have failed. They would cling to me
till the end. The only way I can requite such loyalty is by voluntary
retirement. I cannot work in opposition when ther are some
fundamental differences between the Congress intelligentsia and me.
Ever since my entry into public life I have never acted in that
manner. . . .1
Then there is the growing group of socialists. Jawaharlal is their
1

Omissions as in the source

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

395

undisputed leader. I know pretty well what he wants and stands for. He
claims to examine everything in a scientific spirit. He is courage
personified. He has many years of service in front of him. He has an
indomitalble faith in his mission. The socialist group represents his
views more or less, though probably their mode of execution is not
exactly his. That group is bound to grow in influence and importance.
I have welcomed the group. Many of them are respected and selfsacrifcing co-workers. With all this, I have fundamental differences
with them on the programme published in their authorized pamphlets.
But I would not, by reason of the moral pressure I may be able to
exert, suppress the spread of the ideas propounded in their literature.
My remaining in the Congress would amount to the exercise of such
pressure. I may not interfere with free expression of those ideas,
however distasteful some of them may be me. . . .1
For me to dominate the Congress in spite of these fundamental
differences is almost a species of violence which I must refrain from.
Their reason must be set free at any cost. Having discovered this
undisputable fact, I would be disloyal to the Congress if, even at the
risk of losing all my reputation, I did not leave the Congress.
But there is no danger to my reputation or that of the Congress, if
I leave only to serve it better in thought, word and deed. I do not
leave in anger or in a huff, nor yet in disappointment. I have no
disappointment in me. I see before me a bright future for the country.
Everything will go well, if we are true to ourselves. I have no other
programme before me save the Congress programme now before the
country. . . .2
In this and various other ways I would love to serve the Congress
in my own humble manner. Thus living in complete detachment, I
hope, I shall come closer to the Congress. Congressmen will then
accept my services without being embarrassed or oppressed.
One word to those who have given me their whole-hearted
devotion in thought, word and deed in the pursuit of the common
goal. My physical withdrawal from the Congress is not to be
understood to mean an invitation to them to withdraw. They will
remain in the Congress fold so long as the Congress needs them and
work out such common ideals as they have assimilated.
Yours,
BAPU
Mahatma, Vol. III, pp. 386-8
1
2

396

Omission as in the source
ibid
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

464. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
September 5, 1934
I am surprised that a responsible paper like The Hindu should
have published, without reference to me, unauthorized news about a
serious decision said to have been made by me. Surely the Wardha
correspondent could have the news confirmed or denied.1 It was
wrong to disclose incomplete and unauthorized reports of confidential
conversa-tions.
I may say that there have been discussions with co-workers in
the matter but no final decision have been taken. According to my
wont, I am sharing with friends, who happen to come to Wardha, the
thoughts that dominate me. Public life will become impossible if
exchange of views in the process of formation is at all published,
especially if they are reported as if they are decisions.
Whatever the decision that may be arrived at, it has and will have
no connection whatsoever with Malaviyaji and Mr. Aney.
Whilst every effort will be made to reconcile differences and
conduct the election campaign without friction with the new party that
has been created by Malaviyaji, there is no doubt whatsoever in my
mind or that of the members of the Working Committee that the
Congress Parliamentary Board should, with the full backing of the
Working Committee, prosecute the election campaign and in doing so
give full effect to the resolution of the Working Committee on the
Communal Award, in which it has an abiding faith and which, it
believes, is the only effective method of bringing about an agreed
solution between the communities concerned.
The Hindu, 5-9-1934

1

According to The Hindustan Times, 5-4-1934, the correspondent had
reported: “Mahatma Gandhi has decided to withdraw from the active leadership of the
Congress. . . The decision, it is understood, is due to differences with Pandit Malaviya
and others.” Vide also “Letter to Vallabhbhai Patel”, 19-8-1934.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

397

465. LETTER TO S. GANESAN
September 5, 1934
MY DEAR GANESAN,

I have your letter. I think it will be wise not to tackle any of the
candidates on this question for the simple reason that all Congress
members are bound to carry out the instructions issued from time to
time by the Congress. And Temple-entry Bill is such a highly
technical thing that it would be necessarily exploited by opponents.
And the only question that would embarrass would be not of opening
of temples but of the so-called legislative interference.
S HRI S. G ANESAN
TRIPLICANE
MADRAS
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

466. LETTER TO S. N. BOSE
September 5, 1934
DEAR SATYANANDA BABU,

I have your letter. You have put me several posers which, of
course, I shall bear in mind at the forthcoming meeting. Of course
these cession 1 of Malaviyaji and Bapuji Aney complicates the
situation. But these are the fortunes of political life.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI S ATYANANDA BOSE
4 NUNDY S TREET
BALLYGUNGE
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

398

From the Congress Parliamentary Board
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

467. LETTER TO DR. N. R. DHARMAVIR
September 5, 1934
DEAR DR. DHARMAVIR 1 ,

I thank you for your letter. If I could only allow myself
lemon-juice, I know there would be no difficulty in drinking
sufficient quantity of water with lemon-juice added. But my fasts do
not admit of the introduction of lemon-juice, for however low it may
be it has a food value apart from such value as water and salts have.
The problem before me therefore, is somewhat difficult—how to
overcome the disagre-eableness of water without taking anything with
it except soda or salt?
Yours sincerely,

DR. N. R. D HARMAVIR
P ADIHAM GROVE
DAVIS R OAD, L AHORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

468. LETTER TO MANGHARAM SANTDAS
September 5, 1934
MY DEAR SANTDAS,

I have your letter. You have good news from Atma. The
doctor’s report does not disturb me at all. Naturally he has to be
careful, and he has used an expression which need not frighten us. I
am already in correspondence with Polak. Any letter going from me
to Atma is likely to excite him. Therefore, for the time being I shall
confine myself to writing to Polak. I have already written to Mirabehn
or Agatha Harrison, I forget which, that Atma should be induced to
return to India2 . When the proper time comes I shall not fail to write to
Atma directly and press him to come back, because I am quite clear in
1

President, Gulabdevi Hospital Trust, Lahore. Gandhiji had opened the
hospital on July 17; vide “Speech at Gulabdevi Tuberculosis Hospital Lahore”,
17-7-1934
2
Actually, the reference is in Gandhiji’s letter to the addressee, vide “Letter to
Mangharam santdas” 25-8-1934.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

399

my mind that if he came here he would be quite all right. If
remains unhappy here, he might later on go back.

he

Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI MANGHARAM S ANTDAS
HYDERABAD (SIND)
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

469. LETTER TO G. R. SAHGAL
September 5, 1934
MY DEAR SAHGAL,

I have not been able to reply to you earlier. I am not able yet
to tell you definitely what I can do with you. 1 I do want to harness
your abilities for the Harijan cause. Would you care to go to Harijan
Asrham, Sabarmati, and be there for a few days or longer, and come
in contact with the workers there?The manager will then report to me
and you will also tell me how you feel there and what use you would
make of it if you were placed in charge. I am afraid that if you take
me on trust you may have a reaction and may be thoroughly
disappointed, or you may not be the man I picture you to be, and
then I or the co-workers might be disillusioned. I do not want either
tragedy to take place. And then it won’t be for me to take you. It
would be the Harijan Sevak Sangh which will have finally to decide.
But naturally they would be largely guided by me seeing that you will
be passed on to them through me. If you feel like going to Sabarmati
on a visit of exploration, you will tell me and I shall secure the
necessary permission for you. But you may, if you want to save time,
correspond directly with Sjt. Parikshitlal, the manager there,
mentioning this letter to him and I have no doubt that he will let you
go. And then perhaps it will be necessary for you to see me in Wardha
before I can finally make up my mind. If you do go to Sabarmati or
come to Wardha, you will naturally pay your own fare.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

Vide also “Letter to G. R. Sahgal”, 21-8-1934 and “Letter to G. R. Sahgal”,
26-8-1934

400

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

470. LETTER TO RAIHANA TYABJI
September 5, 1934
DEAR DAUGHTER RAIHANA,

What a letter! But the reply will have to be in English.1
You are a perfect fraud—a strange mystic who cannot rise
above the loving prejudices of parents. Your issue seems to me to be
quite correct. But why are you not satisfied with your being in the
right ! Must your neighbours, be they parents, also admit your claim
to be in the right? Why must not your knowledge that you are in the
right be its own satisfaction? Why should disappointments defeat you?
Or you must withdraw your claim to be spiritually-minded and
mystic. Mystics are made of sterner stuff—they are not ruffled by
misery or pain or insult nor elated by happiness, pleasure or praise.
If you say, they interfere with your action, it won’t hold water.
They do not prevent you bodily from 2 being absorbed in prayer or
contemplation for two hours or longer. I think you will find that all
your difficulties will dissolve, if without irritation, anger or
assertiveness you tell them with the greatest firmness and equal
gentleness and with a smile on your lips, that whatever you are doing
is a fundamental necessity of your being.
Whilst I say this you should know that my whole heart is with
you. You must have freedom of thought, speech and action. You
must be treated as a friend, not as a child. I am afraid that in your
resentment you have underrated the atmosphere of largeheartedness
and tolerance that is the speciality of Tyabjis. If you gave full credit
to them for this rare quality you would gladly overlook what appears
to be patronizing in their behaviour towards you. Remember that you
will not be you but for the training they gave you and the affection
with which they have surrounded you all. Do not be little the much
they have done for you. Do you know this great doha of Tulsida, the
mystic?

God has endowed His animate and inanimate creation with
good and bad qualities. The good man will sift and treasure the
1
2
3

The source has this and the superscription in Urdu.
The source has “for”.
Ramacharitamanasa, Balakanda

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

401

good from the bad even as the fabled swan separates and eats
the cream from the water and the milk he sees before him.
I advise you and ask you to follow the advice of your fellowmystic.
Tell me in reply that you have thrown overboard all your misery
and are singing away in praise of Allah the Good and the Benevolent.
My love to you and Saroj. Do you need thanks for Rs. 15 for
the Harijans?
BAPU
From a photostat: N. S. 9653. Also manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary.
Courtesy: Narayan Desai

471. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
September 5, 1934
CHI. MARY,

I have your two letters. The selections from the Upanishads are
prior to the Gita and therefore they were written between the tenth and
the fifth century (B.C.), if not much earlier. There are others which
are comparatively recent; but the Sanskrit selections are very few.
I am sorry for Miss Linforth’s loss. If she wants me to replace
it, I would gladly do so. But I should have the full text1 .
I hope you are completely restored. I am keeping quite well. I
have gained 8 lb. I walk freely, though on the terrace, and go through
a fair amount of work.
It is difficult to induce Harijans to spin. In some places we have
succeeded.
I send you through separate post one of Mirabehn’s letters for
you to read, which please return after use. There is no hurry about
returning it.
I am also sending you the latest number of Harijan.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 6027. Also C.W. 3356. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

1

402

Vide “A Prayer”, On or before 12-9-1934.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

472. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
September 5, 1934
BHAI THAKKAR BAPA,

I wish you had told me about Surajbehn in Poona itself. I didn’t
know at all that Deodhar and you had encouraged her to study [the
working of ] a maternity home. Many women can, and would like to,
run such a home. I would never think of engaging Surajbehn in work
which many other women can, and would like to, do. Moreover, as
Kishorelal says, such work does not seem to be included among our
objects. If I can, that is, am free to do so under the trust rules, I will
acquiesce in what Deodhar and you have approved, but if I have to
decide after seeing for myself, Surajbehn must vacate the building.
Read Kishorelal’s letter. I was surprised about Swami too. It
certainly does not become one who claims to be a satyagrahi to show
disrespect to a man or woman simply because he or she did not go to
jail. That is why I have given so much time to this matter. Please guide
me now.
Ghanshyamdas and I have had discussion, not exhaustive but
enough for our purpose. We have had a full discussion about the
Ashram. The draft will be dispatched tomorrow.
BAPU

About the remaining letters, some other time.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 1141

473. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
September 6, 1934
MY DEAR CHILD,

I held up your letter all these days in the hope of being able to
send the answer myself. But I must deny myself that pleasure and
dictate this letter if I am to overtake the arrears.
If proof were needed God is proving for me His greatness and
goodness every day. You remember the hymn “Count your many
blessings”. I think it is in Moody and Sankey’s Hymn Book. I can’t
even count the blessings, they are so many. For even the so-called
sorrows and pains He sends descend like blessings. If we knew His
love, we should know that He has nothing but blessings—and never
curses—for His creation.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

403

I hope Tangai is quite free and both the children are
flourishing. You must have now received the spinning-wheel. I hope
that Menon is well-settled.
I am flourishing. My weight has gone up from 94 to 101 lb. I
am going through a fair amount of work and taking regular exercise.
Mira is doing good work in London. She expects to be back in
October. Andrews was here for over a week and he has now gone to
Simla. He will come once more to Wardha before sailing, most
probably on the 6th October, for London. He was looking quite well.
He has brought a Welsh blacksmith with him from South Africa. Mr.
Jones, that is his name, has recently joined the Oxford movement and
considers himself a changed man. We all liked him very much. When
Andrews goes to England, he will go back to South Africa.
Pyarelal and Mahadev are here. Ba has gone with Ramdas to
Sabarmati where Ramdas is to have rest and cure for his ailment.
Devdas was here for a few days. He left yesterday for Bombay. He is
likely to come back for the Working Committee meeting on the 8th.
This, you will admit, is a fair family budget of news. You must write
more regularly than you have hitherto done. I don’t expect to move
from Wardha yet for some time.
With love to you all,
BAPU
MRS. ESTHER MENON
TANJORE
From a photostat: No. 20130. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also My
Dear Child, pp. 106-7

404

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

474. LETTER TO SURESH CHANDRA BANERJI
September 6, 1934
MY DEAR SURESH,

I have your letter. I was not able to reply to it earlier. I had a
chat with Birlaji. He is aggreeable to your spending from Rs. 2,000 to
3,000 on land and buildings, provided of course that they remain his
property. But you will be at liberty to inhabit the house free of rent or
any other charge so long as your health needs such residence. He
does not intend to make private use of such property. He will give it
for a charitable purpose, most probably for a Harijan hostel. But that
is a thing with which neither you nor I are concerned. I think that then
you won’t need Rs. 200, but only Rs. 60 per month. Observe too that
from October to December you will need not Rs. 200 but ranging
from Rs. 125 to 150. You will let me know in time what you would
require. And I hope that you will make steady improvement. You
must not encourage the thought that the disease is incurable and that
you have got to leave within a year or two.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI S URESH C HANDRA BANERJI
11/1 D ILKUSHA S TREET
P ARK C IRCUS, C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

475. LETTER TO B. J. MARATHEY
September 6, 1934
1

MY DEAR MARATHEY ,

I have sent2 you one thing in connection with Rajbhoj’s
complaint. I am expecting an answer from you. I now send you a
letter from Dr. Mulay which please return.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI B. J. MARATHEY
P OONA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
2

Secretary, Maharashtra Board, Harijan Sevak Sangh
Vide “Letter to P. N. Rajbhoj”, 31-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

405

476. LETTER TO BHASKAR MUKERJI
September 6, 1934
DEAR BHASKAR,

I thank you for your letter and whole statement of the work
done by the Corporation. I understand clearly now what you meant
when you said that the Corporation had no authority. The statement
does not show that the Corporation has done anything heroic. Let us,
however, hope that this year will show a marked improvement in the
treatment of these the most neglected and yet the most deserving of
the citizens of Calcutta.1
Love to you, ‘Baby’ and children.
S HRI BHASKAR MUKERJI
C ENTRAL MUNICIPAL OFFICE
C ORPORATION OF C ALCUTTA
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

477. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
September 6, 1934
MY DEAR SHANKERLAL,

I have the copy of Satisbabu’s letter to you regarding Hussanali
who has been recommended by the Maulana for khadi propaganda. I
share Satisbabu’s fear, but I think that Hussanali should be taken on
three month’s trial. But the ultimate decision, I should leave to you
and Satisbabu.
S HRI S HANKERLAL BANKER
AHMEDABAD
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

406

Vide also “Letter to Bhaskar Mukherji”, 18-8-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

478. VILLAGE TANNING AND ITS POSSIBILITIES
Village tanning is as ancient as India itself. No one can say when
tanning became a degraded calling. It could not have been so in
ancient times. But we know today that one of the most useful and
indispensable industries has consigned probably a million people to
hereditary untouchability. An evil day dawned upon this unhappy
country when labour began to be despised and, therefore, neglected.
Millions of those who were the salt of the earth, on whose industry this
country depended for its very existence, came to be regarded as low
class and the microscopic leisured few became the privileged classes,
with the tragic result that India suffered morally and materially. Which
was the greater of the two losses it is difficult, if not impossible, to
estimate. But the criminal neglect of the peasants and the artisans has
reduced us to pauperism, dulness and habitual idleness. With her
magnificent climate, lofty mountains, mighty rivers and an extensive
seaboard, India has limitless resources, whose full exploitation in her
village should have prevented poverty and disease. But the divorce of
the intellect from body-labour has made of us perhaps the shortestlived, most resourceless and most exploited nation on earth. The state
of village tanning is, perhaps, the best proof of my indictment. It was
the late Madhusudan Das who opened my eyes to the great crime
against a part of humanity. He sought to make reparation by opening
what might be called an educational tannery. His enterprise did not
come up to his expectations, but he was responsible for the livelihood
of hundreds of shoemakers in Cuttack.
It is estimated that rupees nine crores worth of raw hide is
annually exported from India and that much of it is returned to her in
the shape of manufactured articles. This means not only a material but
also an intellectual drain. We miss the training we should receive in
tanning and preparing the innumerable articles of leather we need for
daily use.
Tanning requires great technical skill. An army of chemists can
find scope for their inventive talent in this great industry. There are
two ways of developing it. One for the uplift of Harijans living in the
villages and eking out a bare sustenance, living in filth and
degradation and consigned to the village ghetto, isolated and away
from the village proper. This way means in part re-organization of
villages and taking art, education, cleanliness, prosperity and dignity
to them. This means also the application of chemical talent to village
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

407

uplift. Tanning chemists have to discover improved methods of
tanning. The village chemist has to stoop to conquer. He has to learn
and understand the crude village tanning, which is still in existence but
which is fast dying owing to neglect, not to say want of support. But
the crude method may not be summarily scrapped, at least not before
a sympathetic examination. It has served well for centuries. It could
not have done so, if it had no merit. The only research I know in this
direction is being carried on in Santiniketan, and then it was started at
the now defunct Ashram at Sabarmati. I have not been able to keep
myself in touch with the progress of the experiment at Santiniketan.
There is every prospect of its revival at the Harijan Ashram, which the
Sabarmati Ashram has now become. These experiments are mere
drops in the ocean of possible research.
Cow-preservation is an article of faith in Hinduism. No Harijan
worth his salt will kill cattle for good. But, having become
untouchable, he has learnt the evil habit of eating carrion. He will not
kill a cow but will eat with the greatest relish the flesh of a dead cow. It
may be physiologically harmless. But psychologically there is
nothing, perhaps, so repulsive as carrioneating. And yet, when a dead
cow is brought to a Harijan tanner’s house, it is a day of rejoicing for
the whole household. Children dance round the carcass, and as the
animal is flayed, they take hold of bones or pieces of flesh and throw
them at one another. As a tanner, who is living at the Harijan Ashram,
describing the scenes at his own now forsaken home, tells me, the
whole family is drunk with joy at the sight of the dead animal. I know
how hard I have found it working among Harijans to wean them from
the soul-destroying habit of eating carrion. Reformed tanning means
the automatic disappearance of carrion-eating.
Well, here is the use for high intelligence and the art of
dissection. Here is also a mighty step in the direction of cowpreservation. The cow must die at the hands of the butcher, unless we
learn the art of increasing her capacity of milk-giving, unless we
improve her stock and make her male progeny more useful for the
field and carrying burdens, unless we make scientific use of all her
excreta as manure and unless, when she and hers die, we are prepared
to make the wisest use of her hide, bone, flesh, entrails, etc.
I am just now concerned only with the carcass. It is well to
remember here that the village tanner, thank God, has to deal only
with the carcass, not the slaughtered animal. He has no means of
408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

bringing the dead animal in a decent way. He lifts it, drags it, and this
injures the skin and reduces the value of the hide. If the villagers and
the public knew the priceless and noble service the tanner renders,
they will provide easy and simple methods of carrying it, so as not to
injure the skin at all.
The next process is flaying the animal. This requires great skill.
I am told that none, not even surgeons, do this work better or more
expeditiously than the village tanner does with his village knife. I have
inquired of those who should know. They have not been able to show
me an improvement upon the village tanner. This is not to say that
there is none better. I merely give the reader the benefit of my own
very limited experience. The village tanner has no use for the bone.
He throws it away. Dogs hover round the carcass, whilst it is flayed,
and take away some, if not all, of the bones. This is a dead loss to the
country. The bones, if powdered fine, apart from their other uses,
make valuable manure. What remains after the dogs have taken away
their share is transported to foreign countries and returns to us in the
shape of handles, buttons, etc.
The second way is urbanizing this great industry. There are
several tanneries in India doing this work. Their examination is
outside the scope of this article. This urbanization can do little good
to the Harijans, much less to the villages. It is a process of double
drain from the villages. Urbanization in India is slow but sure death
for her villages and villagers. Urbanization can never support ninety
per cent of India’s population, which is living in her 7,00,000
villages. To remove from these villages tanning and such other
industries is to remove what little opportunity there still is for making
skilled use of the hand and the head. And when the village handicrafts
disappear, the villagers working only with their cattle on the field, with
idleness for six or four months in the year, must, in the words of
Madhusudan Das, be reduced to the level of the beast and be without
proper nourishment, either of the mind or the body, and, therefore,
without joy and without hope.
Here is work for the cent-per-cent swadeshi-lover and scope for
the harnessing of technical skill to the solution of a great problem.
The work fells three apples with one throw. It serves the Harijans, it
serves the villagers and it means honourable employment for the
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

409

middle-class intelligentsia who are in search of employment. Add to
this the fact that the intelligentsia have a proper opportunity of
coming in direct touch with the villagers.
Harijan, 7-9-1934

479. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
September 7, 1934
Unrevised
CHI. MIRA,

I must not attempt to write to you this week. I have too much to
attend to immediately to undertake 1 a long letter to you. Mahadev
must have written at least. This is just to tell you that I am getting on
quite well and working almost full speed. There is nothing to worry
about myself.
I hope the storm about Agatha and Muriel is entirely over and
that the associations between them and you are sweeter than ever.
I have the Parliamentary Board and Working Committee
meetings before me. Before this reaches you, you will see some
startling announcement.2 You should not worry about it at all there.
Ba has gone to Sabarmati Harijan Ashram in charge of Ramdas
who is going to have treatment there under Dr. Sharma. Ramdas’s
health has broken down completely, though there is nothing
organically wrong about him. But Ba was anxious about him and
offered to go with Ramdas. I was also pleased. Devdas was here and
passed a few days with us. Khan Brothers are here and I am having a
very nice time with them. To be with them more, is to love them more.
They are so nice, so simple and yet so penetrative. They do not beat
about the bush.
Love.
BAPU
S HRIMATI MIRABEHN
LONDON
From the original: C. W. 6297. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G. N. 9763

1

The source has ‘‘as to overtake’’.
The reference is to his resignation from the Congress; vide “Speech at
A.I.C.C. Meeting, Patna-I”, 18-5-1934
2

410

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

480. LETTER TO NURGISBEHN CAPTAIN
September 7, 1934
I have been withholding replies to your letters and Khurshed’s
as you had expected none from me and as I had wanted to save as
much time and energy as I possibly could. But your last letter
demands an answer. I must not postpone it for writing the reply
myself.
I see no objection to your using swadeshi yarn for embroidery
so long as we cannot procure a hand-spun yarn suitable for
embroidery work. My justification for this latitude is this: embroidery
is no part of original khadi; but embroidery is simply superadded
even as we use sewing thread for preparing clothes, or use even
foreign dyes in order to enhance the salability of khadi.
I am glad Khurshed is looking better. When are you proposing
to do likewise? Khan Brothers are here and I am having a glorious
time with them. I am having quiet discussions with them twice daily
for about two hours. They are both free and penetrative.
You will be presently seeing another startling announcement
from me. Don’t you be anxious or inquisitive. It is better not to hawk
about the proposed decision so that I can safely make the announcement. There is nothing that I can possibly have to withhold from
you, but I do not want to write anything about it.
Love to you all. I suppose I must not expect any letter from
Jamnabehn.
S HRI NURGISBEHN C APTAIN
78 NAPEAN R OAD, B OMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

411

481. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
September 7, 1934
DEAR SATISBABU,

I have your several letters as also the ink-bottle. I must report to
you on the ink later on. Did you prepare it specially for me, or did
you prepare it for the general market ?
What about Kshitishbabu’s experiment in dried milk? I wonder
if he has received my letter1 sent through you. So far as I am aware he
has been silent.
Have you yet got charge of the Harijan office? You have asked
me for suggestions about welfare scheme for Bengal Harijans. I can’t
think of anything special. You must, therefore, refer to Harijan for
whatever I had said, and adopt with necessary modifications whatever
you may find to be suitable there. Of course your problem is
somewhat different from the problem elsewhere. You will carefuly
study the article2 I have sent to Harijan on tanning.
Are you making progress with your “Guide for Village
Workers” on treatment of simple diseases and accidents?
In Onward I see an advertisement on strawboards manufactured
by Kuver Board Limited, Mill Department, 84 Clive Street, Calcutta.
The advertisement says it is manufactured through Indian capital,
Indian labour and Indian material. What are these strawboards? Are
they of any use for Yeravda Charkha ?
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy ; Pyarelal

1
2

412

Vide “Letter to Kashitish Chandra Das Gupta”, 24-8-1934
Vide “Village Tanning and its Possibilitites” 7-9-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

482. LETTER TO PURATAN J. BUCH
September 7, 1934
CHI. PURATAN,

I got your letter. If you were not cheated when you parted with
the hundred rupees, what else could it be? If you were not cheated,
what mistake did you acknowledge? As for myself, I believe that you
have been cheated. Would a poor man give away a hundred rupees for
the sake of a joke? I am afraid, I have no hope that you will either get
the Rs. 100 or the money for the bill. If this does not happen again,
let us take it as an easy atonement.
Have we to debit the money which Parikshitlal gave for his
board to the Charkha Sangh? We cannot debit it to the Harijan Fund.
Have you taken the right amount of rent for their lodging? What is the
rate of rent?
Tell Parikshitlal that I have written a letter to a palace official at
Lakhtar. Let us see what happens.
Are you keeping fit?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 4046. Also C.W. 160. Courtesy:
Parikshitlal L. Majmudar

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

413

483. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI A. MEHTA
September 7, 1934
BHAI BHAGWANJI,

I got both your letters. I have been doing Indian States’ work
according to my lights and ability. The principle of ahimsa is founded
on the assumption that every human being is capable of reform. Since
I cannot give up this faith, some difference of opinion between you
and me will always remain.
I understand about Prabhashankar. He will be meeting me next
week, and I will, then, talk with him about the matter too.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G. N. 5824. Also C.W. 3047. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

414

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

484. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
September 7, 1934
CHI. NARAHARI,

I have your letter. You must have got mine.
I have purposely and after due thought sent Ramdas [to the
Ashram]. The result lies in God’s hands. Surendra is engrossed in
doing his duty there. How could I call him away? Ramdas’s illness is
more mental than physical. According to me, the good company that
he will get there will itself help like medicine.
Give only such help as you easily can without going out of your
way. I have not created new work for you in this.
You may go to the Ashram when you are completely free. I am
trying to send you the letter which you require. Why should you feel
afraid of Thakkar Bapa? All of us have some idiosyncracies and we
should tolerate one another’s. I am sure you will be able to manage.
And in the last resort I am always there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 9064

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

415

485. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
[September 7, 1934] 1
CHI. SHARMA,

I did not mind your not visiting me, rather I appreciated it. I
took it that you wished to save my time.2
I do not see much reason for calling the doctor. You ought to
know the processes of examining the urine and the stools. But I am
sending a letter, you may certainly use it if you want to.
I shall write to Ba and advise her to express her opinions freely.
I had already told her to do so. I shall at once inform you of whatever
Ba writes to me.
Enquire into the arrangement 3 at Jamnagar and write to me. I
shall find out the details later and write about it. I quite like your
intention of cooking for yourself but you must not be adamant about
it. What do you cook ?
I shall let you know immediately the news I receive from
Phoenix. You can send for Draupadi when it is all fixed up. I had
written to her.4 If you have gained some experience and things are
progressing well so that Ramdas need not at all go to South Africa,
Draupadi can be immediately sent for. We shall know something
definite on Monday.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
It was good that you met Mogheji. The sum of Rs. 152 was
deposited in the Ashram that very day. I have enquired about the
goods and am awaiting a reply.
BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha,
1932-48 , between pp. 92-3

1

As supplied by the addressee
The addressee had gone to Sabarmati without meeting Gandhiji and had
apologized for it.
3
The Ruler of Jamnagar had built a solarium for his personal use.
4
Vide “Letter to Draupadi Sharma”, 2-9-1934
2

416

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

486. LETTER TO MOTILAL DEEVDA
September 7, 1934
1

BHAI MOTILAL DEEVDA ,

I had your telegram. Also your letter. I could not reply
promptly for lack of time. Please excuse me. It was not possible to
send a wire in reply to the wire.
The matter of. . .’s 2 second marriage is being discussed. The
future alone can show what the ultimate outcome will be and, whether
or not he will get my blessings as well as his elders’. His present wife,
although more than 20, has, because of her illness, the appearance of a
twelve year old. She is incapable of bearing children. She heartily
consents to. . .’s second marriage. For years she will not be able to
lead conjugal life, so she wishes to take up a life of service. If he
marries again there is a talk of satisfactory maintenance for her by . . .
and his father. . . . feels the need for a wife. I believe it is in
conformity with dharma to enable him to lead a restrained married
life with a suitable wife. And he should be able to get the blessings of
all pious men and women. All this, however, depends upon the purity
and restraint of. . . .Nothing will be done in haste. All his kith and kin
are keen about preservation of dharma. The best thing for. . . would
be to exercise total restraint and overcome his passions. But only one
among a million young men can do this. We should all pray to God to
grant. . . such strength.
In the interest of. . ., I request you not to publish this letter nor
to discuss this matter publicly. If you wish to convey something to me,
certainly do so.3
Yours,
From a copy of the Hindi: G. W. 10220. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

1

President of the Marwari Sabha
The name has been omitted.
3
Under Gandhiji’s instructions, Prabhavati had sent a copy of this letter to G.
D. Birla.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

417

487. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ1
September 8, 1934
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have been regularly getting your letters and also reports about
your health. You seem to enjoy God’s kindness in full measure, for
the wound is healing more quickly than the doctors had expected. Do
not be in the slightest hurry to leave. Leave only after the wound has
healed completely. I like your idea of going to Sinhgad. There you
will also get Mehta’s help whenever needed. The climate is certainly
very good. The water is very light. The place, therefore, will do you
much good. Nor is it very far.
Do not talk much. Even when necessary, talk in a low voice and
not with a full voice. The effort to speak has always some effect on the
ear.
Avoid rice and dal. I am sure that will do you much good. Rely
more on milk. Curds should not be even slightly sour. Go on
gradually increasing exercise as much as the doctors permit from time
to time. Do not worry about anything. If you follow this regimen, it
will not only be good for the ear but will also refresh the brain.
Malaviyaji came today. He is accompanied by Radhakant. Ali
and Khaliq [uz-Zaman] also have come. The others will come
tomorrow.
Khanbhai is very happy. He is with me every morning when I
go for a walk and also from 4-5 in the evening. We discuss the
problems at leisure one by one.
You must have heard Pagali’s story regarding myself. I do not
want to bother you with it now. You may offer your criticism later
when you are completely all right. I think you will approve of
everything.
Om stays with me all the time and helps as and when required.
Four or rather five girls are doing the work which could be done by
one or two girls. Each, therefore, gets very little to do. As you know,
Prabhavati will not let the other girls do much. Moreover Madalasa
also comes to claim her share.
Radhakisan keeps worrying so much because of your
instructions that, though he keeps careful watch over me, he is always
1

418

This was written before 3.30 a.m. ; vide the following item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

afraid lest he may be blamed. I do get up very early. I do not need
more sleep and I feel light during the day if I have finished my work
in the morning. Now the weight will increase slowly. The quantity of
food cannot be increased, so what I eat now will increase the weight
slowly. I think that is better. Strength is growing steadily. I take a
short nap during daytime and am in bed at 8.45 p.m., or at the latest
by 9 p.m. Thus nobody can blame me for not taking enough care of
my health. I shall be here till you come and even after that. I shall not
go anywhere unless there is some reason.
Andrews is returning on Sunday. Kumarappa has taken 20
days’ leave. I will send him back as soon as the period is over. He will
arrive here on Tuesday.
The girls seem to be progressing quite well. Vinoba himself
supervises everything. I therefore, don’t have to interfere with
anything.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I forgot about Assam. If you know the Congressmen there, send
the Assam money to them. If you don’t know, then send the money
to Jwalaprasad. The Marwari Relief Committee is working there. This
amount should be added to its funds. Do what you think best.
[From Gujarati]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, pp. 134-5

488. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 8, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have your letter of the 6th.
I have asked Narahari to inquire into the facts regarding the
dairy and let me have his opinion. I will not forget about this matter.
I am still not able to take sufficient rest. I have again started
getting up at 2.30. The bed itself pushes me out and I welcome that. It
is 3.30 just now. I have started writing this after finishing one to
Jamnalal.
I can’t think what to do regarding Chimanlal and Sharda. One
thing is clear to me. Sharda’s living with Chimanlal may not be for
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

419

her good. If her devotion to her father has become her sole passion,
she may, though ill herself, sacrifice her health in nursing Chimanlal.
We come across many such instances in Europe. I don’t remember to
have seen any among us. But the education which we give is certainly
likely to produce girls of this type. Such idealism endures only if it
grows spontaneously. If Sharda does not possess this spirit, she should
have regard for her health and leave Chimanlal. She may come and
live here. There are other girls of her age here, and among them there
are ten Gujarati girls even, including Vali. The climate also is
excellent. I, too, shall be here for some time. In any case my
headquaters will continue to be here. There are good arrangements
for study, too. It is desirable that one who is ill should not nurse
another sick person. Shakaribehn should undertake to look after
Chimanlal. The latter should stop eating solid food and live only on
milk and fruit. A pure milk-diet has been found to have beneficial
effect, but I think such an experiment is too drastic. A mixed diet of
milk and fruit is found best. Even if such a diet brings on weakness, I
would advise Chimanlal not to mind it but persevere in the experiment
patiently. Sharma is at Sabarmati now. He has renounced everything
in order to live with Ramdas. That is why he has taken Ramdas with
him and gone to Sabarmati. Ba has gone there to look after Ramdas.
You may, if you wish, consult Sharma [regarding Chimanlal]; I have
had experience of his goodness. I cannot say, though, anything
regarding his competence as a doctor. All the same, there can be no
harm in consulting him. Milk and fruit, however, are both food and
medicine. Anybody who is not benefited by them is hardly likely to
be benefited by anything else. Water and sun treatments also should
go on at the same time. The chief thing in my advice is the suggestion
regarding Sharda. Both of you should please think over it.
My personal needs are being looked after by Prabhavati,
Amtussalaam, Vasumati and Om. Amala also does some work. But I
am really afraid that she will go off her head one day. She is hardly in
her senses. She is growing thinner everyday. And now she has become
impatient to marry. I observe that she is not free from passion. In
consequence of her trying to suppress it, it has become
uncontrollable. She hopes to be mother of twelve children. She is 37
at present. Let us see what she does. I don’t have the courage now to
send her to you or somewhere else. She is trying to get a job in some
college. I don’t mind if she succeeds by her own efforts. But I don’t
intend to recommend her to anybody. I don’t worry, but the fact
420

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

remains that the responsibility of looking after her has become more
difficult.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
What has been decided regarding Keshu’s marriage?
From the microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8412. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

489. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
September 8, 1934
DEAR SATISBABU,

You have given a dismal picture. But it does not disturb me. The
atmosphere will undoubtedly clear up presently. You will have seen
my counter-statement1 about retiring from the Congress. Discussions
are going on. So far as I am concerned, I am most anxious to leave
the Congress and serve it from being out of it. I have drawn up a
statement which I propose to discuss with the Working Committee.
You will know the result in due time. The thing that is deeper than the
corruption is the
fundamental differences between many Congreesmen and myself. But
let me not anticipate. Let the constructive workers go on with their
work.
Constructive workers must not touch any newspaper enterprise,
and certainly not at this time. Nor do I agree with you that a paper
with balanced views is required at this time. An outspoken paper in the
face of the Press laws is an impossibility unless it eschews politics
altogether. But that is not what you mean. You want something to
counterbalance the poisons. That means having to deal with politics
also.
How much ink have you prepared? What is the use of
distributing things gratis unless it is for advertisement?
I hope Hemprabha is going on well.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 5-9-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

421

490. LETTER TO NARAYANASWAMY
September 8, 1934
MY DEAR NARAYANASWAMY,

I was delighted to receive your letter. I also got the packet of
ashes. They will be consigned to the Ganges in due course.
I hope you have a good wife and that you are happy. If she is
educated, if she can write, let her do so.
I understand that you have financial difficulties. The only
advice I can give you is: “Do not borrow.” What honestly and
industriously you find, you will take and keep up father’s reputation.
The real capital young men need is a good body, a good character
and tireless industry.
I shall wait for Parthasarathy’s and Sesamae’s letters. You
should continue to write to me.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI NARAYANASWAMY
174 P RESIDENT S TREET
JOHANNESBURG
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

491. LETTER TO RAMACHANDRAN
September 8, 1934
MY DEAR RAMACHANDRAN,

I have not been able to answer your enquiry earlier. Gandhi
Seva Sangh is just now undergoing a thorough overhauling and is
about to adopt some drastic changes. The allowances made hitherto
had been on a liberal scale. But it is being redically revised. And then
if these changes are to come into force, Jamnalalji is not taking any
part in it. He is still undergoing treatment in Bombay and would not
be able to attend to regular work before a few months perhaps. He has
got to take rest in a quiet place before he resumes normal activity.
Meantime you may tell me what your personal requirements are.
S HRI R AMACHANDRAN
BANGALORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

422

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

492. LETTER TO B. J. MARATHEY
September 8, 1934
MY DEAR MARATHEY,

I am glad you have sent me an exhaustive reply, and that too
promptly, to my inquiry.1 I shall now make use of it.2
Yours sincerely,

S HRI B. J. MARATHEY
S ECRETARY, H.S.S.
MAHARASHTRA BOARD
P OONA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

493. LETTER TO GULZARILAL NANDA
September 8, 1934
MY DEAR GULZARILAL,

I am glad you are keeping me informed of what is going on
there. It is a fine thing that the proceedings are being conducted in a
perfectly orderly manner. That means real solid work.
I am keeping quite well.
S HRI GULZARILAL NANDA
45 C HOWPATTY
BOMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide “Letter to B. J. Marathey”, 6-9-1934
It was published in Harijan, 28-9-1934; vide, “Maharashtra Harijan Sevak
Sangh”, 28-9-1934. vide also “Letter to Dr. B. V. Mulay”, 12-9-1934.
2

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

423

494. LETTER TO LILAVATI
September 8, 1934
CHI. LILAVATI,

I got your letter. If you hear from Siddhimati, give me the news
about her.
Do all of you eat your meals at different times or together? How
many take your meals together? Do you get any fruit there? Do you
get good milk?
What books do you read? I should like you to improve your
handwriting still further.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujrati: G. N. 9329. Also C.W. 6604. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

495. LETTER TO ANNAPURNA
September 8, 1934
CHI. ANNAPURNA,

I have your letter. My congratulations to Father on leading
everyone in speed. Your note does not indicate the count and
uniformity of yarn. You must find it. I suppose you know the way of
finding it. The method used for villages is very simple. Give me your
opinion about the yarn spun on the bamboo spinning-wheel. What is
the circumference of the wheel ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2792

424

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

496. LETTER TO NIRUPAMA
September 8, 1934
CHI. NIRUPAMA,

I have your letter. It is nice of you to write. I am absolutely all
right now. Do keep on writing.
Blessings from

BAPU
KUMARI NIRUPAMA
S UDAMA KUTIR, U DIPI
KARNATAK
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 9225

497. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVLEKAR
September 9, 1934
BHAI SATAVLEKAR,

I have your letter. Pre-marital intercourse is ruinous to health,
moral as well as physical.
Journals propagating such morality are knowingly or
unknowingly the enemies of society. My submission to young men
and women is that they will do immense harm to themselves and the
nation by such licentious behaviour.
Is Dr. Kelkar there? If not, where is he and what is he doing?
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
P ANDIT S HRI S ATAVLEKAR
S VADHYAYA MANDAL
AUNDH
S ATARA DISTRICT
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. W. 4775. Courtesy: S. D. Satavlekar

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

425

498. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 11, 1934
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got your letter.
I knew that the important letter which I worte 1 to you would
certainly put you in difficulty. I think what I expected you to do was
unreasonable. I was plainly guilty of violence. But I thought it would
be a great trouble to re-write such a long letter, and this desire to spare
myself increased the magnitude of my violence. God knows how
many times I must be committing such violence everyday. The path
of renunciation of work was discovered to save us from such dangers.
But only one person out of ten million can follow it. Can a person
who does nothing outwardly but whose mind is always busy be
regarded as observing non-violence? For us, therefore, the only course
is to go on working and committing errors and to strive all the time to
remain inactive inwardly and reduce the number of our errors from
day to day.
I have wired to Kanu and told him that he may come, so that his
days may not be wasted. It seems my letters take four days to reach
you.
I am sending to you a letter which I have received from the
Superintendent at Dhulia. It will be sent by book post. I have just
given it to Vinoba to read.
I have still not received Mathuradas’s reply. Lilavati may
certainly come here in the vacation. I know her very well. Her
unsteadiness is incurable.
The women are doing well as teachers. Even if only 50 per cent
of them became permanent here, the Bal Mandir will run well.
. . .2 had started indulging his passion as early as the time when
he was at Sabarmati. And he had no scruples in telling lies either. He
has now written a letter of repentance to Balkrishna and asked what he
should do for atonement.
Amala’s case is different. As she has got a job in Santiniketan
for teaching French, she is quite cheerful these days. She will go in a
few days. She is only waiting for the final reply.
1
2

426

Vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 8-9-1934
The name has been omitted.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I shall be able to decide about the dairy at Sabarmati only after
Narahari has gone there.
Sumitra has trouble in one of her eyes, and so Ba is
accompanying her to Bombay today for treatment.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M. M.U./I. Also C.W. 8413. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

499. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI 1
September 11, 1934
CHI. MATHURADAS,

You have completed 40 years. Does it not mean that out of the
100 years 40 years are gone? If we reckon the years in this way, we
can also say that as time passes our span of life becomes shorter. Live
your remaining 60 years as you did your 40 and add to the sum of
your achievements so far.
You must not imagine that I have time to indulge in unnecessary
talk with Nariman or anyone else. My time is as occupied as you have
so far known it to be. God is sustaining me.
Who can send you letters now? Mahadev is wholly tied up. So is
Pyarelal. Nor does Prithuraj find time in the midst of his work. That
leaves the young women. Your hunger should be satisfied. Let me see.
You have not sent me your book on karmayoga. But I chanced
upon it. I read it every day in the library. I shall finish it in a few days.
I like the work. You have tried to say a lot in a few pages. This will
make it difficult for the uninformed. The binding is bad. What is the
demand it has elicited? Does Vicharsrishti 2 sell?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
Extracts from this letter appear in “Letter to Mathuradas Trikumji”,
11-9-1934
2
Gandhijini Vicharsrishti, compiled by the addressee

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

427

500. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
September 11, 1934
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I have your letter. The last two letters received from
Damodardas have been sent on to you. I find something quite
different in them. He says there is some misunderstanding on your
part. Or is it mine? You yourself must write to Damodardas, and me,
too, what precisely you told me. This, now, cuts the ground away from
under any charge against Keshu, Santok and Radha. The words you
quoted from the letter of Damodardas also are rendered insignificant.
You remember, do you not? I am nervous. I am behaving contrary to
my nature. How can I remain at peace while I harbour the least doubt
about Santok and others? And how can I disbelieve what you have
told me? I have no knowledge at all as to when I shall go to Bombay.
Possibly I may go in October during the Congress session. And there
will be no time then for talking to Damodardas.
I hope you are keeping well there and there has been no
recurrence of fever.
If you have money enough to send to Radha, why can you not
send to me? On the one hand your brothers are under debt, it is not
known if the house ever will be saved or not, yet you are capable of
shouldering the burden of Radha’s expenses! Don’t you know that
Radha is provided for? There has never been any trouble in meeting
her expenses. You may certainly help me if you wish to. Are you
asking for my permission to send money to Radha over and above her
present allowance? If so, why?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G. N. 2423

428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

501. A PRAYER1
[ On or before September 12, 1934] 2
Lord of humility, dwelling in the little pariah hut, help us to
search for Thee throughout that fair land watered by Ganges,
Brahmaputra and Jumna. Give us receptiveness, give us openheartedness, give us Thy humility, give us the ability and willingness to
identify ourselves with the masses of India.
O God, who does help only when man feels utterly humble,
grant that we may not be isolated from the people we would serve as
servants and friends. Let us be embodiments of self-sacrifice,
embodiments of godliness, humility personified, that we may know
the land better and love it more.
Bapu—Conversations and Correspondence, pp. 88-9

502. TELEGRAM TO HIRALAL SHARMA
September 12, 1934
S HARMA
ASHRAM
S ABARMATI
NO HURRY GOING HOME. 3 I MUST HOLD YOU YOUR PROMISE. PRODUCE
SATISFACTORY
RAMDAS

CERTIFICATE

DAILY

THERE.

WRITING4

TOMORROW.

WIRE

PROGRESS.

BAPU
From a facsimile: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha, 1932-48,
facing p. 95

1

The prayer was an enclosure to “Letter to F. Mary Barr”, pp. 437-8. In the
source, Mary Barr explains: “Miss Linforth is an Englishwoman who was then
working at a Hyderabad Welfare Centre run by an intercommunal committee of
Hindus, Mussalmans, Christians and Parsis. She had asked me to get Gandhi to give
her a message. So he enclosed in his letter to me this little prayer, which she framed
and put in her Centre.”
2
ibid
3
The addressee had sought Gandhiji’s permission to go back to Khurja to
attend to his ailing son.
4
Vide “Letter to Hiralal Sharma”, 13-9-1934
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

429

503. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
September 12, 1934
MY DEAR BROTHER,

It is just 3 a.m. This is the first letter I take up after mouth wash.
My whole heart goes out to you all. Who am I to judge your delicate
and domestic affairs? You have granted me the unique privilege of
knowing your secrets. I may not abuse it. I do not know the
implications of the actualities as they happen. But this mute warfare
must cease, if you and Raihana are to have peace. If I were you, I
would either let her have her way ungrudgingly and joyously or give
her a separate house and maintenance and let her have her way. She is
too much of an invalid to be left to her own resources. I should not
bother about Hamida, she is no freak like Raihana. Raihana has no
marriage in store for her. So far as I am aware she is a stranger to the
sensuous passion. I wish I could give you a cheery letter, but I cannot.
Having read this you would do as [the] Great Spirit guides1 you.
With deep love to you all.
Yours,

M. K. G.
ABBAS TYABJI
BARODA
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

504. LETTER TO F. MARY BARR
September 12, 1934
CHI. MARY,

I have your letter full of information about your activities. Here
is a little note2 for Miss Linforth. It is written on hand-made paper of
which I happen to possess a few sheets.
You can certainly send Mira’s letter to your sister and when you
write to her please give her my love. So far as I am aware she owes me
a letter.
I should not consider you to be buried in your books uselessly
when you are studying Hindi for the sake of your work.
1
2

430

The source has “guards”.
Vide “A Prayer”, 12-9-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You will duly report to me how your cotton seeds have
behaved.1
The wise use you can make of the flesh of a dead cow is to
extract tallow from it which can be used in a variety of ways. The
bones can be used as manure.2
I am sending your letter to Jamnalalji.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G. N. 6028. Also C.W. 3357. Courtesy: F. Mary Barr

505. LETTER TO DR. B. V. MULAY
September 12, 1934
DEAR FRIEND,

In continuation of my letter to you regarding your complaint
about the Sholapur Dispensary, I have now a letter from the Secretary
of the Harijan Sevak Sangh, Maharashtra Board, from which I find
that the grant was being voted and was given only after Thakkar Bapa
had inspected everything and satisfied himself about it. In the
circumstances the only thing that I can say to you is that if you are
not satisfied with this recommendation, you have to write to the
President of the Central Board at Delhi. As you may know, I have no
official status in the Sangh. My connection therefore is purely moral.
It is only on rare occasions that I tender my advice to the Board. In
this connection I don’t feel called upon to do anything beyond what I
have done.
Yours sincerely,

DR. B. V. MULAY, M. S.
S HOLAPUR
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

In Bapu—Conversations and Correspondence, p. 89, the addressee explains
: “The reference to cotton seed was concerning some experiments I was making in
growing a certain kind of cotton which had not previously been grown in the
district.”
2
“The advice about the use of a dead cow must have been for some village man,
for I had no cow, either dead or alive” (ibid).
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

431

506. LETTER TO B. J. MARATHEY
September 12, 1934
DEAR MARATHEY,

I have your prompt letter in reply to mine1 of 6th instant. I have
now written a suitable letter2 to Dr. Mulay.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

507. LETTER TO SAUDAMINI MEHTA
September 12, 1934
CHI. SAUDAMINI,

I got your letter.
I agree with you that if I knew as much about. . .’s3 case as I do
about. . .’s, my opinion would perhaps soften. I made the remarks in
question when I read. . .’s defence and . . .’s outpouring of her grief.
However, if I became more intimate with all the persons involved, I
would perhaps have a better understanding of their points of view.
The conclusion to be drawn from this is that before criticizing
anybody’s action one must go deep into the matter. Since this is not
easy to do, the golden rule is not to criticize anybody. I know how to
follow this rule and rarely criticize people, though it is true of course
that I occasionally pass hasty criticism on persons with whom I am
connected in some way. I am still not free from that measure of
attachment. Such subtle attachments cannot be overcome by an act of
will. They weaken gradually through prolonged effort.
Let me give you some more information about . . .’s case. Even
today all his elders except. . .are against his marrying again. If I had
not supported his intention, the idea of second marriage would have
been abandoned. I came to know. . .first. The moment I saw her, I felt
that a girl like her was unfit for conjugal life and that she would never
be able to satisfy . . . sexually. Before I came to know her and take
interest in her life, she used to tremble in. . .’s presence, talked with
none and always wore an unhappy look. Now she talks frankly with
everybody and can even joke. She expresses her views quite freely.
She and. . .gave me their letters to each other to read. The sole cause
1

Vide “Letter to B. J. Marathey”, 6-9-1934
Vide the preceding item.
3
This and other names have been omitted.
2

432

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of her worry is the fact that . . .has not taken another wife. As long as
he has not done so, she does not feel herself safe in her relations with
him and with their elders. Other members of the family keep taunting
her for her inability to satisfy. . .. She, on her part, being a loving girl,
keeps thinking about her inability and feels miserable. I doubt if you
have come across any other instance like hers. Being a woman
yourself, you can certainly claim to know a woman’s heart better than
I do. But as against that I can claim many years’ longer experience
than yours. Though a man, I have been striving for many years to
reach women’s heart, cultivating and preserving complete passionlessness. As a result, I have had intimate knowledge of the lives of
hundreds of women of every class and religion and of different
countries of the world. I know of several instances in which women
urged their husbands to marry again. This is not a peculiarity of
Hindu women. You will perhaps be surprised to know that such
instances are to be found in England also.
I have a motive in writing such a long letter to you even under
all this pressure of work. I am pleased that you have taken interest in
this matter. . . . had been after me. She also had expressed her pain. I
have promised her that I would welcome a deputation of women
headed by her and put this case before them. For me this is an issue of
dharma. It is one of my experiments in truth. I feel no shame about
what I am doing. I am not taking interest in this case because of the
bond of friendship. This is part of my service of women. I think of. .
.as a helpless cow. I should like to protect her as much as I can. I want
the help of you women in that task. That is, if in the name of dharma I
am in fact yielding to self-delusion of any kind and following a
course contrary to dharma, please wake me up and save me. If,
therefore, you can keep up your interest in this case, meet. . . and
discuss the matter with her and then three or four of you may come
and see me. I will put my case before you and listen to what you have
to say. I am not concerned with what happens to. . . or . . .as
individuals. Such cases will always arise. Ill-matched unions are no
rarity in this country. I have told. . .that when her body has developed
and grown to the size natural for her age and if she feels sexual desire
then and wishes to remarry, I will be ready to help her at any cost to
myself. If, however, despite. . .having married a second time she
prefers to live with him and if. . .is inclined to agree to that, I shall be
helpless . . .’s father would of course desire that she should share his
bed even though he might have another wife. My effort is to save both
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

433

of them from such a position. This is a very complicated case. In
solving it I shall be solving many problems. I, therefore, do not mind
giving my time to it.
I don’t know if I am imposing an unwelcome burden on you
through this letter. If you do not wish to go so deep into the matter,
you need not reply to it. Please consider the letter to have been written
by me more for my satisfaction than for yours. I seem to feel that I
know my dharma, but I am always liable to err in my reasoning. I,
therefore, cling to any person who points out my error. This has saved
me from many errors.
S AUDAMINI GAGANVIHARI MEHTA
C ALCUTTA

[From Gujarati]
From a manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

508. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI 1
WARDHA,

3.30 a.m., September 12, 1934
CHI. RAMDAS,

Your wire has scared me. I at once wired Dr. Kanuga that he
might remove you to whichever hospital he thought best. Vallabhbhai
was with me when I sent the wire. I mentioned a hospital at his
suggestion.
God will restore you. Keep repeating the name of Him Whose
das 2 you are considered to be, that is, to Whom your name signifies
you are dedicated. Know that Ramanama is the only remedy that
never fails. There is no remedy like peace of mind. Who has ever
escaped birth, death, old age and disease? They are inseparable from
the body. If, however, they are all equal in our eyes, all the four will
be the same to us in spite of their being different.
Now that you have started treatment under a doctor continue it.
Sharma3 may give you company and nurse you. But as he has now
learnt humility, he will not mind your being looked after by a doctor.
He may even welcome it. You cannot go to S. A. till you are fully
1
2
3

434

A portion of this letter appears in “Letter to Ramdas Gandhi”, 12-9-1934
Servant
Hiralal Sharma
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

recovered. The passport also will take some time. It will be in my
hands at the earliest on the 23rd. You will get a boat ten days after
that. That is quite a long time by our reckoning. By that time you will
have perhaps completely recovered. This fever may eventually remove
all the poison from your body. I do not worry as Ba is also there. Had
she not been with you, both of us would have been very nervous at a
time like this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Ramdas Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

509. LETTER TO RAGHUVIR NARAYAN SINGH
September 12, 1934
BHAI CHOUDHRIJI,

I had your letter. I withheld the reply till the Working
Committee had met. In my opinion, we cannot, under any
circumstance, apply for the release. But I hear that the application is
only a formality and release will be granted for certain. If this is
correct and you are so inclined, you may apply. But under no
condition should the application be sent up if there is the slightest
doubt about its acceptance. It is also implied that in case of rejection
of any one application all are to be withdrawn. The announcement of
the Provincial Board should be awaited.
C HOUDHRI R AGHUVIR NARAYAN S INGH
HAPUR

[From Hindi]
From a manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

435

510. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
September 12, 1934
CHI. SHARMA,

Your letter. I also saw your letter to Prabhavati regarding the
keys.
I was already apprehensive about catching fever. Anyway, it is
now a fact and I hope it will be only to the good. It was quite right to
get him1 treated by the doctors. You have to be patient. The doctor’s
instructions must be adhered to, you have only to turn yourself into a
nurse and follow them. This augurs well in every way. God alone
controls the results. I must get a letter from you daily.
For the time being, how can I even mention south Africa? But I
shall keep up the effort of clearing the way and we shall wait and
watch.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha,
1932-48, facing p. 93.

511. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHARMA
September 13, 1934
CHI. SHARMA,

I read your letter after cleaning my teeth. I could not go
through the whole of it yesterday. Such is my plight these days ! I
have replied to your wire of yesterday. 2 The same answer holds for
today too. Be patient. If you move from there, Ramdas’s health will
deteriorate. This is my opinion from a distance. Surendra is there on
the spot, his advice must be followed. What I mean is that you should
be a silent nurse. As long as Ramdas is happy with you, you must
remain at his side even facing the insults of the doctors. Go on
informing of all the developments. Tolerate Ba. I had forewarned you
about the developments there. It will be good even now to send Kanu
here. But in all this you must be guided by Surendra. Being far away,
I am in a quandary.
1
2

436

Ramdas Gandhi ; vide also the following item.
Vide “A Prayer”, 12-9-1934
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am aware that people are scared of me. That is why I want to
dissociate myself from the Congress and for the same reason I like to
live away from people; but all this cannot be forced. Everything will
be as God wills. Your last remark is wholly right. Who am I to become
responsible for the destiny of India or of any man?
But despite this, my ignorant attachment may be pushing me
unwittingly into such illusions.
If, after considering all circumstances, you think you must leave
Ramdas, you should visit me on your way. We shall then discuss about
Draupadi and the children. I too am concerned with their welfare. But
we shall not be hasty in anything, we shall discuss the future too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsha,
1932-48, between pp. 96 and 97

512. MORE ON SWADESHI
I would like to resume the thread of my remarks on swadeshi in
the Harijan of 10th August.1 Take the special occupations of
Harijans. There is a meaning behind the over two thousand Harijan
castes. Most of them denote their respective occupations—basketmaking, broom-making, rope-weaving, durri-weaving, etc. If a
complete list was made of them, they would make an imposing list.
They are occupations which either need encouragement, or should be
deliberately destroyed if they are useless or unprofitable. But who is
to decide whether they are profitable or unprofitable, useless or
otherwise? If there was a true swadeshi organization, if would be its
duty to find out the turth about all these innumerable handicrafts and
interest themselves in these craftsmen. The ink with which I am writing
comes from Tenali. It supports about 12 workers. It is making
headway against odds. I had three more specimens sent to me by
different makers, all no doubt struggling like the Tenali group. They
interested me. I entered into correspondence with them. But I could
do no more for them. A swadeshi organization will examine the
samples of these inks in a scientific manner and guide them and
encouage the most promising ones. It is a good and growing industry,
requiring expert chemical knowledge.
1

Vide “Swadeshi”, 6-8-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

437

In Cawnpore, a man sent me samples of the paper his friend was
manufacturing in a village nearby. I enquired into the concern. It
supports about nine men. The paper was stout and glossy. However, it
was not good enough for writing. Men engaged in the manufacture
are eking out the barest livelihood. The skill is supplied by an old
man nearing the crematorium. The whole concern may perish with
him, if it is not properly guided. I was told that, if there were enough
orders, the paper could be supplied at the same cost as the mill–made
article. I know that hand-made paper can never supply the daily
growing demand for paper. But lovers of the seven hundred thousand
villages and their handicrafts will always want to use hand-made paper,
if it is easily procurable. Those who use hand-made paper know that it
has a charm of its own. Who does not know the famous Ahmedabad
paper? What mill-made paper can beat it in durability or polish!
The account books of the old style are still made of that paper.
But it is probably a perishing industry like many such others. With a
little encouragement, it ought never to perish. If there was supervision,
the processes might be improved and the defects that are to be noticed
with some of this hand-made paper may be easily removed. The
economic condition of the numberless people engaged in these little
known trades is well worth investigating. They will surely allow
themselves to be guided and advised and feel thankful to those who
would take interest in them.
I hope I have given enough illustrations to show how vast1 and
uncultivated this field of true swadeshi is. It is capable of limitless
expansion and of producing, without any capital outlay, new wealth in
the country and providing honourable employment to those who are
today starving for want of it.
Harijan, 14-9-1934

1

438

The source has “best”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

513. WHY NOT ‘HARIJAN’ ?
TO
THE EDITOR, “HARIJAN ”
SIR,

I was rather pained to find that the keen intellect of Mr. Mahadev Desai
missed the real point involved in the representation made by “some friends
who met Gandhiji claiming to be representatives of the Harijans or rather
‘Depressed Classes’ as they preferred to call them” (See Harijan of August 10,
’34, p. 206, col. 2). 1 The “bad odour” attaching to the term ‘Depressed
Classes’ is a surety of its ultimate extinction and complete disappearance
along with the development of consciousness amongst these classes leading
to the unification and consequent solidification of the general Hindu
community at large, which, we all know, is the aim of Gnadhiji in his great
and unique endeavour. But the sweetness of the term “Harijan” is likely to
perpetuate the gulf between them and the savarna Hindus, which is surely not
desired by Gandhiji. This point should have been noticed by Mr. Mahadev
Desai, whose use of the adjective ‘curious’ appears to be remarkable and at the
same time regrettable, coming as it does from one of the closest associates of
Gandhiji.
I myself feel interested in the matter as one belonging to this great
class, but feel indifferent to the appellation that others may choose to give,
excepting, of course, the result it is likely to have on the future positon of the
great community in the large Hindu fold.
Will you kindly show this to Mr. Mahadev Desai?
I am, etc. ,

H. K. MULLICK

Mahadev Desai has passed the foregoing to me. I know Sjt.
Mullick, as I had the pleasure of meeting him in Calcutta during the
recent visit. I can share his nervousness and his preference for an
odious appellation so long as the stigma of untouchability persists.
But I invite Sjt. Mullick to enter into the feeling of reformers who
have no untouchability in them and who, therefore, have a horror of
using an odious name for those whom they love and are eager to serve
to the best of their ability. Add to this the fact that tens of thousands
of untouchables do not like the words achhut, asprishya and the like
and that they do like the word ‘Harijan’. The aim of us all is the
1

Vide “Discussion with Represent

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

439

same—total extinction of untouchability. When that happy day
arrives, either the word ‘Harijan’ will disappear or we shall all be
proud to be called Harijans—devotees of God—deserving to be so
described, having been free of the virus of high and low.
Harijan, 14-9-1934

514. NOT ARGUMENT, BUT EXPERIENCE
For me non-violence, like Truth, is my eternal creed for every
activity. That I often fail to act up to it in many activities in my
dealings with the sub-human family proves my weakness; it cannot
and does not affect the truth of the creed or my faith in it. I am but a
weak aspirant ever failing, ever trying. My failures make me more
vigilant than before and intensify my faith. I can see with the eye of
faith that the observance of the twin doctrine of Truth and Nonviolence has possibilities of which we have but a very inadequate
conception. If these two should pervade the whole of our being, how
much more in the purely religious war against untouchability? I,
therefore, gladly share with Harijan workers the following extracts
from an intimate letter received from an American friend who
discloses the working of his mind and declares his faith in nonviolence achieved, though, perhaps, not yet fully, after laborious
search:
You may have gathered from my last conversation with you that I was
turning from my faith in the principle of non-violence. I had been troubled by doubts
concerning this principle, and that was why I wanted so much to talk with you. I
think that was very foolish of me, for, it should be evident that great moral and
spiritual truths can never have their validity established through arguments. They
have to be tested in the fire of experience, which I have not done in my own life to
any large extent. I am persuaded that it would require a much stricter discipline than I
have yet known for me to prove by my own experience that non-violence is eternally
true.
But I am able to accept it as one of the great fundamentals of my faith by my
observation of the fruits it has produced in the lives of others. To associate
intimately with such men as Rajendrababu is a privilege for which one may thank
God. I have seen that he and several others whom I might mention, who have accepted
the principle of non-violence in their own lives, have been able to purify themselves
from all the greed, the lust, the self-seeking, the hatred, the fear which obsesses so
many who have caught a vision of a glorious future but are obstructed by these

440

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

enemies within the gates from fighting successfully with the enemy without. It is not
what non-violence has done to those who oppose you that is to me significant, but
what it has done for you and that very small minority who have in their hearts
become non-violent. Sicne I believe this is a moral universe, it must follow, as night
follows day, that such development of character can never arise out of experiments
with falsehood, and, by the same token, I believe that Jesus is right, at least in the
long run, when he says that “they who take the sword will perish by the sword”.
. . . 1 I am certain that the only virtue which you need to exercise for the
ultimate success of your struggle is that of patience.
. . . 2 So far as your own leadership in India is concerned, you did not develop
your qualities of leadership in a day, nor were you born with tehse qualities. I consider
that you are the product of a long discipline of supreme loyalty to truth as you saw it
and that you have arrived at your present position through a long and arduous
experience. While Europeans may be untrained in the exercise of non-violence, I do
not think human nature is essentially different in Europe from that of India, and the
only way they can learn non-violence is through practice. There are bound to be many
failures, many heart-breaks, many defeats, as has been true and is still true in your
case. But If it is truth, it can never be forsaken.

Harijan, 14-9-1934

515. ALMOST LIKE HARIJANS
An Andhra graduate who has married a devadasi writes:
I wanted to write to you long ago. But I was awfully shy. Thank God ! I
am at last confiding my burden to you.
I come from the devadasi community. My life was socially a torture.
Gandhiji, do you think there is any other profession worse than that of the
dancing girls in the universe? Is it not a blot on India that prostitution should
personify in a community?
Andhradesa, I think, is the heart of this evil. Hindu society here
engages dancing girls—especially during marriages and festivals of the
deity—to sing obscene songs accompanied by obscene gestures before the
pious deity and sets a bad example before the newly-wed couple.
The misery of a whole community consigned to a life of prostitution is
great. Young men here are trying their best to root out this evil. But they
badly need help and guidance. Won’t you kindly take up this matter as equally
1
2

Omissions as in the source
ibid

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

441

important and emergent as the Harijan movement? Please have this affair
always in a corner of your heart and give it publicity. You have not only the
Congress, but the whole public opinion at your back. What the Brothels Bill
and the I.P.C. could not do I am confident that a word from your mouth would
do.
I am legally and religiously married to a girl of my own community and
I am a father of two daughters. My wife is as pious in my eyes as any other
Hindu wife. Still society looks down upon us. The sins of our ancestors and
wreaking vengeance on us. The stigma of prostitution is attached to us,
though both of us are free from the vice.
Harijans and devadasis are the only two communities which are almost
in the same degree of depravity. Of course, they will have to help themselves
to moral elevation. Still a teacher like you would educate them and the society
more quickly than they can do it for themselves. These are two sister
movements. Please don’t forget the sister community in you enthusiasm for
the Harijans.

I wish I had the ability he ascribes to me. I am painfully
conscious of my limitations. The correspondent is perhaps unaware
that, when I was editing Young India, I used constantly to refer to the
devadasi institution and prostitution in general.1 But my effort did not
root out the evil. It would only bring relief in individual cases. If I
now refer to the question in the pages of Harijan, it is not because I
have any hope of faring better than I did during the Young India
days. I shall be pleased if this fresh effort brings relief in individual
cases.
The correspondent is quite right in likening devadasis to
Harijans. Nevertheless, he will recognize the difference there is
between the two. But it is waste of time to measure the degree of
difference in wretchedness. Like untouchability, this institution for the
perpetuation of vice must go, if Hinduism is to be purified. Those who
are engaged in the noble task of ridding society of the evil will have to
work in a systematic manner and not become dispirited if they do not
find their effort crowned with success at once. Let them concentrate
on the evil immediately surrounding them. There are two ways of
working at the problem. These should be work amongst those who
employ devadasis for their base end and the devadasi community
itself. If the latter will refuse to serve society’s vice, the system ends at
1

Vide “Our Fallen Sisters” “Our Unfortunate Sisters”, 16-4-1925 and “The
Devadasi”

442

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

once. But the process is not quite so simple. Hunger knows no sin.
Even like Drona and Bhishma, devadasis point to their bellies in
justification of sin. Habit has dulled their sense of sin regarding their
calling. Therefore, they have to be found an innocent source of
livelihood in the place of prostitution. Then, there is work in the
society. Festival and marriage parties in which devadasis are
employed have to be sought out and those in charge reasoned with.
Reformers may not dictate reform to society. They will have to appeal
to its reason and heart. In a way, all reform is a kind of education, just
as essential as the education which is commonly known as such.
Hence it is a science by itself and yields results only when
systematically pursued.
The correspondent who has dared to marry a devadasi deserves
to be congratulated. He should be satisfied with the approbation of his
own conscience and live down the prejudice against him and his wife.
Harijan, 14-9-1934

516. CABLE TO MIRABEHN
September 14, 1934
MIRABEHN
C ARE KALOPH1
LONDON
IF

KAMLANI

ANDREWS’S

WILL,
ARRIVAL

BRING

HIM

OCTOBER

WITH

YOU.

TWENTIETH.

STAY

IF

POSSIBLE

TILL

LOVE.

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6298. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9764

1

Anagram for Henry Polak

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

443

517. LETTER TO B. C. ROY
WARDHA,

September 14, 1934
DEAR DR. BIDHAN,

Here is a telegram from Assam. You will do the needful.
Do not be alarmed at the reported reopening of negotiations
with Malaviyaji. At the instance of Pt. Nekiram I wrote to him that if
he felt dissatisfied, I was prepared to go through his list myself to
examine the chances of success for his candidates. Maulana was
anxious I should make the position clear.
When is Satcowri Babu1 giving over charge of books, etc., to
Satis Babu?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: B. C. Roy Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

518. LETTER TO AMULYADHAN ROY2
WARDHA,

September 14, 1934
. . . letter of 3rd instant. So far as the Congress Parliamentary Board is
concerned you will test its sincerity in the . . . if you insist upon the
Depressed Classes candidate . . . selected by the Congress
Parliamentary Board will be doing you . . . by selecting Depressed
Classes candidates. As you know there is a life-and-death struggle
between the Congress and the Government. It is the duty of the
Congress at the present juncture to keep Depressed Classes outside
the fray which they cannot be, if they are invited to become fullfledged Congressmen determined to carry out the national
programme as it may be determined from time to time. The best
policy for the Congress, therefore, is to keep Depressed Classes out of
the political arena. The Congress can prove its sincerity in a much
more tangible form by serving Depressed Classes in many other ways.
1
2

444

Satcowripati Rai, Secretary, Bengal Provincial Board, Harijan Sevak Sangh
Dots in the letter indicate that the source is damaged.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The Pact naturally comes into play when an agreed constitution
is set in motion or when a constitution including the Pact is imposed
upon a helpless nation.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI AMULYADHAN R OY
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: B. C. Roy Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library

519. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
September 14, 1934
...
Is that all right?
But I hope to obtain part of this amount from Dhulia. If I
succeed, we shall credit it to the Cow-protection Society, but it seems
right to me that the Society should meet Parnerkar’s requirements.
Let me know whether you agree with this view.
I am writing to Sheth Mathuradas.
Read my letter to Lilavati and pass it on to her. I have already
made my suggestion regarding Chimanlal. I still adhere to it.
Ramdas had an attack of malaria in Sabarmati. He is better now.
I understood from Kanu’s last letter that he was perfectly happy
there. If he wishes to come here, send him over as soon as you get this
letter. What will he get from me, though? His study will be neglected.
There will be nothing but hard work for him here. There is so much
work that nobody gets any free time. If he can look upon work itself
as study and be content, he may certainly come. Even if he merely
wants to have some experience and see for himself how things are, I
will not mind. Bal got tired; Kanti was wise and on his own did not
come and Prithuraj is getting ready to leave. From all these instances I
have come to the conclusion that only a few persons, who have had
sufficient education to satisfy their ambition, can stay with me for any
length of time. I would be happy if it is different with Kanu. I see my
own imperfection in the fact that young people soon get tired of
living with me and leave. But I don’t know exactly the reason why
they do so.
1

1

In the source, the first ten lines or so of this letter have faded out, having
been written in green ink.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

445

Many many blessings to you on the occasion of yur birthday.
Sardar also sends his. He is sitting beside me.
. . .1 has been found to be a worthless man. He is given to lust.
He even tells lies. Much, therefore, of what I credited him with was
nothing but show.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./I. Also C.W. 8414. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

520. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN GANDHI
September 14, 1934
CHI. JAMNA,

I got your letter. Equanimity of mind cannot be learnt from
anybody. One can cultivate it by constantly keeping it before one’s
mind when acting. Rather than overstrain yourself, you should spend
some money in engaging a servant whom you can treat as a member
of the family. You ought not to put any burden on Devbhabhi. I see
some discontent regarding Santok. You should tell her about it and
then suffer it. This, too, you can do by engaging a servant. It is part of
the teaching of the Gita that one should endure what is inescapable.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

521. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
September 14, 1934
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

I have your telegram. Prabhavati is going but not happily. She
has decided that she will cheer you up and come away again soon.
When your first telegram came I told her that she should go at once.
But she did not agree and wrote to you. She waited a long time for
your answer, but there was no answer to the very last moment. Then
when your telegram to me arrived, I decided that it was my duty to
persuade Prabha to go.
Prabha’s difficulty is that she made a promise to Mirabehn that
1

446

The name has been omitted.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

she would do the work that Mirabehn did till the latter returned. Later
Ba also went away after extracting another promise from Prabha—for
she knew about your telegram. Prabha told Ba that she could go and
promised her that she would not leave till Ba returned. Still, since the
work consisted of serving me I told Prabha not to worry about me but
go. She is a little troubled as she goes.
Another thing is that you have both decided that Prabha should
serve in the Kanya Ashram for five years. She should not get out of
this. It is as well that she has not yet taken up this work. But how can
she give it up?
However, concerning all these matters I am neutral. I have no
right to come between you two. I only regret that the education that
Prabha has got from me does not have your entire approval. But that
education cannot go waste. What she has assimilated is now part of
her. You can now strike at her heart as many blows as you like. I have
told Prabha not to pay any heed to my advice but to do as her heart
and her reasoning dictate.
I have your sweet and pure-hearted letter. Since I was hoping
that you would be coming here I did not answer it. I am conscious of
the regard and esteem in which you hold me. We shall talk when we
meet.
My commitment for paying you stands. I have made an
arrangement about it with Ghanshyamdasji too. It was you who had
raised the question of moral dilemma. It is you who must take a
decision. We shall do as you say.
I hope you are in good health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Jayaprakash Narayan Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

447

522. LETTER TO ATMARAM
September 14, 1934
BHAI ATMARAM,

This is my reply to your letter. The deeper I go into the matter
the more clearly I see Balvantrai’s sincerity. Your suspecting your
own friend doesn’t seem proper. If you still harbour suspicion, you
may certainly see Bhai Balvantrai. I will not write to him any more
and give him pain. I have seen that you are by nature inclined to
suspicion and exaggeration.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

523. LETTER TO. . .1
September 14, 1934
CHI. . . .,

I have your letter. You must not give way to despair. You must
resolve to exercise self-control till a suitable partner is found. You
must not fail.
. . .
C ALCUTTA

[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

1

448

The addressee’s name has been omitted.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

524. LETTER TO G. V. MAVALANKAR
September 15, 1934
BHAISHRI MAVALANKAR,

I have your letter.
There is no connection between the Vidyapith library and
Kaka’s idea of leaving Gujarat. If the original Trustees had no right to
hand over the library, its gift would remain illegal even if made at a
meeting attended by all. If you think that the Trustees had a right to
make the gift, I believe Sardar wishes to take no action regarding
Kaka’s other error. Being one of the Trustees, he only wants to know
what his duty is. I don’t think anything can be said about that. But
personally I wouldn’t blame Kaka for this ignorance of law if it is
such.
The serious error committed by Kaka, may be unintentionally,
was that, though he had not secured the consent of the Trustees, he
allowed a sentence implying that it had been secured to stand in the
letter 1 to the Collector. Kaka decided to atone for this carelessness by
resigning from all the trusts. Sardar has had nothing to do with this.
However, Kaka’s resignation only solved the moral problem and
has no connection whatever with the question of whether or not he
should remain in Gujarat. He has been waiting for a long time to run
away from Gujarat. We need not go into the reasons for that. But the
final decision whether he should leave or not rests with me. Sardar will
have had no part in it. I will not let Kaka run away. He will leave only
if I feel helpless. You and other co-workers, however, should have no
worry or fear.
You should merely give your professional opinion as a lawyer
as to the legal loophole.
Vandemataram from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati : G. N. 1239; also S.N. 22855

1

This was drafted by Gandhiji; vide “More Donations”,. Vide also “Speech at
Leaders Conference, Poona-II”, 14-7-1933 and “Letter to Home Secretary,
Government of Bombay”, 3-8-1933
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

449

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
1
RESOLUTION ON WHITE PAPER AND COMMUNAL AWARD
The following is the authorized report of the Working Committee resolution
on the policy of Congress regarding the White Paper proposals and the Communal
Award:
The Congress Parliamentary Board having asked the Working Committee to
enunciate the Congress policy on the White Paper proposals and the Communal
Award, the Working Committee declares the Congress policy on these matters as
follows:
The White Paper in no way expresses the will of the people of India, has
been more or less condemned by almost all the Indian political parties, and falls far
short of the Congress goal, if it does not retard the progress towards it. The only
satisfactory alternative to the White Paper is a constitution drawn up by a Constituent
Assembly, elected on the basis of adult suffrage or as near it as possible, with the
power, if necessary, to the important minorities to have their representatives elected
exclusively by the electors belonging to such minorities.
The White Paper lapsing, the Communal Award must lapse automatically.
Among other things it will be the duty of the Constituent Assembly to determine the
method of representation of important minorities and make provisions for otherwise
safeguarding their interests.
Since, however, the different communities in the country are sharply divided
on the question of the Communal Award, it is necessary to define the Congress
attitude on it. The Congress claims to represent equally all the communities
composing the Indian Nation and, therefore, in view of division of opinion it can
neither accept nor reject the Communal Award as long as the division of opinion
lasts. At the same time it is necessary to redeclare the policy of the Congress on the
Communal question.
No solution that is not purely national can be propounded by the Congress.
But the Congress is pledged to accept any solution falling short of the national,
which is agreed to by all the parties concerned, and, conversely to reject and solution
which is not agreed to by any of the said parties.
1

Vide “Speech at Meeting of Congress Parliamentary Board, Bombay”,
16-6-1934, “Manifesto of Congress Parlimentary Board”, 29-7-1934 and
“Letter to N. C. Kalkar”, 17-8-1934

450

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Judged by the national standard the Communal Award is wholly
unsatisfactory besides being open to serious objection on other grounds.
It is, however, obvious that the only way to prevent untoward consequences
of the Communal Award is to explore the ways and means of arriving at an agreed
solution and not by any appeal on this essentially domestic question to the British
Government or any other outside authority.
The Bombay Chronicle, 18–6–1934

APPENDIX II
1
LETTER FROM N. C. KELKAR
“KESARI ” OFFICE , P OONA 2,

June 22, 1934
DEAR MAHATMAJI,

The people in the Indian States desire to ascertain your individual opinion
on certain matters affecting themselves, so that we may move the Congress to
consider, in the light of your opinion, the desirability of defining its policy on
certain questiions more precisely than at present and modifying it somewhat on
certain others.
The first question that we would bring to your notice in this connection is
the necessity of the Congress taking up for solution problems pertaining to the
States. The Congress has now given up its traditional policy of “keeping itself
unspotted” from the States. It recruits members in the States and brings them under
the control of its district and provincial committees. The accession of strength that it
has thus received from the States is by no means negligible; nor are these members
sleeping partners in the Congress activities, although these activities concern
mostly British India alone. On the other hand, even in such movements as civil
disobedience, they have proved good comrades-in-arms and have cheerfully borne
their share of the burden, realizing that British India and Indian India are essentially
one and indivisible and that the concerns of one are necessarily the concerns of the
other also.
We think that time has now arrived for the Congress to respond to this
spirit of good comradeship exhibited by the States’ people by putting all its weight
and prestige behind their efforts at self-emancipation. At the Madras (1927) and
Calcutta (1928) sessions the Congress no doubt pleaded for the establishment of
democratic swaraj in the Indian States and extended its sympathy to the inhabitants
thereof. The Calcutta resolution is well worth quoting here is exteno.
1

Vide “Letter to N. C. Kelkar”, 2-7-1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

451

The Congress urges no the ruling Princes of the Indian States to introduce
responsible government based on representative institutions in the States,
and to issue immediately proclamations or enact laws guaranteeing elementary
and fundamental rights of citizenship, such as rights of association, free
speech, free Press and security of person and property.
This Congress further assures the people of the Indian states of its
sympathy with and support in their legitimate and peaceful struggle for the
attainment of full responsible government in the States.
We make no doubt that a similar resolution will be reiterated at the sessions
that will be held hereafter. But may we not hope that the Congreesmen in British
Indian will lend active help to the people in the Indian States in achieving political
freedom even as the Congressmen in Indian India gave a measure of help to British
Indians in their attempts to realize their destiny? Of the two, British Indians are much
the more advanced, but in fact help has flown far more from the States’ people to
British Indians than from British Indians to the States’ people. Do you not think it
desirable to advise British Indians, in the name of the Congress to support actively,
even by undergoing suffering if necessary, all legitimate movements for the
establishment of popular government in the Indian States under the aegis of their
rulers? Such comradeship shown on both sides, it appears to us, will cement the two
Indians far more firmly than any formal federation can.
Another question, of even greater urgency, on which the Congress must
determine its policy is its attitude towards those parts of the White Paper scheme
which relate to the Indian States. The authorities of the Congress have declared the
scheme to be unacceptable because it does not satisfy the aspirations of the Indian
people. May we say that the provisions concerning the States are far from acceptable
to the States’ people and may we hope that the actual acceptance or otherwise of these
provisions will be made to depend upon their wishes? The future constitution of India
which, according to the Congress intentions, is to take the place of the White Paper
constitution, will be based upon the principle of self-determination given effect to by
a Constituent Assembly. Is it implied that the federal scheme that will be evolved by
this Assembly will be the result of an agreement between the people in British India
on the one hand and those in the Indian States on the other?
While on this subject it would be well to refer to the apprehensions that
have arisen in the mind of the Indian States’ people by some passages in your
speeches at the Round Table Conference. You pleaded earnestly in this Conference
with the rulers of the Indian States for allowing the States representatives in the
Federal Legislature to be chosen by election and for allowing the fundamental rights
of the States’ people to be written into the federal constitution and placed under the
protection of the Federal Court. But your pledings on this occasion have given rise

452

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to an impression that if the Princes did not agree, as they did not and they do not
agree, you would accept a constitution in which provisions of the kind that you
suggested did not find a place. If this impression is well-founded, we cannot help
saying, and saying it straightout, that you have done a grave wrong to the States’
people. If you think that nomination by the Princes, for instance, must be acquiesced
in, if necessary, in the existing circumstances, we will only beg you to refer the
matter to the States’ people themselves in order to ascertain what their wishes are in
this respect. The right of self-determination of the Indian States’ people is no less
sacred than that of British Indians.
But it has been explained to us that in expressing your views in favour of
the election of the States’ representativs and the protection of the fundamental rights
of the States’ people in the way you did, you wished it to be understood by the rulers
of the States that if they did not agree to do what you urged upon them, you would not
admit them into the federation. You meant these to be essential conditions of
federation, but you did not express yourself in this categorical manner only because,
at the time you spoke, federation was still shrouded in uncertainty. If this be your
meaning, we would entreat you to make it clear beyond the possibility of doubt, for
we know that the rulers of the States are putting a ditterent interpretation upon what
you said. They are representing that you are ready to put up with nomination by the
Princes, for instance, for an indefinite length of time. It is necessary that your
meaning should be made plain, for the Swarajist Conference at Ranchi made it known
that their party (which is now only a wing of the Congress) would follow the lines of
your speeches in framing the future constitution. Since, in the final determination of
the Congress policy on these points your personal views plays such a decisive part,
we are anxious to know whether election of the States’ people and Declaration of
Rights in their interest are, in your opinion, merely desirable features of a federation
or essential conditions thereof. There are various other matters connected with the
federal constitution which require careful consideration on the part of the Congress,
but we do not wish to trouble you with them at the present moment. We would only
beg you to give us an unequivocal statement of your views on the point raised in this
letter.
Yours sincerely,
(SD.) N. C. K ELKAR AND OTHERS

The Hindu, 10–7–1934

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

453

APPENDIX III
RESOLUTION ON SWADESHI

1

Doubts having arisen on the Congress policy in regard to swadeshi, it has
become necessary to reaffirm the Congress position on it in unequivocal terms.
Notwithstanding what was done during the civil resistance struggle, no
competition is permissible on Congress platform and in Congress exhibitions
between mill-made cloth and hand-spun and hand-woven khadi. Congressmen are
expected to use and encourage the use of only hand-spun and hand-woven khadi, to the
exclusion of any other cloth.
In regard to articles other than cloth, the Working Committee adopts the
following formula for the guidance of all Congress organizations:
The Working Committee is of opinion that the activities of Congress
organizations relating to swadeshi shall be restricted to useful articles manufactured
in India through cottage and other small industries which are in need of popular
education for their support, and which will accept the guidance of the Congress
organizations in regulating prices and in the matter of the wages and welfare of labour
under their control.
This formula must not be interpreted to mean any modification of the
unbroken policy of the Congress to promote the swadeshi spirit in the country and to
encourage the personal use of only swadeshi articles. The formula is a recognition of
the fact that the large and organized industries which can or do command State aid are
in no need of the services of Congress organizations or any Congress effort in their
behalf.
The History of the Indian National Congress, Vol. I, pp. 576–7

APPENDIX IV
2
RESOLUTION ON DISCIPLINE
All Congressmen, whether they believe in the Congress programme and
policies or not, are expected, and office-bearers and members of the Executive are in
honour bound, to carry them out, and that office-bearers and members of the Executive
who carry on propaganda or act against the Congress programme and policies are, in
accordance with the rules made by the A.I.C.C. dated May 24, 1929, under Article of
the Constitution, clearly guilty of breach of discipline and liable to disciplinary
action.
The History of the Indian National Congress, Vol. I, pp. 577
1
2

454

Vide “Interview to the Press”, 3-8-1934 and “Swadeshi”, 6-8-1934
Vide “Interview to the Press”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX V
1
LETTER FROM JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
ANAND BHAWAN , ALLAHABAD ,

August 13, 1934
MY DEAR BAPU,

After just six months of absolute seclusion and little exercise I have felt
rather lost in the anxiety, excitement and activity of the past 27 hours. I feel very
tired. I am writing this letter to you at midnight. All day there have been crowds of
people coming. If I have the chance I shall write to you again, but I doubt if I shall be
able to do so for some months. I am, therefore, going to indicate to you briefly how I
have reacted to the various major Congress decisions of the last five months or so.
My sources of information have naturally been strictly limited but I think that they
were sufficient to enable me to form a fairly correct idea of the general trend of events.
When I heard that you had called off the C. D. movement I felt unhappy.
Only the brief announcement reached me at first. Much later I read your statement and
this gave me one of the biggest shocks I have ever had. I was prepared to reconcile
myself to the withdrawal of C.D. But the reasons you gave for doing so and the
suggestions you made for future work astounded me. I had a sudden and intense
feeling, that something broke inside me, a bond that I had valued very greatly had
snapped. I felt terribly lonely in this wide world. I have always felt a little lonely
almost from childhood up. But a few bonds strengthened me, a few strong supports
held me up. That loneliness never went, but it was lessened. But now I felt absolutely
alone, left high and dry on a desert island.
Human beings have an enormous capacity for adapting themselves and so I
too adapted myself to some extent to the new conditions. The keenness of my
feelings on the subject, which amounted almost to physical pain, passed off; the edge
was dulled. But shock after shcok, a succession of events sharpened that edge to a fine
point, and allowed my mind or feelings no peace or rest. Again I felt that sensation of
spiritual isolation, of being a perfect stranger out of harmony, not only with the
crowds that passed me, but also with those whom I had valued as dear and close
comrades. My stay in prison this time became a greater ordeal for my nerves than any
previous visit had been. I almost wished that all newspapers might be kept away from
me so that I might be spared these repeated shocks.
Physically I kept fairly well. I always do in prison. My body has served me
1

Vide “Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru”, 17-8-1934 and ”Letter to Vallabhbhai

Patel”, 19-8-1934.
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

455

well and can stand a great deal of ill-treatment and strain. And being vain enough to
imagine that perhaps I might yet do some effective work in this land to which fate had
tied me, I looked after it well.
But I wondered often enough if I was not a square peg in a round hole, or a
bubble of conceit thrown about hither and thither on an ocean which spurned me. But
vanity and conceit triumphed and the intellectual apparatus that functions within me
refused to admit defeat. If the ideals that had spurred me to action and had kept me
buoyed up through stormy weather were right—and the conviction of their rightness
ever grew within me—they were bound to triumph though my generation might not
live to witness that triumph.
But what had happened to those ideals during these long and weary months
of this year when I was a silent and distant witness, fretting at my helplessness?
Setbacks and temporary defeats are common enough in all great struggles. They
grieve but one recovers soon enough. One recovers soon if the light of those ideals is
not allowed to grow dim and the anchor of principles holds fast. But what I saw was
not setback and defeat but that spiritual defeat which is the most terrible of all. Do not
imagine that I am referring to the council-entry question. I do not attach vital
importance to it. Under certain circumstances I can even imagine entering a
legislature myself. But whether I function inside or outside the legislature I function
as a revolutionary, meaning thereby a person working for the fundamental and
revolutionary changes, political and social, for I am convinced that no other changes
can bring peace or satisfaction to India and the world.
So I thought. Not so evidently the leaders who were functioning outside.
They began to talk the language of an age gone by before the heady wine of N. C. O.
and C. D. had fired our heads. Sometimes they used the same words and phrases but
they were dead words without life or real meaning. The leading figures of the Congress
suddenly became those people who had obstructed us, held us back, kept aloof from
the struggle and even co-operated with the opposite party in the time of our direct
need. They became the high priests in our temple of freedom and many a brave soldier
who had shouldered the burden in the heat and dust of the fray was not even allowed
inside the temple precincts. He had many like him had become untouchables and
unapproachables. And if he ventured to raise his voice and criticize the new high
priests, he was shouted down and tol that he was a traitor to the cause because he
spoilt the harmony of the sacred precincts.
And so the flag of Indian freedom was entrusted with all pomp and
circumstance to those who had actually hauled it down at the height of our national
struggle at the bidding of the enemy; to those who had proclaimed from the housetops that they had given up politics—for politics were unsafe then—but who emerged
with a jump to the front ranks when politics became safe.

456

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

And what of the ideals they set forth before them, speaking as they did on
behalf of the Congress and the nation ? A pitiful hotch-potch, avoiding real issues,
toning down, as far as they dared, even the political objective of the Congress,
expressing a tender solicitude for every vested interest, bowing down to many a
declared enemy of freedom, but showing great truculence and courage in facing the
advanced and fighting elements in the Congress ranks. Is not the Congress being
rapidly reduced to a magnified edition of that shameful spectacle, the Calcutta
Corporation during the last few years ? Might not the dominant part of the Bengal
Congress be called today ‘‘the society for the advancement of Mr. Nalini Ranjan
Sirkar’’, a gentleman who rejoiced to entertain Government officials, Home Members
and the like, when most of us were in prison and C. D. was supposed to be flourishing
? And the other part probably a similar society for a similar laudable object ? But the
fault does not lie with Bengal alone. Almost everywhere there is a similar outlook.
The Congress from top to bottom is a caucus and opportunism triumphs.
The Working Committee is not directly responsible for this state of affairs.
But none the less the Working Committee must shoulder the responsibility. It is the
leaders and their policy that shape the activities of the followers. It is neither fair nor
just to throw blame on the followers. Every language has some saying about the
workman blaming his tools. The committee had deliberately encouraged vagueness in
the definition of our ideals and objectives and this is bound to lead not only to
confusion but to demoralization during periods of reaction, and to the emergence of
the demagogue and the reactionary.
I am referring especially to the political objectives which are the special
province of the Congress. I feel that the time is overdue for the Congress to think
clearly on social and economic issues but I recognize that education on these issues
takes time and the Congress as a whole may not be able to go as far at present as I
would like it to. But it appears that whether the Working Committee knows anything
about the subject or not it is perfectly willing to denounce and to excommunicate
people who happen to have made a special study of the subject and hold certain views.
No attempt is made to understand those views, which, it is notorious, are held by a
very large number of the ablest and most self-sacrificing people in the world. Those
views may be right or wrong but they deserve at least some understanding before the
Working Committee sets out to denounce them. It is hardly becoming for a reasoned
argument to be answered by sentimental appeals or by the cheap remark that the
condition in India are different and the economic laws that apply elsewhere do not
function here. The resolution of the Working Committee on the subject showed such
an astounding ignorance of the elements of socialism that it was painful to read it and
to realize that it might be read outside India. It seemed that the overmastering desire
of the Committee was somehow to assure various vested interests even at the risk of

VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

457

talking nonsense.
A strange way of dealing with the subject of socialism is to use the word,
which has a clearly defined meaning in the English language, in a totally different
sense. For individuals to use words in a sense peculiar to themselves is not helpful in
the commerce of ideas. A person who declares himself to be an engine-driver and then
adds that his engine is of wood and is drawn by bullocks is misusing the word enginedriver.
This letter has become a much longer one than I expected and the night is
already far spent. Probably I have written in a confused and scrappy way for my brain
is tired. But still it will convey some picture of my mind. The last few months have
been very painful ones for me and, I take it, for many others. I have felt sometimes
that in the modern world, and perhaps in the ancient world also, it is oft preferred to
break some people’s hearts rather than touch other’s pockets. Pockets are indeed
valuable and more cherished than hearts and brains and bodies and human justice and
dignity.
There is one other subject I should like to mention. That is the Swaraj
Bhawan Trust. I understand that the Working Committee recently considered the
question of the unkeep of the Swaraj Bhawan and came to the conclusion that it was
not responsible for it. As however it had already made a grant about three years ago
and this had not been paid yet, although expenses were incurred on the strength of it,
a fresh grant was sanctioned. This will probably be enough for some months. In
regard to the future, the Working Committee was evidently anxious not to be saddled
with the burden of maintaining the house and grounds. This burden amounts to Rs.
100 a month, which includes taxes, etc. The trustees, I understand, were also a little
frightened of the burden and suggested that parts of the house might be let in the
ordinary way to raise money for the maintenance. Another suggestion was made that
part of the grounds might be sold off for this purpose. I was surprised to learn of these
suggestions, as some of them seemed to me to be contrary to the letter of the trust and
all of them against its spirit. As an individual trustee I have only one voice in the
matter but I should like to say that I have the strongest possible objection to any
such misuse of the trust property. The very idea of the wishes of my father being
flouted in this way is intolerable to me. The trust represented not only his wishes but
also in small way a memorial to him and his wishes and his memory is dearer to me
than a hundred rupees a month. I should, therefore, like to assure the Working
Committee and the trustees that they need have no anxiety on the score of the money
required for maintenance of the property. As soon as the funds, now granted by the
Working Committee for some months, are exhausted, I shall make myself personally
responsible for the maintenance and no further grant need be made by the Working
Committee. I would also beg the trustees to respect my feelings in this matter and not

458

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to break up the property or to hire it for the sake of hiring it out. I shall endeavour to
maintain the Swaraj Bhawan property till such time as it is put to some worthy use.
I have not the figures by me but I believe that even thus far the Swaraj
Bhawan has not been, in any sense, a financial burden on the Working Committee.
The grants that have been paid to it will probably not be much in excess of
reasonable rent for the quarters occupied by the office of the A.I.C.C. This rent could
have been reduced by occupying smaller and cheaper quarters. At the same time in the
past the A.I.C.C. has paid as much as Rs. 150 a month for rent of an upper floor only
in Madras.
Perhaps some part of this letter might pain you. But you would not have me
hide my heart from you.
Yours affectionately,
J AWAHAR
[PS.]
I received your short note in Alipore Jail and I sent an answer. But the
Superintendent suppressed that answer.
A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 112-7.
God

Good

Physically I kept fairly well. I always do in prison. My body has served me
well and can stand a great deal of ill-treatment and strain. And being vain enough to
imagine that perhaps I might yet do some effective work in this land to which fate had
tied me, I looked after it well.
But I wondered often enough if I was not a square peg in a round hole, or a
bubble of conceit thrown about hither and thither on an ocean which spurned me. But
vanity and conceit triumphed and the intellectual apparatus that functions within me
refused to admit defeat. If the ideals that had spurred me to action and had kept me
buoyed up through stormy weather were right—and the conviction of their rightness
ever grew within me—they were bound to triumph though my generation might not
live to witness that triumph.
But what had happened to those ideals during these long and weary months
of this year when I was a silent and distant witness, fretting at my helplessness?
Setbacks and temporary defeats are common enough in all great struggles. They
grieve but one recovers soon enough. One recovers soon if the light of those ideals is
not allowed to grow dim and the anchor of principles holds fast. But what I saw was
not setback and defeat but that spiritual defeat which is the most terrible of all. Do not
imagine that I am referring to the council-entry question. I do not attach vital
importance to it. Under certain circumstances I can even imagine entering a
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

459

legislature myself. But whether I function inside or outside the legislature I function
as a revolutionary, meaning thereby a person working for the fundamental and
revolutionary changes, political and social, for I am convinced that no other changes
can bring peace or satisfaction to India and the world.
So I thought. Not so evidently the leaders who were functioning outside.
They began to talk the language of an age gone by before the heady wine of N. C. O.
and C. D. had fired our heads. Sometimes they used the same words and phrases but
they were dead words without life or real meaning. The leading figures of the Congress
suddenly became those people who had obstructed us, held us back, kept aloof from
the struggle and even co-operated with the opposite party in the time of our direct
need. They became the high priests in our temple of freedom and many a brave soldier
who had shouldered the burden in the heat and dust of the fray was not even allowed
inside the temple precincts. He had many like him had become untouchables and
unapproachables. And if he ventured to raise his voice and criticize the new high
priests, he was shouted down and tol that he was a traitor to the cause because he
spoilt the harmony of the sacred precincts.
And so the flag of Indian freedom was entrusted with all pomp and
circumstance to those who had actually hauled it down at the height of our national
struggle at the bidding of the enemy; to those who had proclaimed from the housetops that they had given up politics—for politics were unsafe then—but who emerged
with a jump to the front ranks when politics became safe.
And what of the ideals they set forth before them, speaking as they did on
behalf of the Congress and the nation ? A pitiful hotch-potch, avoiding real issues,
toning down, as far as they dared, even the political objective of the Congress,
expressing a tender solicitude for every vested interest, bowing down to many a
declared enemy of freedom, but showing great truculence and courage in facing the
advanced and fighting elements in the Congress ranks. Is not the Congress being
rapidly reduced to a magnified edition of that shameful spectacle, the Calcutta
Corporation during the last few years ? Might not the dominant part of the Bengal
Congress be called today ‘‘the society for the advancement of Mr. Nalini Ranjan
Sirkar’’, a gentleman who rejoiced to entertain Government officials, Home Members
and the like, when most of us were in prison and C. D. was supposed to be flourishing
? And the other part probably a similar society for a similar laudable object ? But the
fault does not lie with Bengal alone. Almost everywhere there is a similar outlook.
The Congress from top to bottom is a caucus and opportunism triumphs.
The Working Committee is not directly responsible for this state of affairs.
But none the less the Working Committee must shoulder the responsibility. It is the
leaders and their policy that shape the activities of the followers. It is neither fair nor
just to throw blame on the followers. Every language has some saying about the
workman blaming his tools. The committee had deliberately encouraged vagueness in

460

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the definition of our ideals and objectives and this is bound to lead not only to
confusion but to demoralization during periods of reaction, and to the emergence of
the demagogue and the reactionary.
I am referring especially to the political objectives which are the special
province of the Congress. I feel that the time is overdue for the Congress to think
clearly on social and economic issues but I recognize that education on these issues
takes time and the Congress as a whole may not be able to go as far at present as I
would like it to. But it appears that whether the Working Committee knows anything
about the subject or not it is perfectly willing to denounce and to excommunicate
people who happen to have made a special study of the subject and hold certain views.
No attempt is made to understand those views, which, it is notorious, are held by a
very large number of the ablest and most self-sacrificing people in the world. Those
views may be right or wrong but they deserve at least some understanding before the
Working Committee sets out to denounce them. It is hardly becoming for a reasoned
argument to be answered by sentimental appeals or by the cheap remark that the
condition in India are different and the economic laws that apply elsewhere do not
function here. The resolution of the Working Committee on the subject showed such
an astounding ignorance of the elements of socialism that it was painful to read it and
to realize that it might be read outside India. It seemed that the overmastering desire
of the Committee was somehow to assure various vested interests even at the risk of
talking nonsense.
A strange way of dealing with the subject of socialism is to use the word,
which has a clearly defined meaning in the English language, in a totally different
sense. For individuals to use words in a sense peculiar to themselves is not helpful in
the commerce of ideas. A person who declares himself to be an engine-driver and then
adds that his engine is of wood and is drawn by bullocks is misusing the word enginedriver.
This letter has become a much longer one than I expected and the night is
already far spent. Probably I have written in a confused and scrappy way for my brain
is tired. But still it will convey some picture of my mind. The last few months have
been very painful ones for me and, I take it, for many others. I have felt sometimes
that in the modern world, and perhaps in the ancient world also, it is oft preferred to
break some people’s hearts rather than touch other’s pockets. Pockets are indeed
valuable and more cherished than hearts and brains and bodies and human justice and
dignity.
There is one other subject I should like to mention. That is the Swaraj
Bhawan Trust. I understand that the Working Committee recently considered the
question of the unkeep of the Swaraj Bhawan and came to conclusion that it was not
responsible for it. As however it had already made a grant about three years ago and
VOL. 64 : 20 MAY, 1934 - 15 SEPTEMBER, 1934

461

this had not been paid yet, although expenses were incurred on the strength of it, a
fresh grant was sanctioned. This will probably be enough for some months. In regard
to the future, the Working Committee was evidently anxious not to be saddled with
the burden of maintaining the house and grounds. This burden amounts to Rs. 100 a
month, which includes taxes, etc. The trustees, I understand, were also a little
frightened of the burden and suggested that parts of the house might be let in the
ordinary way to raise money for the maintenance. Another suggestion was made that
part of the grounds might be sold off for this purpose. I was surprised to learn of these
suggestions, as some of them seemed to me to be contrary to the letter of the trust and
all of them against its spirit. As an individual trustee I have only one voice in the
matter but I should like to say that I have the strongest possible objection to any
such misuse of the trust property. The very idea of the wishes of my father being
flouted in this way is intolerable to me. The trust represented not only his wishes but
also in small way a memorial to him and his wishes and his memory is dearer to me
than a hundred rupees a month. I should, therefore, like to assure the Working
Committee and the trustees that they need have no anxiety on the score of the money
required for maintenance of the property. As soon as the funds, now granted by the
Working Committee for some months, are exhausted, I shall make myself personally
responsible for the maintenance and no further grant need be made by the Working
Committee. I would also beg the trustees to respect my feelings in this matter and not
to break up the property or to hire it for the sake of hiring it out. I shall endeavour to
maintain the Swaraj Bhawan property till such time as it is put to some worthy use.
I have not the figures by me but I believe that even thus far the Swaraj
Bhawan has not been, in any sense, a financial burden on the Working Committee.
The grants that have been paid to it will probably not be much in excess of
reasonable rent for the quarters occupied by the office of the A.I.C.C. This rent could
have been reduced by occupying smaller and cheaper quarters. At the same time in the
past the A.I.C.C. has paid as much as Rs. 150 a month for rent of an upper floor only
in Madras.
Perhaps some part of this letter might pain you. But you would not have me
hide my heart from you.
Yours affectionately,
J AWAHAR
[PS.]
I received your short note in Alipore Jail and I sent an answer. But the
Superintendent suppressed that answer.
A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 112-7.

462

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

