1. SPEECH AT MEETING OF DEPRESSED-CLASS SCHOOLS,
CALCUTTA 1
January 2, 1927
Mahatmaji in reply said that he never knew that the members of the depressed
classes would present him with an address. He felt their troubles and untold miseries
and he sometimes wanted to become an untouchable so that he would clearly realize
their position in the country. Mahatmaji was sorry to say that the members of the
Hindu community were not helping them in any way. On the other hand, they were
having their service in the way of labour. The country would be ruined if that feeling
prevailed in the Hindu community. Swami Shraddhanand who had sacrificed his
valuable life in removing untouchability from the country had said that, if he saw that
the Hindus were keeping at least one depressed-class boy in their house, he would
think that the Hindus were really feeling for the untouchables in the country. Before
that Swamiji expected that they should give up the habit of drinking, gambling, and
other vices which always kept them behind the other communities in the country.
Continuing, Mahatmaji said that Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya had issued an
appeal to collect five lakhs of rupees to complete the shuddhi and sangathan
movement of Swami Shraddhanand. Malaviyaji did not expect any money from them
as he knew the members of the Hindu community would fulfil his desire for their good.
Still as a mark of respect to the sacred memory of Swami [Shraddhanand] they should
collect some money among themselves and approach Malaviyaji with the purse.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 4-1-1927

2. SPEECH AT CHITTARANJAN SEVA SADAN, CALCUTTA 2
[January 2, 1927] 3
In declaring the foundation to be well and truly laid, 4 Gandhiji emphasized
what Dr. Nilratan Sarkar had described as the spiritual unity between Deshbandhu and
Gandhiji which had become, if possible, more real after Deshbandhu’s death. He had
no doubt that, if Deshbandhu’s energies had not been absorbed, like all other
political leaders’, by politics owing to the peculiar conditions of enslaved India, he
1

Gandhiji was replying to an address of welcome presented by the students of
sixteen depressed-class schools in Calcutta and Howrah. The meeting was held at
Mirzapur Park, Calcutta.
2
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
3
The date is taken from the Forward report.
4
Two annexes for the Obstetric Ward and X-Ray Block of the Seva Sadan—the
Deshbandhu Memorial Hospital
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

1

would have entirely devoted himself to religious reform and to the service of
Daridranarayana 1 . But Deshbandhu believed, said Gandhiji, in following the lesson
of the Gita —Do your immediate duty, even though other duties may seem to be
superior—and if he seemed that day to be laying the foundation of an ordinary
maternity home, he was sure that from the point of view of Deshbandhu it was a step
forward to swaraj. He then alluded to the suspicion expressed in some quarters that the
Bengalis being of a parochial outlook, the memorial would also take a parochial
character.

I would not mind the Bengalis absorbing the whole of India in
Bengal, for then the old Panditji 2 from the U.P. and myself, an old
Bania from Gujarat, would be left free to have some rest. I would not
mind in the least the whole of India being absorbed in Bengal that
gave birth to Rabindranath, Ram Mohan Roy, Keshub Chandra Sen,
Ramakrishna Paramahansa and Vivekanand, Bengal which was
hallowed by the sacred feet of Chaitanya, Bengal which is sanctified
by the sacred rivers the Ganges and the Brahmaputra. But the fear is
baseless, as Dr. Bidhan Roy has declared on behalf of the trustees, that
Seva Sadan would be conducted on the same broad lines as [those on
which] Deshbandhu served the Motherland. The institution is a living
tribute to one who had the emancipation of women at heart, those
down-trodden sisters of ours who are the victims of our lust and
passion. It does not belong to this or that trustee, it belongs to the
nation. Let us strive to make it worthy of Deshbandhu and let it
immortalize his memory in India.
Young India, 13-1-1927

3. SPEECH AT KEORAHTALA CREMATION GROUND,
CALCUTTA 3
January 2, 1927
Mahatma Gandhi made a short speech on the occasion. He said that he laid the
foundation of a memorial in honour of one of the greatest patriots of Bengal, nay, of
whole India. Mahatma Gandhi thought himself very fortunate in performing the
ceremony. He regretted that he could not come into intimate acquaintance with Aswini
Babu. When Mahatmaji was in South Africa, he used to read newspapers during the
Bengal Partition days and it was there that he got acquainted with Aswini Babu’s

1
2
3

2

God in the form of the destitute
Madan Mohan Malaviya
Gandhiji was laying the foundation for a memorial to Aswini Kumar Du tt .
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

works through the papers.
On his return to India, Mahatmaji continued, he had the privilege to have
darshan of the late Aswini Kumar Dutt and that was during his Bengal tour when he
went to Barisal. At Barisal, as soon as he got down from the steamer, he was told that
Aswini Babu was lying on sick-bed and hence could not come to welcome him. So he
thought it his first and foremost duty to go directly and see the great patriot on his
sick-bed. He still remembered that loving look when he met Aswini Babu and he could
never forget it.
Mahatmaji next recognized that the lesson we learnt from the life of Aswini
Kumar was that only those could be the worshippers of the motherland who had given
up all pleasures of life and sacrificed all their desires for the cause of the country.
Mahatmaji advised young Indians to learn the spirit in which Aswini Kumar led his
life, and that was the lesson that every young man should learn from the life of the
great men of the world.
Mahatmaji further said that many things could be heard about many people in
the papers, but untill and unless one could come in contact with those men, one was
not able to get the truth about them. When Mahatmaji came in close contact with
Aswini Dutt, he realized the absolute truth of what he had read in the papers.
Mahatmaji, in conclusion, appealed to young men to mix with such great men
and follow in their footsteps if they wanted to serve the country, and the only true
memorial that they could raise in the name of such great men was only to follow in
their footsteps.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 4-1-1927

4. SPEECH AT KHADI PRATISHTHAN, SODEPUR 1
[January, 1927] 2
You will see that he has staked his all on Khadi. Many of you
will think that he has gone mad, but I tell you it is faith that moves
mountains, and Satis Babu has faith in khadi, and the determination
that he must stop, as much as he can, the lakhs of rupees worth of
foreign cloth that is dumped every day in the Calcutta market.
3

In response to his appeal for collections, Rs. 500 were collected on the spot
and Rs. 3,000 and odd were promised.

Young India, 13-1-1927
1

Gandhiji was opening the Kalashala of Khadi Pratishthan, established by
Satis Chandra Das Gupta, at Sodepur, near Calcutta. The report is extracted from
Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”.
2
The date is taken from the Hindu report.
3
Satis Chandra Das Gupta
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

3

5. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
[After January 2, 1927] 1
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I find that you make mistakes in gender. In the Kutchhi dialect
there are only [two] genders—feminine and masculine. But in
Gujarati there is a third, the neuter gender. You say ghar kevo 2 , while
in Gujarati we say ghar kevun3 , you say tamaro sharir4 , while in
Gujarati we would say tamarun sharir5 . You will find it interesting to
compare the two languages in this manner and will be able to correct
your mistakes more easily. Such mental exercise will also develop
your intellect.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8703. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

6. TELEGRAM TO PARASHU RAM MEHROTRA
C ALCUTTA ,

January 3, 1927
P ARASHU R AM
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM
WARDHA
YOU

MAY

DEVOTE

FOR [TNIGHT] 6

“ STREEDARPAN”7 .
BAPU

From a photostat: G.N. 7487; also C.W. 4962
1

The letter was in reply to one from the addressee dated January 2, 1927.
Gujarati expression for “What kind of a house”; the adjective is in the
masculine gender and in the second expression in the neuter gender.
3
Gujarati expression for “What kind of a house”; the adjective is in the neuter
gender.
4
Gujarati expression for “Your body”; the adjective is in the masculine
gender.
5
Gujarati expression “Your body”; the adjective is in the neuter gender.
6
This part of the original is damaged.
7
Streedarpan was a Hindi magazine devoted to social topics, edited by
Mehrotra before he joined the Ashram. He had sought leave of absence from Gandhiji
for attending to its financial problems.
2

4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

7. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 3, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your two letters. I see what you are passing through and I
am glad of it. You have to love humanity in spite of itself. The
Ashram is finally not at Sabarmati but in yourself. The vilest beings
must enter there purified. That is the meaning of treating all alike and
in this universe of opposites remaining unaffected even as the lotus
remains unaffected by water though immersed in it.
I understand your programme. You may carry it out. I continue
to send you letters to Kanya Gurukul till I hear from you again.
I suppose in the circumstances related by you, you will not
advice me to send anybody to the place as a pupil.
I am writing this at Sodepur, a suburb of Calcutta, where Satis
Babu has built his Khadi Works. It is a great effort. It has cost nearly
Rs. 80,000.
We leave for Comilla tomorrow as per programme sent to you.
But for future guidance, it would be well to note that when in doubt
send to the last address.
You will be interested in the enclosed which was handed to me
by a friend.
With love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5194. Courtesy: Mirabehn

8. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
[SODEPUR,]

Monday [January 3, 1927] 1
CHI. MANI,

I had hoped to get a letter from you but so far I have not had
any. I hope you are keeping good health, both of body and mind.
You must be making rapid progress in Sanskrit. Write to me in detail.
I shall be in Comilla till the 6th, and in Kashi till the 9th. In Kashi,
1

As in the printed source

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

5

address the letter at “Gandhi Ashram, Banaras Cantonment”. Write to
Father. He seems to be worrying about you. We are all well.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRIMATI MANIBEHN
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM
WARDHA , B. N. RLY

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, p. 44

9. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
S ODEPUR,

Monday, Magsar Vad O1 , January 3, 1927
DEAR SISTERS,

This time I have not yet received your weekly letter. We have
shifted today to the new buildings erected on the land purchased by
the Khadi Pratishthan. They have built many small houses here. The
houses took only nine months to build. The processes of washing,
bleaching and dyeing khaddar with the aid of machines are now
carried on here. There was a big gathering here yesterday. Theatten
dance was very good. I thought that I should ask for a collection from
the audience; I did, and got about Rs. 3,500/-.
Prayers are held here just as we hold them there. The verses
which they recite are also the same. But their recitation is out of tune,
compared to ours, and so it jars a little on the ear. But gradually they
will improve.
Perinbehn, Mithubehn and Jamnabehn are still with me. They
are carrying on their khadi work. They have sold about half the stock
they had brought with them.
It is a very good thing that your prayers are held regularly. I
note that they are also well attended. Do not forget that spinning is
yajna. The Gita says that he who eats food without offering yajna eats
stolen food. ‘Yajna’ means work done for the good of others. For us
spinning is such public work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3633
1

6

The new moon day
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

10. LETTER TO PRABHASHANKAR PATTANI
ON

THE

TRAIN ,

January 4, 1927
BHAISHRI,

You ask me not to write merely to acknowledge your letters, and
want to know when I am going to Kathiawar. I must reply, then. I am
hoping that I shall be there in the beginning of March.1
Look after your health.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
If the Hindus forgive Abdul Rashid2 , what can be more welcome
than that?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 3210. Courtesy: Mahesh Pattani

11. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
Tuesday [January 4, 1927] 3
CHI. RAMDAS,

I write this on the train. Regarding towels . . .4 to Pattani Saheb
and others. There are many hospitals in Kathiawar. All the towels can
be easily sold among them. After buying from Gondal did you not
buy khadi at all or did you buy it from somewhere else? I am making
arrangements for the rent to be paid by aunt. I will not leave her
without any means of support. Manilal5 is going to the Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6852

1
2
3
4
5

The Kathiawar Political Conference was to be held at Porbandar in March.
Assassin of Shraddhanand
From the postmark
Some words are missing in the source.
Manilal Gandhi who had come to India from South Africa

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

7

12. PRAYER DISCOURSE AT ABHOY ASHRAM 1 ,
COMILLA
[January 5, 1927] 2
You are the pioneers and like the Jamnotri and Gangotri. 3 Be
you as those two streams. As I think of you I picture to myself two
fine horses running abreast and drawing the khadi carriage at full
speed, vying with each other. You have achieved a unique success
inasmuch as you do not depend on extra-provincial help for the sale
of your products. You have bent the women of Bengal to your will—
all honour to them—and they are proud today to wear saris that you
supply to them. Let then the strength and weakness of each be
thestrength and weakness of the other, and let the Khadi Pratishthan
look in its hour of difficulties to the Abhoy Ashram, and vice versa.
Young India, 13-1-1927

13. SPEECH AT VILLAGERS’ MEETING, COMILLA
January 5, 1927
The Mahatma with his party visited two Namsudra villages, viz., Rajapura and
Muradpur, near about the Ashram and addressed the inhabitants in Hindi. The
Mahatma was received by the villagers, men, women and children with hullas 4 , and
the blowing of conch-shells and sankirtans 5 . His message to them was not to
consider themselves lower than others and not to imitate the bad habits of the socalled higher classes. He asked them to give up drinking and to lead a simple and
honest life. He specially dwelt upon the importance and utility of khaddar and
exhorted them to follow the examples of the members of the Abhoy Ashram. . . .

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 7-1-1927

1

Institution run by Dr. Suresh Chandra Bannerji. The Ashram conducted seven
schools for untouchables and also ran a khadi store. Only the concluding remarks of a
long talk at the prayer are available.
2
The report is extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter” where no date
has been assigned to it, but it is placed before the report of the public meeting, which
took place on January 5.
3
The reference is to the Khadi Pratishthan and the Abhoy Ashram.
4
Sound uttered by women of Bengal on auspicious occasions as a sign of
welcome
5
Devotional mass singing

8

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

14. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, COMILLA 1
January 5, 1927
You have been so kind to me in giving me permission to speak
in Hindi. If only because I want to show you my appreciation of your
kindness, I propose to say a few words to you in English. Every time
that I am obliged to speak in the English language before an audience
of my countrymen, I feel humiliated and ashamed. I have urged upon
Bengali audiences several times not to put an undue strain upon my
loyalty, not to put an undue strain upon Bharatamata herself. It is the
easiest thing possible for every Indian north of the Vindhya range to
pick up Hindi inside of a month. Try it and tell me if what I say is not
true. Let us not say that our mother tongue is only Bengali or Gujarati
or Punjabi, as the case may be. These are provincial languages. When
we sing that ode to the Motherland—Bande Mataram, we sing it to the
whole of India. When Bankim2 wrote the inspired song he said saptakoti bhujaih 3 . But you and others deliberately said dwi-trimshatkoti
bhujaih 4 and it was proper. It was proper and dignified on your part
to sing of dwi-trimshatkoti bhujaih, and it was proper and dignified
for the whole of India to accept that magnificent ode. Shall we not
then live up to it and sing with all our hearts and say we are sons of
Mother India, not merely sons of Bengal? I ask you, therefore, next
time I happen to come here or you invite me to come, to insist upon
my speaking to you in Hindi and Hindi alone. That is one thing.
We have seen the last of the last session of the Congress. On the
sacred banks of the Brahmaputra, in the midst of that magnificent
foliage and scenery almost unrivalled in the world, our leaders
deliberated. They have evolved a Council programme. But how many
of us can take a direct part in the working of that programme? How
many of us can enter Councils and the Legislative Assembly? How
many of us are entitled to elect members to these legislative bodies?
Are the millions of the villagers of India enfranchised? Is India living
in her 10 or 20 cities, or is she living in her 700,000 villages? What
then is the programme that can weld together the 30 crores of people
scattered on a surface 1,900 miles long and 1,500 miles broad in
1
2
3
4

The meeting was held at Mahesh Prangan.
Bankim Chandra Chatterji
Seven crore arms—a reference to the population of Bengal at the time
Sixty crore arms—a reference to the population of India

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

9

700,000 villages? What is it that every villager, man, woman and child,
Hindu and Mussalman, can do with profit and, at the same time, uplift
the whole of India? The one and unequivocal answer is the spinningwheel and khaddar. The message of khaddar can penetrate to remotest
villages if we only will that it shall be so. The spinning-wheel can be
turned by millions of the villagers of India who have been reduced to
pauperism, who have been ground down to dust, not merely under the
foreigner’s heels but under your heels, under my heels. We the citydwellers are living upon the labour, upon the wealth of these millions
of villagers; not like the Americans, not like the Englishmen, who live
upon the exploitation of Asiatic races or the so-called weaker races of
the earth. Even they would be obliged to take up the spinning-wheel
or any equivalent if they were not able to exploit India, China, Africa
and other parts of the earth. We do not exploit them, because it is a
virtue of necessity with us. But I hope that a time is coming when out
of the fullness of our hearts, out of a wider national outlook, we shall
disdain of our own free will to exploit a single nation of the earth, no
matter how weak. I hope that in your lifetime and mine that time is
coming when we shall reach our freedom and having reached it, we
shall say to all the nations of the earth that they need not fear us, as we
have lived in perpetual fear of the so-called civilized races of the
earth. You may not believe me today. You may call me, if you like, a
mad man. But the time is coming when you will say that what this old
man said was right and that, if India was really to prosper in her
villages and not in her cities, the spinning-wheel was the only
instrument of India’s prosperity and India’s freedom.
And hence it was that you saw the phenomenon at Gauhati,
which I did not expect, which I had not asked for, however much I
desired it. But you saw at Gauhati the extraordinary phenomenon of
the Congress franchise being improved along khaddar lines. I know
there were bickerings about it. But I also know that it was the pressure
of the popular mind that extorted that improvement in the franchise.
The leaders made that important improvement because they saw that
khaddar and khaddar alone was the only passport to the hearts of the
villagers. Let me assure you that it was khaddar that won the elections
for the Swarajists. You may not know, or perhaps you know, that in
Madras even those who were otherwise opposed to khaddar were
obliged to take it up at the time of appealing to the electorate, and as
the days roll on, you will find that khaddar will gain in importance,
because it has intrinsic worth about it; and because no national
popular organization contains for its working so many self-sacrificing,
able, young, educated men as the khaddar organization; because no
10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

organization is capable of giving employment to an almost unlimited
number of patriotic youths who will be content with an honourable
livelihood and who will be content to pass their lives in the closest
touch with the villagers and share their food, their sorrows and joys. I
invite you to show me a single other organization which has that
capacity in it.
Believe me, khaddar is not a dying cult. There is no fall in the
barometer of khaddar. Five year’s experience show that it has been an
undoubtedly gradual, but a steady and hopeful rise. It could not have
been otherwise. Because India wants it, because India’s millions
require full means in order to sustain their energy, therefore the Congress has passed the resolution making it necessary for Congress- men
to wear khaddar habitually and not merely on ceremonial occasions.
They may wear mill-cloth on rare occasions, when it is absolutely
necessary for their bread and butter; but they dare not, if they are
honest Congressmen, habitually wear anything but hand-spun and
hand-woven khaddar.
And now a word about untouchability. A great hero and patriot
Swami Shradhanandji died for the sake of the untouchables. He loved
them as dearly as his own life. He regarded them as his own children,
and, if it was in his power, he would have banished untouchability
from the shores of India. And what does that banishment mean? It
means universal love. It means translating into action the great
message of the Bhagavad Gita which is: Treat the Brahmin and the
Bhangi alike, if you would but know God. But how are they alike? A
Brahmin is any day superior to the Bhangi in learning, and how am I
to treat both alike? The Bhagavad Gita says that you should treat
them even as you would wish to be treated by them, or even as you
would treat yourself:

:

1

That is the teaching of the Bhagavad Gita. That hero and
martyr translated this teaching into action in his own life and he has
sanctified it, and sealed it with his blood. Let that blood purify us, and
let it remove the last taint of any isolation or aloofness that we may be
harbouring against those brothers of ours whom in our arrogance we
call untouchables. They are not untouchables, we are untouchables.
Let them have every attention, every kindness that they deserve from
1

This is not to be found in the Bhagavad Gita; cf., however, VI, 29 & 32,
with one of which, it is possible, Gandhiji confused it.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

11

us. During my Comilla visit, I have seen two villages which are
predominantly occupied by the so-called untouchables. Had I not
been told, I should not have known that the people I saw were
untouchables. I could see no difference between them and the others
who were standing with them there. They eat and drink and think and
feel even as we do. If a sum-total of their virtues and vices and the
privileges they are denied were to be made and compared with our
virtues and vices and the privileges we enjoy and deny to them, I am
sure in God’s books we should find our debit side far heavier than
theirs. Let us then think no more of any single person on earth as an
untouchable. That is the lesson that comes down to us form South
Africa too. A just Nemesis has descended upon us there. Just as we are
treating our brothers here, our kith and kin are being treated as
pariahs and Bhangis in South Africa. The moment we purge ourselves
of the sin, the moment we are free from the curse of untouchability,
you will find the shackles dropping off our countrymen in South
Africa.
I dare not touch the problem of Hindu-Muslim unity. It has
passed out of human hands, and has been transferred to God’s hands
alone. Even as Draupadi, forsaken by her husbands, forsaken by men
and gods alike, asked God and God alone to come to her help, and
God gave her unfailing help, so it is with me and so should it be with
every one of us. Let us ask for help from God, the All-Powerful and
tell Him that we His tiny creatures have failed to do what we ought to
do, we hate one another, we distrust one another, we fly at one
another’s throat and we even become assassins. Let our heart’s cry
then ascend to His throne, and let us wash His feet with tears of blood
and ask Him to purge our hearts of all hatred in us. We are disgracing
His earth, His name and this sacred land by distrusting and fearing
one another. Although we are sons and daughters of the same
motherland, although we eat the same food, we have no room for one
another. Let us ask God in all humility to give us sense, to give us
wisdom.
You have listened to me with the greatest attention. I have given
you also what I don’t willingly give to the audience—an English
speech, and that also at some length. I now want my reward. I want
you tomorrow to come to the Abhoy Ashram and denude it of every
yard of khaddar in its store, if my message, the message of the
paupers of India, has gone home to you. There you will see a band of
workers working for them and for you. They are the link between you
12

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and the villagers. They are trying to do their level best to serve the
motherland. I want you to put your hands into your pockets and give
me what you have and what you can and what you will, not out of
shame, not out of any pressure that you may feel becuase you are in
this meeting, not out of patronage for me or affection for me. I shall
use your affection for other work if you will give me your affection.
But I want you to give me what you can and what you have for the
sake of paupers, for the sake of those who do not even get one square
meal a day. If you are satisfied that this organization is being worked
well, and with ability and self-sacrifice, and if you are convinced that it
is not sinful to wear khaddar and it cannot be wrong to wear khaddar
woven and spun by your starving countrymen, and that it is right and
proper and necessary to do so, you will give your coppers and silver
and gold, whatever you may have.
If you have any suspicion about it, any doubts in the matter, I
ask you to restrain your hands and not to give me a single pie. If not
today, at least on some near date, you will be convinced of the
message. But if you are convinced that this is the right thing—
although you may not have the strength to carry out the message fully
into practice—you will support this great, aye the greatest, national
industry. There is no better way of industrializing the villages of India
than the spinning-wheel. No man has yet been able to show a better or
more effective substitute—I say even an equal substitute—than the
spinning-wheel for the millions of Indians who are idle for at least
four months in the year, who are starving for want of a square meal,
and for whom even one anna a day means a fortune. I plead on behalf
of them. May God help you to understand this simple message.
You will recall that last time I was in Bengal, I collected for the
All-Bengal Deshbandhu Memorial. That was for what is now the Seva
Sadan. I announced then that, in due course, I would collect for the
All-India Deshbandhu Memorial. You know that its object was to
promote the message of the spinning-wheel. You will thus be
contributing to the Memorial by contributing to khaddar.
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 7-1-1927; also Young India, 13-1-1927

15. SWAMIJI AS I KNEW HIM
My first acquaintance with Swamiji was when he was Mahatma
Munshiram, and that by letter. He was then Governor of Kangri Gurukul, his great original contribution to education. He was not satisfied
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

13

with the orthodox Western method. He wanted his boys to be saturated
with Vedic teaching, and he taught through Hindi, not English. He
wanted them to be and remain brahmacharis during their training. He
had inspired his boys to contribute to the fund that was then being
collected for the Satyagrahis of South Africa. And he wanted them to
do so by themselves labouring as coolies for hire; for, was it not a
coolies’ fight in South Africa? The boys rose to the occasion, earned
full wages and sent them to me. The letter he wrote to me about this
incident was written in Hindi. I was addressed as ‘my dear brother’. It
endeared me to Mahatma Munshiram. We had never met each other
before.
Andrews was the link between us. He was anxious that whenever
I returned home, I should make the acquaintance of what I used tocall
his trinity—the Poet, Principal Rudra and Mahatma Munshiram.
From the time of the receipt of that letter, we became brothersin-arms. We met each other in 1915 at his favourite Gurukul and with
each meeting we came closer and knew each other better. His love of
ancient India, Sanskrit and Hindi was remarkable. He was undoubtedly a non-co-operator before non-co-operation was born. He was
impatient to gain swaraj. He hated untouchability and was anxious to
raise the status of the untouchables. He could not brook any restriction upon their freedom.
When the Rowlatt agitation was started, he was among the very
first to hail it. He wrote a very warm letter to me. But the suspension
of Satyagraha after the Amritsar and Viramgam tragedies he could
not understand. From that period our differences commenced but
they never once disturbed the brotherly relations that subsisted
between us. The differences showed to me his childlike nature. He
blurted out the truth as he knew it without regard to consequences. He
was daring to a fault. I observed more and more the temperamental
differences beetween us as time progressed but they only proved to
me the goodness of the soul in him. To think audibly is no crime, it is
a virtue. It is the hallmark of truth. Swamiji thought audibly.
The Bardoli decision broke his heart. He despaired of me. His
open protest was most energetic. His private letters to me were still
more so but with the emphasis on the differences there was an equal
emphasis on love. He was not satisfied with an avowal of love in mere
letters. He sought me out as opportunity offered and explained his
own position, tried to understand mine. But the real reason, as it seems
14

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to me, for seeking me out was to assure me, as if any such assurance
was necessary, of undiminished love for me as for a younger brother.
My remarks about the Arya Samaj and its great author and
my references to him hurt him deeply; but our friendship was strong
enough to bear the strain. He could not understand that it was possible
to reconcile my general estimate of the Maharshi with the quality of
forgiveness that he had in a boundless measure for personal injury .
His devotion to the Maharshi was too great to brook any criticism of
him or his teachings.
He has been severely criticized and maligned in the Mussalman
Press for his shuddhi movement. I myself could not accept his
standpoint. I do not accept it even now. But, in my opinion, he had a
complete defence of his own position from his own standpoint.
Shuddhi is entitled to the same toleration that is claimed for tabligh so
long as either remains within moral and legitimate bounds. But this is
not the occasion for entering into an examination of that highly
controversial question. Both the tabligh and the shuddhi which is a
reply to the former, have to undergo a radical change. Progress of
liberal study of religions of the world is bound to revolutionize the
existing clumsy method of proselytizing which looks to the form
rather than the substance. It is the transference of allegiance from one
fold to another and the mutual decrying of rival faiths which gives rise
to mutual hatred.
Swamiji’s assassination can be turned to good account by us if
we both Hindus and Mussalmans could possibly realize the deeper
meaning of shuddhi.
I cannot close the reminiscences of the life of a great reformer
without recalling his last visit to the Satyagraha Ashram only a few
months ago. Let me assure my Mussalman friends that he was no
hater of Mussalmans. He undoubtedly distrusted many Mussalmans.
But he bore them no ill will. He thought that Hindus were cowed down
and he wanted them to be brave and be able to defend themselves and
their honour. In this connection he told me that he was much
misunderstood and that he was absolutely innocent of many things
that were said against him. He told me he had several threatening
letters. He was warned by friends not to travel alone. But this man of
faith said, “ What protection shall I seek but of God? Not a blade of
grass perishes without His will. I know therefore that nothing can
happen to me so long as He wishes me to serve through this body.”
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

15

During this stay of his he spoke to the boys and girls of the
Ashram school. He said the best protection of Hinduism must come
from within, from self-purification. He put the greatest emphasis on
the need of brahmacharya for the building of character and body.
Young India, 6-1-1927

16. NOTES
S HRADDHANAND MEMORIAL

It is in the fitness of things that there should be an appeal on
behalf of the Hindu Mahasabha for funds to perpetuate the memory
of the late Swami Shraddhanandji. I congratulate the Sabha on having
decided upon inviting collections for carrying on the work for which
the Swamiji chiefly lived after his sannyasa. This was removal of
untouchability, shuddhi and sangathan. The appeal has been made
for five lakhs for untouchability and as many for shuddhi and sangathan. For my own part I still remain unconvinced about the necessity
of the shuddhi movement, taking shuddhi in the sense it is generally
understood. Shuddhi of sinners is a perpetual inward performance.
Shuddhi of those who can be identified neither as Hindus nor as
Mussalmans or who have been recently declared converts but who do
not know even the meaning of conversion and who want to be known
definitely as Hindus is not conversion but prayaschitta or penance.
The third aspect of shuddhi is conversion properly so called. And I
question its use in this age of growing toleration and enlightenment. I
am against conversion whether it is known as shuddhi by Hindus,
tabligh by Mussalmans or proselytizing by Christians. Conversion is a
heart-process known only to and by God. It must be left to itself. But
this is no place for airing my views on conversion. Those who believe
in it have a perfect right to follow their own course without let or
hindrance, so long as it is kept within proper limits, i.e., so long as
there is no force or fraud or material inducement and so long as the
parties are free agents and of mature age and understanding. Those,
therefore, who believe in shuddhi have a perfect right to subscribe to
the appeal.
Sangathan is really a sound movement. Every community is
entitled, indeed bound, to organize itself if it is to live as a separate
entity. I have kept myself aloof from it because of my peculiar ideas
16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of organization. I believe in quality rather than quantity. The fashion
nowadays is to rely upon quantity even at the cost of quality. Quantity
has its place no doubt in social and political economy. Only I am illfitted for organizing quantity in the way it is done at present. Therefore, for me the appeal only for funds for the removal of untouchability has a value. It comes with a force all its own. For reform of
Hinduism and for its real protection, removal of untouchability is the
greatest thing. It is all-inclusive and, therefore, if this the blackest spot
on Hinduism is removed, you have automatically all that shuddhi and
sangathan can be expected to yield. And I say this, not because of the
vast number of untouchables whom every Hindu should seek to
embrace as one of his own but because consciousness of having
broken down a barbarous and ancient custom and consequent purity
it necessarily implies gives a strength which is irresistible. Removal of
untouchability therefore is a spiritual process. Swamiji was a living
embodiment of that reformation because he had no half measures
about it, because he would not compromise, he would give no quarter.
If he could have had his way, he would have made short work of
untouchability in Hinduism. He would have opened every well and
every temple to every untouchable on conditions of absolute equality
and he would have braved all consequences. I can conceive no more
fitting memorial to Swami Shraddhanandji than that every Hindu
should henceforth purge his heart of the uncleanliness which untouchability undoubtedly in and deal with the untouchable as with his
own kith and kin. His monetary contribution to the memorial, therefore, will, in my opinion, be merely an earnest of his irrevocable resolution to root out the evil and cast it away once and for all from
Hinduism.
The 9th day of January is the day appointed for doing public
and religious reverence to the memory of the Swamiji. I hope that the
ceremony will be performed in every city and every village. But the
ceremony will lose its real significance, if at the same time those who
take part in it do not purge themselves of the taint of untouchability.
Every untouchable should, therefore, take part in the ceremony; and
what a great thing it would be if every temple were thrown open to the
untouchables on that day. If an organized effort is made, the collections could be finished without the slightest difficulty before the sun
sets on the 9th January.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

17

KHADI BOARD

OF

S TUDIES

In selecting the Board of Studies the Council of the All-India
Spinners’ Association had included Dr. Profulla Chandra Ghosh’s
name in the Board subject to his acceptance of the office. But as his
acceptance was not received owing to his absence from his headquarters in time for publication, the name was withdrawn at the last
moment. Dr. Ghosh has now kindly accepted the office. The reader
will be glad to learn that the Board will have the assistance of one who
has made a study of and has practical experience of the science of
charkha and khadi.
P RIZE ESSAY

ON

HAND -SPINNING

The Prize Essay on Hand-Spinning and Hand-weaving issued by
the All-India Spinners’ Association and written by Professor S.V.
Puntambekar and Sjt. N. S. Varadachari is a publication which I
commend to the attention both of the khadi worker and the sceptic.
The khadi worker will find many things in this volume occupying 235
pages of bold type in octavo size, which he perhaps had not known
before. It has four chapters. The first gives the history of handspinning and hand- weaving in India before the advent of the British.
The second deals with the complete ruin of hand-spinning, the greatest national industry, and almost complete ruin of hand-weaving, the
second great national industry. The third deals with the possibilities of
hand-spinning and hand-weaving and incidentally sets up a comparison between mill-spinning and mill-weaving and hand-spinning and
hand-weaving. And the fourth deals with exclusion or boycott of all
foreign cloth through the spinning-wheel. The authors give facts and
figures for every statement made by them.
The price of the book is one rupee. Copies can be had from the
office of the All-India Spinners’ Association, Ahmedabad, or from
Mr. S. Ganesan, Current Thought Press, Triplicane, Madras, by sending one rupee and two annas to cover postage.
Young India, 6-1-1927

17. THE CONGRESS
When, in Cawnpore, the Assam delegates gave the invitation to
hold the Congress of 1926 at Gauhati and the Congress accepted the
invitation I was filled with misgivings. I felt that Assam was too far
away, too unorganized and too poor to shoulder the heavy burden of
18

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

holding a Congress session. Gauhati has a population of only 16,000.
No place with such a small population has, before Gauhati, had the
temerity to invite the Congress. Gauhati, however, beat all previous
records, and in an incredibly short space of time erected, in the midst
of surroundings of great natural beauty on the banks of the great
Brahmaputra, a city under khadi canvas. The huge Congress pavilion
itself was made of pure Assam khadi. The Reception Committee had
to import material and men from outside in order to provide for the
varied tastes of delegates and visitors from different provinces.
Leaders’ quarters were isolated from the delegates’ quarters. When I
resented the isolation, I was told that it was not done intentionally, but
it had to be done because there was not enough ground available in
one single spot to provide accommodation for all. The construction of
the cottages was incredibly simple,—Assam bamboo, Assam mud,
Assam straw, Assam khadi and Assam labour were responsible for the
very simple but artistic huts erected on the Brahmaputra bank. And as
Mr. Phookan led me to one of these beautiful huts, he said,“Now it
must delight your heart in that we are giving you not a palace
miscalled hut, as you had remarked in Belgaum 1 , but we are giving
you a proper hut, only we cannot claim any merit for it because it is a
virtue of necessity; for we could have given you nothing more,
nothing less.” I was, however, more than glad for this virtue of
necessity. Let not the reader however imagine for one moment that
there was in any degree whatsoever less comfort in these artistic huts
than in the palatial-looking structure that was provided in Belgaum.
All the other arrangements so far as I gather were in keeping with this
artistic simplicity.
The address of the Chairman 2 of the Reception Committee was
equally simple and equally artistic and therefore naturally brief.
Proceedings commenced punctually at the advertised time. No
time was lost in ceremonial functions. In a few minutes Mr. Phookan’s brief address was finished, the President3 amidst shouts of
applause walked to the rostrum and read his address. The suppressed
gloom cast over the assembly through the news of the assassination of
Swami Shraddhanandji was no doubt there, but it was not allowed to
be made visible. The delegates knew that Swamiji had died a hero’s
1
2
3

The venue of the Congress session in 1924, over which Gandhiji presided
Phookan
S. Srinivasa Iyengar

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

19

death and it therefore demanded no tears but action and so the business part of the Congress went on as if nothing had happened. The
ceremonial was severely cut off including the usual presidential
procession. The address of the President for the matters it covers is
brief enough. I pass by the references to the Councils and the defence
of the Swarajist attitude which occupies half of the address.
The constructive programme has its due share given to it. The
place of honour is assigned to khaddar. The President trusts that the
All-India Spinners’ Association will become a nation-wide labouror
ganization which, if it cannot be identical with swaraj, will go some
way towards it. It can become that if every Congressman and every
Congresswoman will do his or her duty.
The spinning-wheel has by its persuasiveness affected to a visible
extent the national psychology, and has lent a new dignity to our manhood
and womanhood.

This was more than exemplified by the enthusiastic manner in which
the amendment in the franchise clause regarding khaddar was accepted by the Congress in spite of stubborn opposition offered to it. No
wonder that the President considers that “khaddar is at once the
radiant symbol of our self-reliance and of our power of resistance”.
In the constructive programme the second place is given to
prohibition and the President correctly pleads guilty to the charge that
we have not lately paid much attention to the question of total
prohibition. He says,
The movement will gain in moral grandeur if we successfully organize
the will of the nation in that behalf.

He remarks that
No minister has during the past six years been found, and I doubt
whether a minister will now be found, to be courageous enough to bring in a
bill for total prohibition and to resign his office on its rejection or
disallowance.

There is something somewhere utterly wrong if, in a place like
India which is overwhelmingly dry, ministers are unwilling to provide
what is the nation’s due, namely, total prohibition. There is as much
flaw in the argument that it is an interference with the right of the
people, as there would be in the argument that the laws prohibiting
theft interfere with the right of thieving. A thief steals all earthly
possessions, a drunkard steals his own and his neighbour’s honour. It
20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

surprises me to discover that the President has failed to suggest the
obvious method of providing for the deficit of revenue. There is a
huge military expenditure, so much of which is utterly useless and
based upon distrust of the nation. It is capable of reduction by more
than 25 crores which is the revenue from drinks and drugs.
Untouchability comes next. He does not think that it is necessary to wait for swaraj till untouchability is removed. He cites the
capital instance, in his favour, of the United States of America achieving freedom long before the abolition of a very real and widespread
slavery. But he hastens to add,
We must all agree that we must make an end of untouchability, apart
from any question of swaraj and whether we ever win swaraj or not.

And then this Brahmin philosopher lays down that
the higher philosophy of Hinduism as well as the history of the religious
dissidence in our country emboldens me to claim that the rule regarding
untouchability has neither part nor lot with the indestructible soul of
Hinduism. Judged by any test humanitarian, rational or spiritual, patriotic or
democratic, we cannot with decency uphold in Hinduism the dogma of an
immutable untouchability. It clouds our vision, limits our experience, hardens
our heart, narrows our sphere of responsibility and prevents our ideals of
justice, love and sincerity from being perfect.

I congratulate the President for this eloquent and severe
condemnation of the curse that has descended upon Hinduism.
The next heading is labour and unemployment. I am inclined to
think that this needs more diligent study than appears to have been
given to it. It requires, in my opinion, considerable revision. I suggest
that the charkha movement with all its implications provides the
largest form of relief to the unemployment of millions.
The currency policy of the Government has also claimed a
paragraph in his address. The President ‘cordially’ welcomes the formation of the Indian currency League and trusts that it will adequately
educate public opinion on the question of the ratio, the gold standard,
gold currency and other cognate questions. He says:
But I am certain the League will be able to achieve nothing, either by debate
and vote in the Assembly or by protest outside, unless it comes into line with
the Congress and unless its members harness themselves to the dynamic
politics of the Congress.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

21

Indian States have also found a paragraph in the address.
Greater India naturally follows the paragraph on Indian States.
The status of Indians abroad, whether in South Africa or Kenya, in Fiji or
Guiana, in Ceylon or Malaya, in America or Australia, depends inevitably
upon the status of Indians in their own land; and swaraj for India depends in its
turn upon the brave and unfaltering spirit of our kith and kin across the seas.

I suppose the presidential suggestion “ of the holding once in a
way of a session of the Congress in South Africa” is merely a pious
wish. The subject deserves better examination than it has received. I
presume the absence of any reference to Mr. Andrews’s signal
services is an unintentional oversight due to the many local pre-occupations of the very busy President.
The Asiatic Federation comes in too for a few lines. Mr. Iyengar deplores that “we have too long neglected the possibilities of a
cultural and business union with all Asiatic countries.” I venture to
suggest that the cultural union is being sufficiently attended to by our
great Poet and the business union by the great commercial firms.
The irrepressible optimism of the President is to be observed in
the paragraphs upon Communalism and Nationalism. He says:
I am confident that wherever intensive propaganda, sincere and persuasive,
clearly analyses the fallacies underlying it, communalism will go to the wall.
Happily, prejudice and suspicion are not deep-seated amongst Indians and
communalism is but their offspring.

Under the heading ‘Plea for Tolerance’, one reads the following
pregnant sentences:
Though each community should be free to make conversions, no resort to
conversion is really any longer useful or necessary. For the lives of the best
and most pious men in each community are a fitter and more effective
propaganda in that behalf than definite missionary effort. But wherever the
latter is made, it should be open and general and neither secret nor directed to
the converting of particular men or women. Let us realize that no great and
long-established religion gains in truth, beauty or spirituality with any
increase in its census figures.

He winds up the paragraph by quoting the following beautiful passage
from Ashoka’s inscriptions:
He who does reverence to his own sect while disparaging the sects of
others wholly from attachment to his own, with intent to enhance the
splendour of his own sect, in reality by such conduct inflicts the severest
injury on his own sect.

22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The President is evidently against communal representation. He
says:
That much abused expression “communal representation” is a misnomer; for
all the communities are equally interested in all public questions and in the
country’s problems and in particular solutions of them.

Again he says:
Let us realize clearly that to uphold justice between man and man is to uphold
justice between community and community. As a safeguard a negative rule
against members of any community or caste monopolizing offices is all that is
required.

The President remarks:
The intrusion into politics of religion, and very often of dogmatic religion,
must be resisted as a primitive or mediaeval idea, born of theocracies, and
disastrous alike to religion and to politics.

But he adds:
I do not speak of morality or of that spiritual quality which is common to
all religions; for thereby politics and organizations are cleansed and made sweet
and wholesome.

Sjt. Iyengar adds:
Let us not forget, in the fever of political controversy, that the strength of
each religion is derived from God and rooted in the souls of Prahlads. Not all
the tortures of a Torquemada1 , nor all the burning at the stakes, nor all the
forms of persecution have been able to destroy the mystic quality of the human
soul. Neither Hinduism nor Islam derives or requires strength either from the
present or from any future Government. Both stand far, far above swaraj which
is not comparable to them. Neither foreign governments nor selfgovernments, neither democracies nor autocracies, can destroy that seed of
faith which is in every one of us, that inspired interpretation of the universe to
which one clings for guidance and solace in this world and for salvation in the
next.

The last three pages of the address are devoted to a fervent
appeal for unity.
There can be only two parties in India, the party of the Government and its
adherents that obstruct swaraj, and the party that fights visibly and
unceasingly for swaraj . . . I deprecate the philosophy of individualism in a
supreme struggle for freedom against a powerful people with their trained
bureaucracy and with unlimited material resources. On a question whether a
1

Thomas Torquemada (1420-1498); Inquisitor-General of Spain who is said
to have condemned more than 10,000 people to be burned at the stake
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

23

particular course is wise or unwise, will succeed or fail, will accelerate swaraj
or retard it, to make one’s opinion or judgment or feeling a matter of
conscience is false philosophy. On a point of religion, of morality, of
honour, one’s own conscience must be the arbiter, but in transacting the
affairs of a country, when a decision is not irreligious, immoral or
dishonourable, I fail to see how we may rely on our right to differ from one
another and yet uphold the discipline necessary for an organization fighting
for swaraj.

The conclusion is in keeping with the fervency of the appeal
and the deep emotion that underlies every line of this address. He
says:
Swaraj is not an intellectual but an emotional proposition. We must cherish it
in our hearts with unquenchable faith. . . . We must become possessed by a
passion for swaraj that is not warped by fallacies and impulses, that will stand
for a uniform and rapid corporate advance in serried masses, that will know no
obstacles, that will not wax and wane with the seasons, that will not be
daunted by imprisonments or depressed by failures.

Let me hope that the appeal will find an echo in the hearts of us
all.
The resolutions do not require an elaborate examination.
Besides the condolence resolutions, there is of course the Council
resolution for the guidance of Council-wallas, then the resolutions
about South Africa and Kenya, the Bengal detenus and the Gurdwara
prisoners. The khaddar clause in the constitution is, in my opinion,
altered for the better. The ceremonial wear had become the laughing
stock of all. Habitual wear of khaddar is the right thing if khaddar
wear should find a place in our franchise qualifications. It is to be
hoped that every Congress worker will enforce this resolution in his
own person and induce others to do likewise. But I must deal more
fully in a subsequent issue with many other things that were discussed
in the Subjects Committee in connection with the resolutions
withdrawn or rejected.
Young India, 6-1-1927

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

18. INTERVIEW TO FREE PRESS OF INDIA
COMILLA,
January 6, 1927
With reference to the statement1 issued by Mr. T. C. Goswami2 on the habitual
khadi wear resolution passed by the Congress at Gauhati the following interview was
granted to a representative of the Free Press of India by Mahatma Gandhi:

I tender my congratulations to Mr. Goswami upon his frank
statement on khaddar. It should clear the atmosphere of cant, hypocrisy and humbug. Khaddar must stand or fall on its own merits. Mr.
Goswami betrays a mental attitude which no doubt makes any
mention of khaddar repugnant to him. His is not an objection to
khaddar as a fetish but it is an objection to khaddar even as an economic factor, because he says that khaddar may be even an economic
waste and permanent exclusion of foreign cloth may not be a
desirable thing. If I thought like Mr. Goswami I should also object to
the khaddar clause as strongly as he does. The change from ceremonial to habitual wear was not due to my prompting. But I have no
hesitation in endorsing the change as desirable and even necessary for
the growth of a true national life. Politics apart from nationalism I do
not understand. I consider boycott of foreign cloth not merely as a
political expedient but as a permanent duty. I regard it as immediately
possible in terms of khaddar if we have the will.
I go a step further and say that boycott of foreign cloth through
khaddar is the only thing the nation is capable of achieving within a
measurable distance of time, and since the economic aspect of
khaddar includes organization of the whole nation towards one single
effort, it has tremendous political consequences. If, therefore, it is
right and proper to restrict the membership of the Congress to those
who desire swaraj and to exclude those who wish to retain the present
British domination, it is equally right to restrict the membership to
those who desire and work for the boycott of foreign cloth, through
active, continuous and persistent khaddar production and sale. It is the
beauty of khaddar and not its limitation, as Mr. Goswami suggests,
that it is no respecter of persons and that it can adorn the body of a
government spy as much as that of a saintly servant of India, whoever
1
2

Not reproduced here
Member of the Legislative Assembly from Bengal

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

25

he may be. For the nation includes all the highest and the lowest, the
healthy and the unhealthy, the good as well as the wicked. But it
should be the privilege of the good to reform the wicked and serve
them.
Forward, 7-1-1927

19. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, COMILLA
January 6, 1927
. . . Next he addressed a big gathering of ladies, where he said that they must
have swaraj, which meant Ramarajya which again could not come without Sita. He
exhorted all to attain the virtues of Sita and to wear clothes made by their own hands
as Sita used to do, and also to follow the examples of Sita by leading a simple and
pure life. He concluded by saying that the charkha was the only cure for pauperism.
When he appealed for funds for the All-India Deshbandhu Memorial, the ladies
contributed some money and some of them even gave away their gold ornaments.

Amrita Bazar Patrika, 8-1-1927

20. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
[KASHI ,]

Saturday [January 8, 1927] 1
CHI. MANI,

I have your letter. It is good that you are studying with
Valjibhai’s help. You will learn much from him.
I do not know why you have been relieved of your teaching
work, for I could not understand the reasons from the letter in which
the news was conveyed to me. You yourself should be bold and ask
the reason. I thought that the reason must have been explained to you.
I remained unconcerned by the news because, irrespective of whether
or not you teach, you continue to stay in the Ashram, and the salary,
or whatever you name it, will continue to be paid to you. The
responsibility for you is mine. You should not get angry with the
teachers . They have to run the institution, and so they may act as they
think proper. But you have a right to know the reason, and you shall
know it.
1

26

As in the printed source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You should now get ready to learn spinning. You should learn
everything that goes with it, that is to say, repairing the spinningwheel, recognizing the different varieties of cotton, ginning, pressing,
carding, spinning, moistening the yarn, making skeins, joining
thebroken thread—all these processes. You should learn to make a
mal 1 and to wind the sadi 2 round the spindle. Moreover, wherever you
go you should learn what else you can besides these processes, and as
part of this programme of studies you should improve your
proficiency in Hindi and Sanskrit. In studying Sanskrit, you should
know the meaning of every verse in the Gita along with its syntax.
And of course, you should learn to spin on the takli. There was a
telegram from Karachi to say that your name has been sent to the
Board. I am happy.
Write to me regularly and go on working very cheerfully. Now,
from the 2nd to the 8th I shall be in Gondia, Nagpur, Wardha, Akola
and Amaravati. I am not certain about the towns on the programme. It
will be better to address your letters to Wardha.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, pp. 45-6

21. COMPLICATIONS OF UNTOUCHABILITY
I publish in this issue Shri Govindji Jadavdas’s letter under the
heading which he has himself given to it, viz., “The Downfall of
Hinduism”. The purport of his letter is this: If untouchability is to be
removed, then why have separate schools, temples and wells for the
untouchables? This argument is certainly not pointless. Similar problems have arisen and still arise in South Africa. I had raised the
argument myself, in South Africa, that setting up of separate schools
for the Indians means prolonging the life of untouchability. Only
those who have themselves suffered can realize the pain of other
sufferers; in the same way I can appreciate Shri Govindji’s unhappiness.
But where I realized that it would be considered foolish on my
part to ignore the existence of a thing which does exist, I did my work
1
2

Belt or cord passing round the wheel and the spindle
Cotton thread moistened with gum

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

27

with full realization of the discrimination which was there. So I
accepted the proposal of having separate schools. I had also accepted
[in S. Africa] the proposal for separate first and second-class compartments in trains for Indians. Like Govindji I too had opposed such a
discrimination there. But when the mere existence of a community
was in danger, I accepted such a discrimination which would virtually
lead to lightening the discrimination in spite of its continuance. For
example, the Indians could formerly travel only by the third class; as a
result of the agitation an order was issued allowing them to travel in
first and second-class compartments. Simultaneously it was decided to
have for the Indians separate first and second-class coaches. We
accepted this provision even after we had opposed discrimination. The
government authorities can make arrangements [for common coaches] but how can others be forced to sit with us?
I yielded to this line of thinking and came to the conclusion that
as long as the Antyajas are not able to make use of common temples,
etc., it is better to have for them separate institutions by which they
may benefit, rather than totally to deprive them of the amenity.
Theoretically, untouchability has disappeared. Still many are not yet
ready to discard it altogether in practice. What should the friends of
the untouchables do so long as such a situation persists? How else can
they prove their sincerity of purpose? The answer should be that it can
be done by constructing temples, etc., for the untouchables.
Shri Govindji says that such temples, etc., may be built, but why
label them with unpleasant words, “for the untouchables only”? No
one has assigned such unpleasant labels. The temples, etc., which are
being built are used by those who have made donations towards their
cost as well as by other friends of the untouchables. From this
viewpoint the institutions built for the benefit of the untouchables are
in fact for the general public. But the untouchables have the first
claim upon them. In the matter of using these institutions, the untouchables are given the first preference, and their requirements looked
to first.
Though I can fully realize the unhappiness of an Antyaja like
Shri Govindji, I wish him to believe that the Antyaj Directory1 and the
underlying motive to build temples, etc., is pure, laudable and in the
interests of the Antyajas.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 9-1-1927
1

28

Vide “Antyaja Directory”, 12-12-1926.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

22. INTERVIEW TO BHAGWANDAS1
BANARAS,
January 9, 1927
BHAGWANDAS :

Mahatmaji, I wish very much to know what you think of

certain measures which seem to me very helpful, or indeed indispensable, for the
welfare and progress of India in political as well as other respects. I have been trying
my feeble best to place them before the public for the last six years, but more or less
in vain. If they could secure your approval, the country would look at them with more
consideration, and might attempt to put them into operation, for the force of your
tapasya (asceticism and self-denial) is very great, and the country rightly places
great faith in you because of your great selflessness. I put these measures into the
form of proposals for Resolutions, and requested my dear friend, Shri Shiva Prasad
Gupta, to try to get them placed before the Gauhati Congress. But nothing more could
be done than to place copies in the hands of the members of the A.I. Congress
Committee. With your permission I will put the same in the form of questions to you.
First of all, do you think, or not, that the essence of true swaraj, true selfgovernment, is that all the laws should be made by the elected representatives of the
people, and that these elected representatives should embody the higher self, and not
the lower self, of the people, that is to say, they should be the wisest, the most
experienced, the most unselfish and philanthropic persons available?
MAHATMA GANDHI:

This also is among the essential features.

What other essential features are there, if any?

My ideal is that every person should realize dharma. In that
case, there will be no need left for any representatives. That is the ideal
swaraj. There are no rulers and no ruled in that swaraj. no government
servants; all are the servants of all. This is the ideal swaraj. If this ideal
swaraj is kept in view, mistakes would be avoided, or, at least, minimized. It is certain that such ideal swaraj can never be attained; but we
will be able to make a near approach to it.
This is no doubt the highest kind of swaraj. Apparently the Republic of the
Uttara-Kuru as described in the Mahabharata was something like this.
But the inhabitants of that happy land were all supermen and superwomen,
god-and-goddess-like Jivanmuktas and Yoga-Siddhas, perfect, final, men and women,
1

The original Hindi report of the interview was published in Aaj, 19-2-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

29

insan-ul-ka-mil, mard-wa-zan-i-mam (“Be ye perfect, even as your Father in Heaven
is perfect”), according to the tradition of that epic. In view, obviously, of our present
condition, however, you yourself said at the Ahmedabad Congress of 1921 that you
could lead this country to Dominion Home Rule. Would not that be the preliminary or
intermediate form of swaraj which would be suitable for us now?

Yes.
There must be legislatures in such swaraj?

Yes.
Representatives would have to be elected for them?

Yes.
These representatives should be the wisest, most experienced, most self-less,
most philanthropic persons available?

Yes.
Electors should always keep this ideal, this guiding principle, in view?

Yes.
Should this guiding principle be followed in making elections for District
Boards, Municipal Boards, and other local elective bodies, as well as for the Congress
Committees of all grades?

Certainly.
Is this guiding principle recognized by, is this ideal spread among, the Indian
public?

To some extent.
Looking at the elections made to the Congress Committee and the various
elective bodies, what inference can we draw as to the extent to which this principle is
recognized and acted on? Is the extent very small, or sufficient?

It is less than it ought to be.
This same principle should guide the elections to the legislative bodies,
should it not?

It should guide all the elections that are made nowadays.
Has sufficient effort been made by leaders, individually, or by the Congress as
a body, to spread this ideal among the public?

It would not be enough to say yes or no in reply to this question. I believe that the present atmosphere is not favourable for this
purpose.
You said before that the principle had been recognized to some extent by the
public. What was the cause of the spread of the ideal to that small extent?

So far the effort has been individual. When the atmosphere
becomes favourable, then all persons begin to act according to such
ideals without any effort.
30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Should effort be made to create such a favourable atmosphere or not?

It should be made unceasingly.
What kind of effort would be helpful?

The number of the individuals who make this effort should
increase constantly. And there is, and has always been, only one way
to bring about this increase, viz., that those who believe in this ideal
should cling to it in the face of all difficulties.
That is to say, individuals should spread the ideal by teaching and preaching,
in speech and writing?

Individuals should preach by the example of their conduct.
Speeches and writings are also of help. Conduct includes speaking
and writing.
I entirely agree that preaching has no force if the preacher does not act up to
his own advice. But while you have been putting on khaddar and working the charkha
yourself, you have also, side by side, with the setting of this personal example, been
preaching them very extensively and very diligently. And that is why they are
spreading. So too you have been preaching assiduously and widely various measures
connected with non-violent non-co-operation. Do you not think that in this very
important matter also it is very necessary to give advice to and remind the public
persistently as thus: “Whenever you have to elect representatives, you should elect
persons of such-and-such qualifications”? Without such advice, will not the general
public remain in darkness, without any guide, in this exceedingly important matter?

This question is right. But really the answer to it is included in
my previous answer. I regard advising and preaching as part of
conduct generally. I do not give a separate place to precept because
when a person cannot set a good example his precept is useless, and
often becomes harmful. And he who keeps his conduct right does as a
fact give advice also whenever there is an opportunity.
But so far as I am aware, you have not advised the Indian public as yet, in your
speeches and writings, as to the qualifications they should look for in the persons
they elect.

Not once but many times have I given this advice, in speech and
writing.
Should I find writings on the subject in Young India?

Yes.
I will search. In the meanwhile, will you kindly tell me what means should be
employed, what rules followed, to secure properly qualified representatives? So far as
I can see, the general complaint is that the representatives chosen are not of the right
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

31

quality, either in the self-governed countries of the West or in present-day India under
the new election system. This is the one chief and serious defect in current systems of
self-government, is it not?

And this is the reason why I strongly oppose Council-entry. So
long as the people do not realize swatva (i.e., spirituality), so long as
their intelligence is not awake, so long it will not be possible to secure
purity in elections by any laws. And this purity has a large part in my
present efforts. From the very beginning my endeavour has been
directed towards the increase of the power, the soul-force of the
people, by self-purification and tapasya (self-denial, riyazat, nafskushi). By such tapasya their intelligence will be purified and rectified. Because of this, the persons who were elected for Municipal
Boards, etc., after the commencement of the non-co-operation movement, were good persons, and they were elected without trouble and
expense. When that atmosphere disappeared, confusion began.
By the ancient tradition of this land, tapasya (self-denial, riyazat, zohd) and
vidya (right knowledge) are two distinguishable (though more or less interdependent)
things, and only by the combination of both is achieved that true humanity, true
spirituality, or realization of God or Self or Brahman or Allah or Brahmanhood, or
Kamal, however it may be called, which is what I believe you mean by swatva
(selfness). In the Puranic story we read that Ravana and others made great tapasya,
but the result of that was tyrannical earthly power and excessive luxury to them, for
some time, and groaning to the rest of the world. They made tapasya without vidya
(right knowledge). What I feel is that in the atmosphere created by the N.C.O., there
was the element of tapasya, but not of vidya (emotion and enthusiasm and self-denial
but not clear intelligence and right knowledge of the essential feature of the object to
be striven for); and that this was the reason why the atmosphere could not gain
permanence, but dispersed in two or three years. Do you think this belief of mine to
be right or wrong?

It is generally right. A little modification is needed. Our tapasya
at that time was not sufficient in amount. Had it been sufficient, we
should certainly have achieved the vidya also. The Lord has said in
the Gita that God gives right understanding to the person of firm
devotion.
I too believe so, but devotion brings such wholesome fruit only when it is
rightly directed, when its aim, its object, its ideal, is the Right Object, not otherwise.
The Gita also says: “They who worship other gods go to the other gods; they who
worship Me (the Higher Self) come to Me.” Also : “There is no purifier like unto
knowledge.” My belief has therefore always been that from the very beginning of

32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

tapasya (self-denying effort), right knowledge of the essential features of the true
Goal is also absolutely indispensable; otherwise the soul-force, the power, of
whatever kind, gathered by tapasya, will certainly err away into wrong paths, as that
of Ravana, etc. Is that belief of mine wrong or right?

Entirely right.
Just for this very reason have I been endeavouring, from the very beginning of
the N.C.O. movement, that side by side with the tapasya (self-sacrifice) of N.C.O.,
appropriate vidya (right knowledge) should be particularly imparted to the people, by
the Congress and the leaders, as to the essential of this intermediate swaraj, i.e.,
Dominion Home Rule, viz., the election of duly qualified representatives. Was this
wish of mine wrong?

If it meant that any yojana (detailed constitution) should be
placed before the people, then I have arrived at the opinion that it
would be of no use. But it is quite right and proper that such knowledge should be given to the people, that they should be so awakened
as will make them able to elect duly qualified representatives only.
What the qualifications of the representatives should be—I do not like
to fix this now. All this should be left to the intelligence of the
electors.
In respect of the charkha, the cultivation of cotton, the storing of yarn, the
weaving of cloth, the selling of it, etc., you yourself and through your co-workers,
are constantly giving instruction and information to the people in much detail. Do
you not think it necessary to give to the people, similarly, in respect of this very
important matter even some little specific indication as to the marks by which the
fitness of representatives might be recognized? Even such self-evident truths, as that
two and two make four, have to be taught to children with much labour. That the
charkha should be worked in leisure hours is also an almost self-evident proposition;
yet this also, and with all the labour you have spent on it, is not yet so widespread
among the people as it ought to be. Now then can you leave for the unaided
understanding of the electors the decision of the fitness of representatives, without
any instruction and guidance? If you think it undesirable to fix any age-limit, you
might give indications in some other respects at least.

I have written something in this respect, and will write as I find
time. But there is no need to speak about it in the Congress. When the
people come to the occasion for electing representatives, then advice
will have to be given to them about it, as is done now regarding the
charkha. Everything has its own fit time.
Which of the qualifications suggested by me in No. 2 of my proposals for the
Gauhati Congress do you think to be desirable, if any at all, for persons to be elected?
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

33

Almost all, but not for legislative enactment. It is a matter essentially for the education of the electors.
I will now ask about another matter. Is it possible to bring about unity and
peace between the followers of the several religions without explaining to them that
the essentials of all these religions are one and the same? Without showing that the
various religions are one at heart, is it possible to make the various religionists one
at heart?

No.
Only when it is explained to the followers of the several religions that the
heart of all religions is the same, will it become possible to make peace between the
followers thereof?

Yes.
What should be done to bring this about?

All the good and true followers of the several religions should
preach and promulgate this fact.
What special effort have you made, or intend to make, in this behalf?

I have made enough individual effort; and it continues to be
made even today. There is a lack of persons amongst us for this
prachara (propaganda), i.e., there are very few persons amongst us
who might separate the merits and demerits of the various religions,
bring together all the merits, and put them before the people.
Do you not think that an influential leader like yourself should bring together
into a committee elected representatives, large-hearted and broadminded, of the
several religions current in India, who might preach such essential unity of the
religions by speech, writings, and conduct?

I think I have made efforts to the extent of my powers; but it
seems I have not the ability to bring together educated and learned
persons for such work. I have, therefore, contented myself with my
own individual efforts.
As the time is short, I pass on to another subject. The Hindu Sabha is laying
stress on shuddhi and sangathan. Can the work of shuddhi be done effectively
without accepting the principle of “class-caste by temperament and functions (and
not by birth)”? And is the work of sangathan possible without first abolishing the
mutual untouchability which prevails at present in respect of dining among the
thousands of sub-castes of Hindus?

I have explained my views as regards shuddhi and sangathan in
Young India in the articles I wrote in appreciation of Shraddhanandji.
I am unable to say more. I may say here, however, that even
34

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

panktibheda (Separate seats at dinner) is destructive of sangathan,
without a doubt.
You have said in Young India of 6-1-1927 : “Both the tabligh and the shuddhi
which is a reply to the former, have to undergo a radical change. Progress of liberal
study of religions of the world is bound to revolutionize the existing clumsy method
of proselytizing which looks to the form rather than the substance. It is the
transference of allegiance from one fold to another and the mutual decrying of rival
faiths which gives rise to mutual hatred. . . .” “The third aspect of shuddhi is
conversion properly so called. And I question its use in this age of growing toleration
and enlightenment. I am against conversion, whether it is known as shuddhi b y
Hindus, tabligh by Mussalmans, or proselytizing by Christians.”
I most heartily subscribe to all this; in saying it you have completely
endorsed the first two objects of the Theosophical Society, which has been working
for fifty-one years, and of which I have been a member for forty-three. But the
“growing toleration and enlightenment” are obviously growing very very slowly,
and the “liberal study of the religions of the world”, which “is bound to revolutionize
the existing clumsy methods of proselytizing” which seek simply to change the
labels and signboards on the foreheads of persons, has failed to produce its due effect,
so far, on the practice of the highly educated men who are at the back of these
conversion movements. Therefore is it not desirable that a great leader like yourself
should diligently help to quicken the growth of the toleration and enlightenment and
the progress of the liberal study of religions, in more specific and express ways, as
suggested in No. 6 of my proposals for the Gauhati Congress, by organizing
committees for the purpose all over the country, to do this vitally important work,
which has been rather put aside latterly by the Theosophical Society?
When I asked in my previous question whether the principle of caste according
to character-and-functioning (karmana varnah) was not the only legitimate basis as
well as completion of shuddhi, my implication was just this that if the principle was
accepted, the whole of mankind would at once be “converted” to essential Hinduism
without anyone having to change his particular religious label or signboard.

I can only answer in the words of the seer : “The distant scene I
do not care to see, one step enough for me.” After all, the future
isdetermined by the sum-total of the present activities, often contradictory, of mankind.
You do not, presumably, think it undesirable to form an army of volunteers for
public work in connection with the Congress. If so, do you not think that if the
qualifications mentioned in No. 5(a-b) of my proposals for the Gauhati Congress were
prescribed and adopted, the army would become much more efficient? If you consider
any particular qualification out of these inappropriate, or any other as more
appropriate, would you very kindly mention it?

It would be desirable to form such a corps if it is possible. The
qualifications too are good. But my experience shows that we are not
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

35

in a position to form any such body for all India. It will not come into
being by means of resolutions.
The Hindustan Times, 4-10-1927

23. SPEECH AT BENARES HINDU UNIVERSITY1
BANARAS,

January 9, 1927
“ You have had your say now. No one is listening to you. Why not stop talking of khaddar?” That was the advice that was being given him in some quarters.
Gandhiji said:

But why should I stop reciting my favourite mantra when I have
before me the example of Prahlad of old refusing to give up Ramanama in the teeth of tortures worse than death? And I have not had to
go through any tortures yet. How can I give up the only message that
the condition of my country has been whispering to me? Panditji2 has
collected and has been still collecting lakhs and lakhs of rupees for
you from Rajas and Maharajas. The money apparently comes from
these wealthy princes, but in reality it comes from the millions of our
poor. For unlike Europe the rich of our land grow rich at the expense
of our villagers the bulk of whom have to go without a square meal a
day. The education that you receive today is thus paid for by the
starving villagers who will never have the chance of such an education.
It is your duty to refuse to have an education that is not within the
reach of the poor, but I do not ask that of you today. I ask you to
render just a slight return to the poor by doing a little yajn for them.
For he who eats without doing his yajna steals his food, say the Gita.
The yajna that was required of the British civic population during the
War was for each household to grow potatoes in its yard and for each
household to do a little simple sewing. The yajna of our age and for
us is the spinning-wheel. Day in and day out I have been talking
about it, writing about it. I shall say no more today. If the message of
the poor of India has touched your hearts I want you to raid Kripalani’s khaddar store tomorrow and denude it of all its stock, and to
empty your pockets tonight. Panditji has cultivated the art of beggary.
1
The meeting was attended by about 2,000 students and was held under a
shamiana specially erected for the Viceregal visit which preceded Gandhiji’s by just a
week. The report is extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”.
2
Madan Mohan Malaviya

36

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I have learnt it from him, and if he specializes in laying the princes
under tribute, I have learnt to be equally shameless in emptying the
pockets of the poor, for the benefit of those who are poorer than they.
*
*
*
Malaviyaji’s one object in begging millions for you, in raising
these palatial buildings, is to send out to the country gems of purest
ray, citizens healthy and strong to serve their motherland. That purpose will be defeated if you allow yourselves to be swept with the wind
that comes today from the West—the wind of impurity. Not that the
methods have the general sanction of Europe. There are friends in
Europe, a very few, who are fighting hard to counteract the poisonous
tendency. But if you do not wake up betimes, the immoral wave that is
fast gathering strength might soon envelop and overwhelm you. I cry
out to you, therefore, with all the strength at my command: Be
warned, and flee from the fire before it consumes you.
Young India, 20-1-1927

24. SPEECH AT SHRADDHANAND MEMORIAL MEETING,
BANARAS
January 9, 1927
It is a sacred day today and the meeting is taking place at a very
good spot, where temple and mosque stand side by side. If any
Mussalman considers Swami Shraddhanand to have been an enemy,
he is in error. Swamiji died as a hero. He pursued his mission according to truth and dharma with great courage.
[From Hindi]
Aaj, 10-1-1927

25. SPEECH AT MEETING OF UNTOUCHABLES, BANARAS
January 9, 1927
I thank you for the address you have presented to me. If
Mussalmans will only realize it, this is for them too a sacred day. We
have today paid homage to the memory of Swami Shraddhanand and
have bathed in the Ganga. We took the holy bath in the hope that we
too might gain some of the qualities of Swamiji. Swamiji was a friend
of the untouchables. He suffered in their suffering. And it was for
their sake that he sacrificed his life. It was all to the good. If someone
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

37

gets killed for the sake of religion it brings him only good. He cannot
die a nobler death. Swamiji was so firm that he found it painful himself to go where untouchables were not allowed to go—just as Yudhishthira would not go even to heaven without his companion, the dog.
The untouchables too have faults. Some of them drink. This they
should give up. They should not argue that after all caste Hindus
drink too. For the untouchables have got to go forward. They should
imitate virtues, not vices. They should not gamble. They should not
lie. They should maintain cleanliness. Every morning and evening
they should repeat the name of Rama and thus cleanse their souls. We
should all wear khadi. For this gives livelihood to the poor. Contributions will be raised all over the country today for the emanci-pation
of the untouchables. I want that you should also contribute at least
one pice each. I pray to God that the hearts of the so-called untouchables may become pure and they may be pillars of the Hindu
community.
[From Hindi]
Aaj, 10-1-1927

26. SPEECH AT MEETING OF WOMEN, BANARAS1
January 9, 1927
Sisters, I have just come from one meeting and am on my way
to another, a bigger one. Please listen peacefully to the few words I
have to say to you. The first thing is that if you want swaraj or
Ramarajya in India you have to become pure as Sita. Sita was pure in
body and mind. When she was put through the ordeal on her return
from Lanka, the flames did not even touch her. Why? Because she was
pure not only in body but also in mind. No cloth was imported from
England at the time, English cloth was not worn. All women plied the
charkha and wore khadi. Foreign cloth does not add to your beauty.
Real beauty consists in making body and mind pure. Only a woman
who keeps body and mind pure can be worthy of our reverence.
Therefore, sisters, wear khadi, ply the charkha and become pure.
Make your sons and daughters pure by having them wear khadi. If
you wish to give me something make some donation for khadi.
The other thing I wish to talk to you about is the death of Swami
Shraddhanand. Swamiji is not dead: he lives in our hearts. He was
1

38

The meeting was held in the Kashi Naresh Hall of the Hindu School.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

brave; he had a noble soul. We have taken a bath in the Ganga and we
have paid tribute to Swamiji. May God impart to us some of his
qualities so that we can carry on his work.
[From Hindi]
Aaj, 12-1-1927

27. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, BANARAS
January 9, 1927
Mahatmaji thanked the Municipal Board for the address presented to him and
said it had been suggested to him that he should start his new programme from
Banaras. He said:

I am sorry I have not come here to enunciate some new programme. Nor am I aware of any new programme. I am afraid therefore that those who have come to this meeting looking for a new programme will have to be disappointed. I put before the people only
what I feel is to their good. There is nowhere else in the world such
stark poverty as prevails in India. The poor want work. The peasantry
want work for four months of the year. The purpose is not fulfilled by
simply distributing money among the poor. This will make beggars of
them. The best occupation for them, the best work for the peasantry is
the charkha. No one has told me that there can be any simpler occupation than the charkha. I therefore appeal to you to wear khadi, ply
the charkha and help in this programme. I appeal to you to go and
see the khadi exhibition after this meeting. You will then know what
fine khadi is now being produced. If people were to help in this, ten
times as much could be accomplished.
God dwells in our hearts. If we listen to Him we shall know that
it is our duty to wear cloth made by poor people. Foreigners would
even distribute their cloth free to make it acceptable to us. Those who
grudge paying a little extra money for the poor cannot be either true
Hindus or true Mussalmans. For those who will not help the poor, it is
futile to think of God.
I have just come from Bangali Tola and a meeting of women at
the Hindu School. Women have made donations. Some of them have
parted with even their jewellery. Here at this meeting also there are
some sisters. I ask them too to be pure as Sitaji. When she was put
through the ordeal, when she entered the fire, she did not get burnt,
the flames did not so much as touch her. No foreign cloth ever came
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

39

in contact with Sitaji’s body. Sitaji and her maid both plied the
charkha. During that age yarn was spun with hand and people wore
hand-spun cloth. I appeal to the ladies to ply the charkha and wear
khadi.
I am asked why I keep silent on the Hindu-Muslim question. We
have now lost grip of this question. Today is the jalanjali1 day of
Swami Shraddhanand. Let us today commune with his soul. A brother
of ours became mad and killed him. In truth he is not dead. He lives
yet. Had the assassin not become mad this tragedy would not have
occurred. I receive letters saying that there are a number of people
behind this. I do not know. But I know that this killing is against the
teachings of the Koran. I cannot accept that Shraddhanandji was an
enemy of the Mussalmans. I did not agree with all his views. All the
same I have repeatedly said the Mussalmans should not consider
Shraddhanandji, Malaviyaji and Lalaji their enemies. All have the
right freely and fearlessly to express their views. All can preach their
several religions. Swamiji was full of compassion for all living things.
Now of course the untouchables are treated much more humanely
than before. In this respect we have made some progress. Swami
Shraddhanand had been associated with this work from a very early
stage. Emancipation of the untouchables was the main part of his
programme. The time is now coming when Hindus and Muslims will
cleanse their hearts and God will be pleased. The only way in which
we can please Swamiji’s soul is for all of us to help in the work for the
emancipation of the untouchables.
I must tell the Hindus to wash off the stain of untouchability.
This will be true shuddhi. They should not think of revenge. If they
do, they will cause pain to the soul of Shraddhanandji and disgrace
Hinduism. Madness cannot be answered by madness. I appeal to the
Hindus not to seek revenge, not to think of it. Otherwise they would
cause pain to the soul of Shraddhanandji.
To the Mussalmans I have to say this. Let there not be a single
Mussalman who approves this killing of Shraddhanandji even privately. There is nothing in the Koran to support this. If we wish to free
India, we must cleanse our hearts.
[From Hindi]
Aaj, 12-1-1927
1

40

Offering of water as part of obsequies
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

28. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised

BANARAS alias KASHI ,

January 10, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter, or letters is it? I am writing this against my
time for going to the station.
I am glad of all the varied experiences you are having. I shall
not be angry so long as you keep your health and your mental
balance. For the rest we learn through mistakes. Not that I know of
mistakes made by you. But where there is consciousness of mistakes,
readiness to mend is sufficient penance and antidote in a majority of
cases.
I had rich experiences in Kashi, but of these I have no time to
speak.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5196. Courtesy: Mirabehn

29. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
KASHI ,

Silence Day, Pausa Sud 6 [January 10, 1927] 1
DEAR SISTERS,

Only yesterday I got the letter written by Chi. Radha. I see that
your 7 o’clock prayers are going on regularly and that all of you feel
interested in them. I am happy. What Kaka Saheb has said is certainly
worth bearing in mind. Instead of replying by a mere yes or no, we
should develop the ability to understand and explain the reasons for
our reply.
Yesterday was the day of homage to Shraddhanandji. Pandit
Malaviyaji is here in Kashi at present. He sent word at the last moment
that we ought to go to the Ganga-ghat for a bath and prayers. I got
ready and took with me the students of the Rashtriya Vidyapith who
had come to see me. We formed ourselves in twos and started. Malaviyaji joined us and slowly our procession swelled. I have not time for
1

Pausa Sud 6 seems to be a slip for Pausa Sud 7 which was a Monday.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

41

describing the scene at the Gangaghat. It was simply grand. The ghat
is not as clean as I would wish it to be.
After bath, we went for the darshan of Kashi Vishwanath.
Mahadev will perhaps give you a description of other things there.
The German lady was with us. It was doubtful whether she would be
permitted to enter. She is a Buddhist and hence can be regarded as a
Hindu. How could she be denied admittance? I had decided that if she
was stopped, I too would not go in. But the priest kept quiet when he
was told that she was a Hindu.
How can I describe the dirtiness of the street leading to the
Kashi Vishwanath temple?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3634

30. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
KASHI ,

Monday [January 10, 1927] 1
CHI. MANILAL,

I have your letter. There is no harm if Ba reads it. I have not
given it to her so far, but I intend to. You would have done a good
turn to Harilal if you had not given him even the ten rupees which
you gave. But don’t mind, since you have given it. I don’t think you
have made any big mistake. Often strictness results in real kindness
and kindness turns out to be cruelty. If all people become strict with
Harilal with a loving heart, his eyes would soon open. But all of us are
full of weaknesses and, therefore, cannot cultivate such loving strictness. Being ourselves in need of false kindness, we show such kindness
to others. I am not reproaching you for giving him ten rupees but am
only trying to teach you wisdom. You will still have many ordeals to
pass through.
I have been trying to do something for you. Have no worry on
that account. But make yourself worthy. Do not waste a single
moment. If you have time, write an article about E. A. either for
Young India or Navajivan and send it to me immediately.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1118. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi
1

42

Gandhiji was in Banaras on Monday, January 10, 1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

31. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 10, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter describing the drive with Hakimji. I do not
mind either your tasting the dishes at Brijkishen’s or the pan from
Hakimji. The latter’s tempting you with pan distresses me. It is bad
stuff and he should never have offered it to you. But opinions differ.
He evidently considers it to be harmless. However, the reasoning that
you have employed for justifying the tasting of the dishes and the pan
is in my opinion faulty. Why should one know the taste of what one
does not need or wish to take? Do you know that this is the reasoning
that has been applied to justify every form of vice? It is the million
times told story of the forbidden apple: why should I not know the
taste of the thing I am asked not to take or touch? But you must not
worry. If you do not understand my reasoning, you must argue with
me patiently. If you appreciate my reasoning, it is to serve as warning
in the future. But it must not result in self-reproach. There is no cause
for it. The incident is trivial. But trivialities possess deadly potentialities. Hence the paternal warning.
Now about your analysis of the Kanya Gurukul. I hope you
have spoken about it to Vidyavati. But you must discuss it freely with
Principals Ramdev and Sethi. Principal Ramdev is her guide and if he
is convinced, immediate improvement can be made. I propose to send
him the relevant extract from your letter. That will make your position
quite clear. The insanitation, the indiscipline must go. The antiMuslim feeling is a more difficult proposition. But you have to do
your duty. Little girls’ minds must not be poisoned if we can help it.
But whilst you will talk about these things, you will remember your
limits. You have gone out to learn Hindi and to observe and gain
experience, not to reform or teach. Yours will, therefore, be remarks
only by the way and merely as suggestions either for acceptance or
rejection. Your own conduct is sufficient effort for reform otherwise.I
am writing this on the moving train during my silence which finishes
at 9 p.m.
With love,
BAPU

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

43

[PS.]
Yes, when you go back to Delhi to inspect takli-spinning you
may stay with Brijkishen.
BAPU

[PPS.]
Can you decipher my writing?
From the original: C.W. 5195. Courtesy: Mirabehn

32. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
ON THE TRAIN ,

Monday [January 10, 1927] 1
BHAISHRI NANABHAI,

I have your letter. I feel that Dastane’s demand is reasonable.
Just now I am touring for collecting funds. Hence I should go in the
main to places where I can expect to obtain some contributions. But I
think Akola is bound to be included in the itinerary. There is no
question of my not visiting a place which has a devoted lover of Khadi
like you. Formerly I used to tour with the idea which you have
explained. If you do not follow the difference, ask me again. Gomatibehn 2 must be free from her fever and Kishorelal must have left by
now.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRIYUT NANABHAI ICHCHHARAM MASHRUWALA
AKOLA DISTRICT
From a photostat of the Gujarati:
Mashruwala

1
2

44

C.W. 4319. Courtesy:

Kanubhai

The postmark bears the date January 13, 1927. Monday fell on January 10.
Wife of Kishorelal Mashruwala
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

33. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
KASHI ,

Monday [January 10, 1927] 1
DEAR HARIBHAU,

I have received your letter. There is no reason to be unhappy
about the resolution passed by the school committee with regard to
Martand. I personally feel that your decision to keep him there is best.
But if you wish to send him to Wardha there should be no difficulty.
It would be as well to know what Martand himself wants.
My health is fine. I am going to Bihar today. Devdas is with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Haribhau Upadhyaya Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

34. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
KASHI ,

Silence Day [January 10, 1927]
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

I have been wanting to write to you every Monday, but the letter
remains unwritten till it is time for the post to go. So I decided to write
early today.
I may not write to you; but can I forget you? I cannot forget
you even if I want because the packet of cloves and the blankets you
have given constantly remind me of you.
As for my experiences, what should I write and what not write?
You can read about them in Young India and Navajivan.
I am keeping very good health. Now I am closing the letter
because people have started coming.
Tell Mridu that I shall ask her for the account. Do go to the Ashram
occasionally.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 11573
1

From the contents. Gandhiji was in Kashi on January 9 and 10, 1927, and
left for Bihar on the 10th.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

45

35. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
[After January 10, 1927] 1
CHI. GANGABEHN,

Never mind if you commit mistakes. If you keep on trying to
avoid them, they will cease by and by.
Spiritual progress is easy for one whose mind is always occupied
with thoughts of serving others. Since you are constantly engaged in
such service, everything will be well with you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8704. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

36. LETTER TO COW-PROTECTION COMMITTEE,
MYSORE
AS AT THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

January 11, 1927
DEAR FRIEND ,

I must apologize to you for the very long delay in acknowledging your letter of 27th November, 1926. I duly received your first
intimation which I thought was purely formal and as I had nothing
effective to say, I did not send you a reply. From your second letter,
however, I observe that you were anxious to have my opinion. But
when I received it I was so overwhelmed with work that I had no time
to collect my thoughts and give you a considered reply. Even as it is, I
am sending you this reply in the midst of my Bihar tour. I hope you
will accept these facts as sufficient excuse for the delay that has been
caused in sending you my reply. Probably now it is of no use, even so
I gave myself the satisfaction of telling you that there was no
discourtesy intended by me in the first instance in not replying and
now in replying at a time when my reply may prove too late.
In matters of religion I am against any State interference, and
the cow question is in India a mixed matter of religion and economy.
So far as economy is concerned, I have no doubt that it is the concern
1

46

The letter was in reply to the addressee’s dated January 10, 1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of every State, whether Hindu or Mussalman, to conserve the cattle
supply. But, if I have understood your questionnaire rightly, the
underlying note is whether the State would be justified in interposing
itself between Hindus and Mussalmans and regulating cow slaughter
even for purposes which Mussalmans consider to be religious. In
India which I consider to be as much the land of Hindus born in it as
of Mussalmans, Christians and others born in it, even a Hindu State
may not prohibit cow slaughter for purposes considered to be
religious by any of its subjects without the consent of the intelligent
majority of such subjects so long as such slaughter is conducted in
private and without any intention of provoking or giving offence to
Hindus. That the very knowledge of any such slaughter would give
offence to Hindus is inevitable. But unfortunately we know that in
India cow slaughter is often resorted to defy and wound Hindu sentiment. This should be put down by every State that has the slightest
regard for its subjects. But in my opinion the economic side of the
cow question, if it is properly handled, automatically provides for the
delicate religious side. Cow slaughter should be and can be made
economically impossible, whereas unfortunately, of all the places in
the world, it is the sacred animal of the Hindus which has become the
cheapest for slaughter. To this end I suggest the following:
(1) The State should in the open market buy out every [head
of]
cattle offered for sale by outbidding every other buyer.
(2)
The State should run dairies in all principal towns
ensuring a cheap supply of milk.
(3) The State should run tanneries where the hides, bones,
etc., of all dead cattle in its possession should be utilized and should
offer to buy again in the open market all privately-owned dead cattle.
(4) The State should keep model cattle farms and instruct the
people in the art of breeding and keeping cattle.
(5) The State should make liberal provision . . .1
From a microfilm: S. N. 12667

1

The letter is incomplete.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

47

37. LETTER TO A. C. C. HARVEY 1
AS AT THE ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

January 11, 1927
DEAR FRIEND1,

Your letter written on Christmas Day has followed me in my
travels and I am able to overtake it only today. I would ask you to
believe me when I tell you that I have nothing against General Dyer or
even Sir Michael O’Dwyer. 2 They were both creatures3 and symptoms of a deep-seated disease of which I had not sufficient knowledge
when I pleaded for co-operation at Amritsar. Whatever force there was
in my plea was in my honest belief behind it. The Rowlatt Act and
the subsequent events having opened my eyes, I cannot summon to
my aid the fervour of Amritsar. My belief is shaken. Nothing has
happened to restore it, though I am eager for its restoration. It gives
me no pleasure to disbelieve men and measures. But I shall be false if
I shut my eyes to facts as I see them. I think that non-co-operation is a
fundamental fact in God’s plan, even as darkness is. There is no such
thing as co-operation if there is no non-co-operation.4 If we give our
co-operation for the prosecution of that which is good, we must
withdraw it from that which is evil. I believe that the present British
administration of India is on the whole not good but positively evil.
The military policy and the revenue policy which includes the hideous
1
A.C.C. Harvey was on the staff of the Khalsa College, Amritsar, during
1919-20, and met Gandhiji when he visited the institution (S.N. 12094).
2
Harvey had referred to a meeting at Bombay on December 21, at which Sir
Chimanlal Setalwad and Jinnah had “urged the policy of ‘back to Amritsar’ ”, whereas
Gandhiji, he recalled, has persuaded the Congress at Amritsar to adopt a ‘policy of
moderation and co-operation’. Harvey had observed that “Worse things were done on
the nationalist side than that of the Government”. Ibid.
3
The source has “preachers”.
4
Criticizing the policy of non-co-operation as not being right “in the light
of the universal religion”, Harvey had commended “the policy of co-operation, of
friendly discussion, of ‘getting together’ to talk over things, to explain viewpoints,
quietly, sincerely and with desire to understand, as so ably exemplified by such men
as Lord Reading, Lord Irwin”. Further, Harvey had described the policy of non-cooperation as not only negative and therefore barren, “not only politically wrong, but
also irreligious, contrary to the will of God”. He had appealed to Gandhiji “to ponder
over these words so that you may perhaps be helpful to them to give a right lead”
(S.N. 12094).

48

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

traffic in drink and drugs and the preference given to English interests
over Indian are causing progressive deterioration both moral and
material of the people of this unhappy country. English people are
not all conscious of this tremendous wrong that is being done to the
country and they will never be if we continue to give our co-operation
whether through ignorance, through hypocrisy or through weakness.
Ludhiana Punjab] Non-co-operation, therefore, is the only
alternative to an armed rebellion. It has been suggested that the object
can be achieved by persuasion and argument. In my opinion, which is
based upon extensive experience, argument has only a limited place in
an endeavour to persuade people. In deepest matters argument hopelessly fails. But whilst I feel so strongly about my position, let me
assure you that my non-co-operation is itself designed to bring about
co-operation. I need hardly assure you. . . .1
[A. C. C. HARVEY
GOVERNMENT INTERMEDIATE C OLLEGE
From a photostat: S.N. 12804

38. A LETTER2
AS

ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI ,

AT THE

January 12, 1927
DEAR FRIEND ,

I do not propose to deal with your letter in the columns of
Young India, because I think the average reader has not the difficulty
that has presented itself to you. I could certainly call myself a votary
of non-violence, if in spite of the consciousness that I kill thousands
of invisible creatures, I incessantly long to be free from the necessity
of so killing and avoid every occasion possible for so doing. And, I
therefore long to be free from the bondage of the flesh which is birth
and death. My refusal to live the present life does not end the agony.
But refusal to have another body after the dissolution of the existing
one, is a possibility capable of realization.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 12805

1
2

The text in the source is incomplete.
The addressee is not known.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

49

39. SPEECH AT DHANBAD 1
January 12, 1927
He said that on an enquiry from Babu Rajendra Prasad about the inclement
weather he had come to know that rains even in winter were not quite unusual in the
province and that that was to some extent necessary too. He was no doubt conscious
of the immense difficulties the audience had to face on account of the rain; his own
difficulties were no less. But he was capable of working in the midst of all sorts of
difficulties, his life had been only a prolonged story of his fight with difficulties of
every description.
After announcing the meeting to be addressed by him at six next evening, he
proceeded to explain the purpose of his visit. He said that they were perhaps aware
that his tour was specially intended to preach the message of the charkha and khaddar.
He admitted that there was enough field in the country for other activities with a view
to the attainment of swaraj but he had taken to the charkha because he had found that
that could be prescribed with equal force for all—Hindus and Muslims, males and
females, men and boys, touchables and untouchables. The charkha was the universal
thing and as such it was to be taken up by all according to the capacity of each
individual. Working at the wheel was the sacred business of every Indian; everyone
was required to join this universal yajna. But if that was not possible for all, they
could do one thing. They could at least put on khaddar.
Continuing, he said that khaddar work to be conducted on a large scale
throughout India demanded a large sum of money to be spent over it. That money was
to be supplied by the country. Nearly 16 lakhs were already collected and spent and as
a result, nearly 50 thousand women who had formerly nothing to do, and about 4,000
men who also formerly had alomst nothing to do, had got employment. Weavers,
many of whom were compelled to give up their profession on account of hard
competition with Lancashire weavers, had once more found occupation, while large
sums had already gone to the carders and ginners. Spinning, therefore, was the
saviour of the poor, while the middle-class men also could derive much benefit from
it. Without humbly approaching the Government, without supplicating the rich,
middle-class young men could solve a good deal of their unemployment problem by
taking to the charkha. Riches were of course not to be expected from this work, but
young men could very well earn an honest living by reverting to khaddar work.
Proceeding, he said that the fund, for which he was appealing for money, was
called Deshbandhu Memorial Fund, started to commemorate the sacred memory of the
late Deshbandhu. Khaddar was very dear to his heart. He had realized that the charkha
was the thing for the whole of India and through that alone one could approach the
masses for village reconstruction work which was the unrealized dream of his life. A
1

50

The meeting was held in a local hall.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

few days before his death, he had expressed his wish to the speaker to accompany him
(Mahatmaji) on his tour for khaddar work. But “man proposes God disposes”. Before
he could begin to work according to his plan, he was snatched away by the cruel hand
of death. It was in order to fulfil his last wish, said Mahatmaji, that the All-India
Deshbandhu Memorial Fund, to be utilized by the All-India Spinners’ Association,
was inaugurated. He referred to the circumstances under which the All-Bengal
Deshbandhu Memorial Fund was allowed to be spent over the Hospital, while at the
very time he had appealed for money for the All-India Memorial Fund for khaddar
work. It was time, said the speaker, that each one of them contributed his quota to
fulfil the last wishes of Deshbandhu. By contributing to this fund the donor might
serve two useful purposes at the same time; firstly they would honour the sacred
memory of Deshbandhu who lived and died for them, and, secondly, they would be
helping the poor with work and money.
Proceeding, Mahatmaji said that to purchase one yard of khaddar was to help
the poor men of their country to the extent of about four annas, whereas spending
money over foreign cloth was to send the same abroad to the untold miseries of their
own people. To purchase Indian mill-made cloth did not mean helping the poor, for it
was the capitalists who used to enjoy the largest amount of profit, doling out a
negligible amount to the labourers, which was not sufficient for them even to keep
their body and soul together. Three-fourths of the money spent over Indian mill-made
cloths, said the speaker, filled the already overflowing coffers of the capitalists,
while the labourers who were really in need of money did not get collectively more
than one-fourth of the profit. The charkha was the only effective weapon to fight the
poverty of the country to a successful close.
Mahatmaji then appealed for money. He wanted everyone present to contribute
his mite for this noble work and asked them to send the money to the proper authority
if they had not it with them at that time. He exhorted the audience to solemnly
promise in that hall to put on khaddar habitually for all time to come. He said that he
would ask them even to burn their foreign clothes, if they had any. But if they could
not go so far as that, they must henceforward boycott all foreign clothes without the
least hesitation. Khaddar had become the burning passion of his life because he had
found that and that alone could give food to the poor. People might call him mad, but
he could not give up that work for anything. He asked everyone present in that hall to
pay what little he could. He did not want that people should pay money out of fear or
shame; he wanted every one of them to feel the nobility of the cause and then do
whatever lay in his power.
Referring to untouchability, he said that that was greatest blot upon Hindu
society and that should be wiped out at the soonest possible date. Hinduism never
taught one man to consider another man as untouchable. By observing the custom of
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

51

untouchability, Hindus were committing a sin. Swami Shraddhanand gave his life for
the sake of the removal of untouchability. It was their duty to take up that work of
service to the poor and the untouchables.
Incidentally he referred to the Hindu-Muslim tension and deplored the murder
of Swamiji. But Sawamiji’s death could be turned to good account, if both the Hindus
and the Muslims cleansed their hearts with his blood. That would be the work of
purfication, that would be a real shuddhi work. What was the duty of the Hindus? They
should not seek to retaliate. The teaching of all religions was not to return evil for
evil but good for evil. All the religions taught that the greatest conquest was the
conquest of one’s own self. The Hindus should attain that self-possession. Abdul
Rashid was a poor creature; he alone was not responsible for this diabolical deed. The
bulk of the Muslim Press in Delhi and all those who had been holding up Swami
Shraddhanand, Lala Lajpat Rai and Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya as the enemies of
Islam collectively contributed to the murder. The results of those things were before
them. The whole atmosphere of the country demanded purificatin. Enthusiasm like
that of 1922 was necessary for their success in the battle they had undertaken, but that
could not come until the process of purification had reached its completion. Everyone
should, therefore, concentrate all his attention upon self-purification. It was wholly
unwise to be inimical to the enemies, one should rather pity them.

The Searchlight, 16-1-1927

40. INDEPENDENCE
Year after year a resolution is moved in the Congress to amend
the Congress creed so as to define swaraj as complete independence
and year after year happily the Congress throws out the resolution by
an overwhelming majority. The rejection of the resolution is proof of
the sanity of the Congress. The moving of the resolution betrays the
impatience (pardonable in the circumstances) of some ardent Congressmen who have lost all faith in the British intentions and who
think that the British Government will never render justice to India.
The advocates of independence forget that they betray want of faith in
human nature and therefore in themselves. Why do they think that
there can never be change of heart in those who are guiding the
British people? Is it not more correct and more dignified to own that
there is no change of heart because we are weak? Nature abhors
weakness. We want from the British people and the world at large not
mercy but justice that is our due. And justice will come when it is
deserved by our being and feeling strong.
52

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am sure that the staunchest votary of independence does not
mean that he will not have any British association on any terms
whatsoever. Even when he says so, he means, as one of the supporters
of the resolution admitted in answer to my question, that the British
people will never accept association on equal terms. This is totally
different from rejecting British association on any terms.
Indeed the word swaraj is all-embracing. It does include complete independence as it includes many other things. To give it one
definite meaning is to narrow the outlook, and to limit what is at
present happily limitless. Let the content of swaraj grow with the
growth of national consciousness and aspirations. We may be satisfied
today with dominion status. The future generations may not be, may
want something better. Swaraj without any qualifying clause includes
that which is better than the best one can conceive or have today.
Swaraj means even under dominion status a capacity to declare
independence at will. So long as we have not achieved that capacity,
we have no swaraj. This is the least it should mean. South Africa has
achieved that status today. It is a partnership at will of free peoples.
Between Britain and the Dominions there is a partnership at will on
terms of equality and for mutual benefit. What India will finally have
is for her and her alone to determine. This power of determination
remains unfettered by the existing creed. What therefore the creed
does retain is the possibility of evolution of swaraj within the British
Empire or call it the British Commonwealth. The cryptic meaning of
swaraj I have often described to be within the Empire if possible, without if necessary. I venture to think that it is not possible to im-prove
upon that conception. It is totally consistent with national self-respect
and it provides for the highest growth of the nation.
After all, the real definition will be determined by our action, the
means we adopt to achieve the goal. If we would but concentrate upon
the means, swaraj will take care of itself. Our exploration should,
therefore, take place in the direction of determining not the definition
of an indefinable term like swaraj but in discovering the ways and
means.
Young India, 13-1-1927

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

53

41. NOTE
INDIANS IN P ANAMA

The Legislative Assembly of the Republic of Panama recently
passed an Immigration Restriction Act prohibiting the entry of British
Indians among others. President Chiari had in a well-considered
message returned the Bill to the Assembly advising considerable
amendments and reconsideration. But the Assembly refused to make
the amendments recommended except in matters that were inevitable.
The Assembly defended its restriction upon the liberty of British
Indians on the ground of protection of the rights of posterity. There
are at present not more than perhaps thirity Sindhi Indian merchants
of fancy goods. It was acknowledged that their presence was no
menace to the inhabitants of Panama. Nevertheless the law is
retrospective in its effect with the exception that those who can prove
continuous previous domicile of ten years may receive exemption
certificates. I hardly think there are many settlers there who can prove
continuous residence in Panama for such a long period. If African
experience is any guide, Indian settlers abroad are not in the habit of
staying out of India for such a long period. The matter is now, I
understand, before the Foreign Office. It remains to be seen how far
that office is able to protect the rights of the resident Indian population and of those who may choose to emigrate to Panama in search
of an honest livelihood.
Young India, 13-1-1927

42. MESSAGE TO CONGRESSMEN
Have faith. Along with intellectual capacity develop strength of
character.
[From Hindi]
Aaj, 13-1-1927

54

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

43. SPEECH AT DHANBAD 1
January 13, 1927
Mahatma Gandhi in replying thanked the commissioners for the welcome
addresses they had presented him. He thanked particularly the commissioners of the
Municipality for frankly confessing that khaddar and charkha were not much in use in
the jurisdiction of their municipality. He said that he used to take keen interest in
municipal affairs even when he was in South Africa. He knew that towns played a
prominent part in the affairs of the country and that almost all movements in the
modern world sprang from the towns. He was aware further that sense of civic
responsibility was to be awakened in their young men. But in the peculiar condition
of India, towns were at the most only of secondary importance. India lived in villages
and towns, sank into insignificance when compared with seven lakhs of villages.
This importance of village life in India was not to be lost sight of by the
commissioners of the municipalities. There was a growing tendency in this country
on the part of the educated men to cut off all their connection with villages and wipe
them out of their memory. This tendency was to be checked. In Europe the villages
depended for everything upon the towns which were the centres of all sorts of
activites. But in India it was the villages which nourished the towns and as such it was
the duty of every townsman to see that the healthy growth of the villagers was not
interfered with in any way. One wondered how India could be so poor in spite of her
exports exceeding her imports. The reason was that crores of rupees went out of this
country to add to the prosperity of other people while the majority of their own men
did not know what it was to have two full meals a day. Whatever little money was left
in this country went to the coffers of merchants and middle men. He (Mahatmaji) did
not envy their lot but the poor villages were not to be forgotten. They themselves
were starving while they were supplying the townspeople not only with food but also
with other luxuries. It was to find out a few morsels of food for these hungry millions
that he was asking them to take to the charkha. The poor, weak, miserable villagers
could eat and live if only they all used khaddar in preference to all other cloth. He
wished them all to work at the charkha as a sacred duty but if they could not do so they
could wear khaddar at least. He said that he was glad that they had introduced spinning
on a small scale in their jurisdiction but the work remained still incomplete. All their
activities would remain incomplete until they perfected the khaddar organization. He
himself would not be satisfied till then. To work for khaddar was to work for the poor.

1
At the meeting, held in the morning in the Dhanbad town hall, Gandhiji was
presented addresses by the Dhanbad Municipality and the Local Board. Gandhiji
addressed altogether five meetings at Dhanbad, Jharia and other places.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

55

That was why he had been devoting all his time and energy to the work. It was their
duty to take up that work for the sake of the poor, for the country and for God.
Concluding, he thanked them once more for the warm reception they had
accorded him.

The Searchlight, 16-1-1927

44. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, KATRAS

1

January 13, 1927
He said that he was glad to see them there . Last time when he was at Jharia, he
had no opportunity to go to that place [Katras]. Jharia, he said, was a place which
attracted people, both capitalists and labourers, from all parts of India. Labourers
were the chief inhabitants of that place and as such he wanted to speak a few words to
them.
Continuing, he said that he used to call himself also a labourer. If anybody
enquired about his calling, he used to say that he was a weaver, or a cultivator. He
would rather like to be called a scavenger. The profession of a scavenger was not to be
looked down upon. He did a great benefit to human society. His profession was to
cleanse the most dirty portion of a house. Society was, therefore, highly indebted to
him. His was a profession of service and it was unwise to consider him low. His
(speaker’s) mother, in fact, every mother, did the same thing as a scavenger. Did they
hate their mothers for that reason? If his own mother had not done the work of a
scavenger for him in his boyhood, he could not have lived so long and come in their
midst to address them. It was not due to the profession that a scavenger should be
looked down upon. Unless the heart of a man was dirty, there was no reason why he
should be considered low, no matter how low his profession might be. His appeal,
therefore, to the scavengers as a matter of fact, to all labourers, was that they should
begin to cleanse themselves simultaneously with cleansing the household of other
persons. He was aware that the labourers were addicted to drinking, gambling,
smoking and other evil habits. They must be free of all these vices. He was in favour
of total prohibition, but as long as that could not be achieved, they should
themselves try to get rid of that pernicious habit. Credit lay in a man’s abstinence in
the midst of all sorts of temptations. He appealed to them to give up drinking for
God’s sake as well as for their own sake.
Referring to gambling, he said that was a most vicious practice. The Pandavas
lost their all on that account. But they recovered at last because they were on the side
of truth. Yudhishthira was himself repentant for what he did. Referring to their lustful
1

The meeting was held in a spacious pandal. Gandhiji spoke after an address
of welcome in Hindi was presented to him.

56

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

habit, he said that he was aware that there were people who used to leave their wives
and destroy their health and wealth after vile prostitutes. That was a very bad habit.
All women, other than one’s wife, were to be considered as sisters.
Smoking of bidi and ganja was also to be given up. He could not understand
why people smoked ganja. He knew that even rich and learned men smoked cigarettes
and bidis. But that was no reason why they also should be addicted to the same. There
was no reason why one man should be addicted to vicious habits because another man
was used to them. His appeal to even the educated men was that they should give up
smoking.
Continuing, he said that labourers should remember that there were men who
were poorer than them. They (the labourers) had money to spend over wine,
gambling, smoking and all that, but there were people in villages who could not get
even sufficient food and clothing to keep themselves alive. They could at least earn
about 15 to 20 rupees, but their brothers in villages could seldom see the face of a
pice. Had they any feeling for them? They themselves were poor. Was it not very
reasonable, then, that they should realize the miseries of those who were poorer than
even them, he asked, If they felt like that, it was their duty to wear khaddar
exclusively. They should clothe themselves with khaddar woven with pure yarn spun
by their poor sisters in villages. Whatever they paid for khaddar was paid to those
poor creatures. Women who could not earn even a penny were earning about two
annas a day each. He was appealing to them for that money to be paid to their poor
fellow beings. They could help them with that money by wearing khaddar. The law of
God was that man should sympathize with his fellow-creatures in distress. He
appealed, therefore, in God’s name to them to exclude all clothes except khaddar and
help him with money in cash, no matter how little it was, to carry on that work.
Khaddar worth Rs. 96 thousand was produced in Bihar the previous year and about 60
thousand worth was sold within a period of six months. All this money went to the
homes of the poor. A good deal of money was now spent over the selling of khaddar.
If they purchased khaddar as they purchased foreign cloth, much of that money could
be saved and utilized for the purpose of production. If they decided to do that, the
entire amount of khaddar required in the country could be produced here without any
difficulty. What was necessary was their sympathy and support; would they deny that?
Addressing the ladies he said that, if they wanted swaraj, which term was
synonymous with Ramraj , they should each be like Sita. Sita was pure of heart, she
kept her body clean by wearing hand-spun and hand-woven khaddar. She lived at a
time when the charkha was to be found in every household and every woman used to
spin. That time was to be revived again. The charkha should even now find as
important a place as the household hearth.
Addressing others, the Mahatma said that, if they wanted freedom they would
have to undergo considerable sacrifice. The minimum they could do was to put on
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

57

khaddar. The khaddar movement must receive their whole-hearted support; they must
render every possible financial support to that cause. He then narrated the
circumstances in which the All-India Deshbandhu Memorial Fund was inaugurated and
appealed to the audience to honour the sacred memory of the departed great by
contributing to that fund.
Continuing, he said that the Deshbandhu Memorial Fund was to be utilized for
the purpose of spreading khaddar. They had already got some money for the Fund but
the work they had undertaken demanded more and more money. Sixty crores of rupees
annually went out of the country; their aim was to keep that money here. A huge sum
was, therefore, to be spent over that. Their task was great, but he hoped to fulfil it
with their help. Everyone could pay to that fund without any difficulty; even
Government servants could contribute to that. He hoped that he would not go
disappointed from that place.
Referring to untouchability, he said that Swami Shraddhanand sacrificed his
life for that cause, They should remove this blot at least for the sake of Swamiji.
Hinduism had nothing to do with that pernicious system. The Gita never taught a man
to consider another as untouchable.
Referring to Hindu-Muslim unity, he said that both the communities were to
go through the process of purification before they could hope to attain that unity. To
the Muslims, he said that, if anyone of them considered the murder of Swamiji as a
praiseworthy act on the part of the murderer, it was a great mistake. He claimed to be a
sanatani Hindu, but he had studied the Koran with as much reverence as the Gita . But
he had nowhere found in the Koran any approval of such dastardly deeds. On the
contrary, there were passages there distinctly against violence. If violence was to be
committed, it was to be committed upon one’s own self for the purpose of fighting
the evils in oneself, not upon another person. Hindus had become weak and cowardly;
how could they expect to rise in spite of their weaknesses? The real shuddhi work was
the work of self-purification and it was the duty of everyone of them to go through
that process. He prayed to God to help them in their work.1

The Searchlight, 19-1-1927

45. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, JHARIA 2
January 13, 1927
Mahatma Gandhi, in addressing the meeting, said that he was glad that the
president of the Employees’ Association had complied with his request and did not
read the address written in English. He had received two addresses in the morning
1

At the meeting, a purse of Rs. 885 was presented to Gandhiji and some
money collected on the spot.
2
At the meeting an address of welcome was presented to Gandhiji by the
members of the Indian Colliery Employees’ Association, Jharia.

58

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

which were written in English . But he objected to the third, because there were few
people in the meeting who could understand that language. He would have very much
appreciated the address if it was written either in Hindi or in Bengali. He had no
quarrel with the English language; it was, indeed, a good language. He claimed to have
some knowledge of it. If he had any ill feeling against the English language, he would
not have conducted an English paper. But all occasions were not favourable for using
that language. They had their lingua franca, that is, Hindi. They could very well use
that language on interprovincial matters no matter if it was faulty. A man was not to
be judged by his words, they were to see whether his heart was sincere. He himself
might speak grammatically incorrect Hindi, hut his motive was honest and that was
enough to recommend his speech to them.
Continuing, he said that Jharia was a place where people, Hindus, Muslims,
Sikhs, Christians, Marwaris, Gujaratis, Bengalis, Biharis, in fact, people from all
provinces of India flocked together. He hoped that they all lived together on friendly
terms without bearing ill will to anyone.
Proceeding, he narrated the havoc caused to India by imported cloth. He said
that it was but natural and desirable that man should try to do good to all, irrespective
of their nationality and religion. But is was monstrous for a man to help others in
such a way as to incur irreparable loss to his own house. Why did they put on foreign
cloth then? Was it to help the weavers of Manchester? Certainly not. The one answer
he had found to this question was that is was a fashion to put on foreign clothes and
that khaddar was rough and coarse. But would they refuse the bread prepared by their
mothers if it was bad and go begging from door to door for the better bread? Khaddar
was the gift of their motherland and therefore sacred to them. They might demand of
their mothers for better bread; but, as long as that was not ready, they had no other
alternative but to take that contentedly. Similarly, they might try to improve the
quality of khaddar but as long as that could not be done, they had to remain content
with what was available, no matter how coarse it was.
Proceeding, he said that a characteristic feature of Indian civilization was that
a man was to help his fellowmen in distress. By wearing khaddar, they could perform
their religious duty, namely, helping the poor. Their Gita taught them that a man who
did not perform yajna committed sin thereby. Spinning at the wheel was yajna for
them; a spinning-wheel was to be kept in every household as a sacred altar. He said
that he was just coming from the local khadi Bhandar. He had seen that khaddar worth
only Rs. 1,000 was kept in stock in that shop and even that could not be consumed.
He did not know how many rupees worth of foreign cloth was sold in Jharia, but he
was sure that the sale of foreign cloth exceeded that of khaddar many times. It was a
matter of great regret to him that even such a small khaddar shop could not be
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

59

conducted in Jharia. He appealed to all to make it a point to wear khaddar. He requested
them to solemnly promise to discard all foreign cloth and habitually wear khaddar.
Addressing the labourers, he asked them to observe temperance and put on
khaddar in preference to all other cloth. They would thereby be giving food and
clothing to hundreds of their own hungry men and women who could not earn even a
single pice for want of occupation. Mahatmaji next touched upon untouchability and
Hindu-Muslim tension.
Replying to the address, he said that he was glad that the work of the
association was improving and he congratulated the organizers on their success. As
to the second, namely, the relations between the capitalist and the labourer, he
assured them that his sympathy was always with the poor labourers and that his aim
was to establish harmony and peace between the employer and the employee. He said
that he had, of course, done something for the labourers of Jamshedpur but he was not
fully aware of local conditions. In Jamshedpur the leaders of the labourers included
some of his own men and even his friend and brother, Mr. Andrews. Nevertheless, if
his help was at any time necessary, he would try to do what little he could. He, of
course, did not believe that all capitalists were bad and oppressive; on the contrary,
he knew many who had really the good of the employees at heart. He was for equal and
legitimate rights for all. He advised the labourers to be on the right path and said that
he was sure that truth would triumph at last. He concluded his speech by once more
appealing for money.1

The Searchlight, 19-1-1927

46. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, AURANGABAD

2

January 14, 1927
He said that when he toured in Bihar on a previous occasion he had not the
opportunity to come to that place. He was glad, therefore, to meet them there and
thanked them for coming over to that place from distant villages. He said that his
visit was intended to appeal to them to do some little work for India and for
themselves and hoped that they would not disappoint him.
India, he said, was a poor country. Those who lived in the towns could scarcely
imagine how poor the villagers were; even those villagers who had come to the
meeting did not know that there were men living in far-off villages who were poorer
than them even. These poor people lived in woeful obscurity dragging somehow or
1

At the end of the speech Gandhiji was presented a purse of Rs. 1,001.
About 10,000 people were present at the meeting which was held in the open
maidan near the Dak Bungalow and which Gandhiji addressed for about half an hour.
2

60

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

other their miserable existence to a melancholy close. The people of the towns
depended for their livelihood upon the villagers who, in their turn, got money from
those miserable creatures. They produced wealth for the whole country, while they
themselves had no means to keep their bodies and souls together. The railways of
India might bring some amount of wealth to a fortunate few, but they deprived the real
producers of wealth of even their means of livelihood. He appealed to them in the
name of God for those poor, wretched and miserable villagers who were the very
backbone of Indian society.
Continuing, he described how the imports of foreign cloth had contributed to
the misery and poverty of their people and explained how a check on that unlimited
import might give an effective check to the growing poverty of the country. The
most effective weapon he had devised to fight the course of such unnatural events was
the spinning-wheel and he said he had come to recommend that to them. He was
confident that if they could effectively boycott foreign cloth and take exclusively to
khaddar, they could proceed a long way towards their goal, namely, swaraj. But if the
political significance of khaddar was not recognized, there were other grounds strong
enough to recommend it. If khaddar was not to be used as a political weapon, they
might use it with a view to helping thousands of their poor countrymen. The charkha,
he said, was their Annapurna because it had the power to give food and drink to
almost an unlimited number of poor men. The poverty of their people was a
universally recognized fact; even English chroniclers had in their books testified to
the fact that there were thousands of people in India who did not know what it was to
have two full meals a day. He himself had seen with his own eyes in Orissa what he
had so long read only in books. People in Orissa were so poor that they had really no
means of subsistence. Was it not their duty to help them?—he asked. If they could not
help them in any other way, they might help them by wearing khadi. The work of
khaddar could be done by all-Hindus and Muslims, males and females, men and boys.
The Bengalis and the Punjabis, all could join this work and contribute their mite to its
success. There was no ban even upon Government servants in respect of wearing
khadi. Khaddar produced by their own brothers and sisters in the peaceful atmosphere
of villages situated far off from the din and bustle of modern industrialism, deserved
every sympathy and encouragement from them. It was sanctified with their memories
of the past; it was their religious duty to put on khaddar in preference to every other
kind of cloth.
Continuing, he said that money spent on foreign cloth went into the pockets
of the weavers of Manchester and Lancashire, while that spent over Indian mill-made
cloth filled the already-full coffers of the Ahmedabad merchants. It pained him to
think that in spite of there being expert manufacturers in India, Indians had to pay so
much money to foreign manufacturers. The East India Company might have been
responsible for the extinction of their industry during the first period of their reign.
They might have put an end to their textile industry by violence and their undesirable
methods. But who was responsible for the continuance of that state of things, he
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

61

asked. If they even now began to patronize khaddar, Indian cloth might once more
become the observed of all observers of the world. They should take to spinning and
khaddar as a means of prayashchitta. Even the rich men should begin to spin, not for
money, but for setting an example to the credulous and imitative people of the
villages. Hinduism strictly enjoined upon everyone to perform yajna. Yajna was that
which was performed not in the interest of one’s own self, but in the interest of
others. In the present circumstances of India, no other work could be more beneficial
to the poor villagers than spinning and it was therefore the best possible yajna for
the Indians.
Proceeding, the Mahatma said that in Bihar alone they had distributed Rs.
29,000 and Rs. 36,000 among the spinners and weavers, respectively. It seemed to
him that the people of Bihar had love for khaddar, but if all of them had patronized it
they might have distributed more wealth among the poor inhabitants of the province.
About one hundred years ago, Patna used to produce very fine khadi which was
exported to foreign countries and the people of those countries used that cloth as an
object of luxury. The wheel had turned and India instead of exporting fine cloth to
foreign countries consumed imported cloth worth crores of rupees and the people of
India felt proud to wear fine foreign cloth. They as people of Bihar mush remember
the progress that the textile industry had made in Patna in the past and it was their
duty to revive those good old days. They could do so by patronizing khaddar in every
possible manner. Khaddar had made progress; fine khaddar was now available and the
price also had considerably gone down as compared with what it was in 1921. If the
people made adequate response it might still be made cheaper.
He then appealed for funds for the All-India Spinners’ Association and then
dealt with the problem of untouchability and the problem of Hindu-Muslim unity.
He said that swaraj which had ever been the dream of his life had almost come
in 1921-22. The real shuddhi work, namely, the process of purification, had begun at
that time. A wave of enthusiasm had swept over the country and that was why they
could come almost near their goal. The same chapter was to be repeated again, but that
could not be done till dissensions and disunions kept them hopelessly divided.
Proceeding, he said that those who entered the Councils did it with the sincere
desire of doing good to the country and they might do some good work as well. But
how many could go to the Councils and how many were there who had right of voting,
he asked. Sixty lakhs of voters did not constitute the whole of India; his aim was to
raise the thirty crores of Indian people. Khaddar, he believed, might serve as a link
between the rich and the poor; the spinning-wheel might bring about unity and
harmony among the entire population of India. He appealed once more to the people
to contribute to the funds of the All-India Spinners’ Association and prayed to God to
help them in doing their duty.1

The Searchlight, 21-1-1927
1

62

At the end of the meeting, Gandhiji was presented a purse of Rs. 2501.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

47. ENTRY IN VISITORS’ BOOK 1
GAYA ,

Pausa Sud 12, 1983 [January 15,1927] 2
I feel very happy to see this library. While thanking the donor, I
pray for the progress of the library.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2509

48. TELEGRAM TO MANIBEHN PATEL
GAYA ,

January 15, 1927
YOUR DELIGHTFUL LETTER. MASTER CARDING GINNING SOON.

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, p. 46

49. SPEECH AT MEETING, GAYA

3

January 15, 1927
Mahatmaji, speaking in Hindi, regretted that the address presented to him on
behalf of the municipality was written in English. He said that whenever he found an
opportunity he had repeatedly asked the people to present him addresses either in the
vernacular of their province or in the national language of India, namely, Hindi. He
had no spite against the English language; he himself used that language on special
occasions, but it was undesirable that they should use it while addressing their own
men. He requested the municipality to use Hindi whenever they presented any address,
not merely to himself, but to any other Indian leader.
Continuing, he said that Gaya was really a sacred place to the Hindus, a place
of pilgrimage for them. But it pained him to see the deplorable state of the roads of
that sacred city which was frequented by people from all parts of the country. He had
occasion that morning to see some of the roads in Gaya. They surpassed in dirtiness
even the roads of Ahmedabad, which was an old city and home of many poor people,
1

Of the Munnalal Library at Gaya
There was no Pausa Sud 12 in this year. Gandhiji was in Gaya on January
15, 1927 which corresponded to Pausa Sud 13.
3
At the meeting, Gandhiji was presented addresses by the Municipality and
the District Board.
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

63

which fact might be an excuse for the municipality of that place. He regretted to say
that he had never before seen such dirty roads in any part of India. Gaya, being a place
of all-India interest, its municipality ought to have been an ideal one, but he was
sadly disappointed. He said that the commissioners should be up and doing in
reforming the municipal arrangements of that great city. How could they do so? In
order to achieve that end, the commissioners should themselves take up the work.
Mere dependence upon paid sweepers and scavengers would not better the situation.
He would rather request the chairman and the commissioners of the Board to take the
broomsticks and buckets of water themselves and proceed to cleanse the roads and
latrines of the city. Towns were of considerable importance to the development of a
country. Growth of civic responsibilities in the people was an urgent necessity for
their political emancipation. He said that the case of Gaya was not an exception.
There were many other municipalities in India which were guilty of such bad
administration. But the exceptional character of Gaya city demanded it to be free from
these evils. There was nothing to be ashamed of in sweeping the streets; he himself
had done it in many places; he had done it even in Bihar, in Champaran. He was no
lover of Western civilization; he would rather oppose all Western influences which
tended to injure the vital interests of India. But he would welcome all that was good in
Western culture. In respect of municipal administration, they had much to learn from
the Western people. Glasgow and Birmingham were formerly as dirty as Gaya, or
perhaps even worse. But the way in which the municipal administrators of those two
places had reformed them was worthy to be imitated by the municipal commissioners
of India. He hoped that the Gaya Municipality will be prompt in reforming the state
of that city.
Continuing, he regretted that the Chairman of the Municipality did not inform
him in the morning that he and his colleagues could not agree on two points, namely
khaddar and removal of untouchability. In that case he might make time to try to
convince them on those two points. If they wanted to create a link between them and
the villagers, the charkha and khaddar were unavoidable for them. As regards
untouchability, he did not think that there was any necessity of arguing on that
point, after the death of Swami Shraddhanand. He claimed to be sanatani Hindu. But
he had never found any of the Hindu scriptures sanctioning untouchability in the form
in which it was practised by them. If untouchability was not removed, Hindu society
might altogether perish in the near future. There were only three religions in the
world, namely, Christianity, Islam and Hinduism. He would regard Buddhism and
Sikhism as branches of Hinduism, as the Hindu Mahasabha had defined it. But the
mighty Hindu society was fast disintegrating. Christianity and Islam, in fact, the
entire non-Hindu population of the world, were keenly watching the movements of
the Hindu society. If they wanted to justify their existence and revive their old glory,
it was their clear duty to remove that blot from Hinduism.
He had received that morning a cable from Mr. Andrews. If they continued to
tyrannize upon the so-called untouchables, how could they expect to receive proper
treatment at the hands of the white men in South Africa? Sjt. Gokhale had rightly said

64

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in one of his addresses that it was but quite natural that the white people should look
down upon the Indians who so inhumanly treated certain sections of their own
people. So long as the removal of untouchability was not achieved and the khaddar
movement was not made to succeed, all their works would remain incomplete.
Continuing, he thanked the District Board for taking up khaddar work,
although he was sorry that spinning could not be made popular with school-children.
He was not surprised, for he knew the habit of children. In order to make them spin
regularly, the teachers should have to spin themselves. The example of teachers
might prompt the students to cling to the charkha as a plaything and they might
create wonders while playing with the same. He reminded the people of the good old
days of their textile industry and asked them to endeavour their best to bring back
those days.

The Searchlight, 21-1-1927

50. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, RAMNA 1
January 15, 1927
He said that he was reminded by the chairman of the municipality as well as by
the president of the Hindu Sabha that Gaya was a sacred place of pilgrimage, hallowed
by the association of Lord Buddha. But it pained him to see the miserable state of the
latrines and the roads of Gaya dirtier than those which he had ever seen in his life. He
said that he had reminded the commissioners of their duty, but, if the people had not
developed sufficient sense of responsibility, it was impossible for the municipality
to discharge its duty. Where the people were alert, the commissioners could not
neglect their duty, for it was in the hands of the people themselves to replace those
commissioners by new and better ones. He had advised the commissioners to sweep
and cleanse the roads, he would advise all the people to join them in their work.
Keeping the roads clean was as much the duty of the citizens as of the scavengers; the
latter could not discharge their duty if the former did not heartily co-operate with
them.
Referring to the Hindu Sabha address, he said he was glad that the Sabha was
trying to free the Hindus of cowardice. But he had found that the Hindus alone were not
cowards. Cowardice had become the attribute of Indians as a whole. If they could get
rid of this evil, there could be no power on earth to check their forward march.
He thanked the Hindu Sabha for working for khaddar and removal of untouchability. Untouchability, he had told them on a former occasion, was no part of
Hinduism. They should hang down their head in shame before the world for indulging
1

Over 10,000 people attended the meeting at which an address of welcome
was presented to Gandhiji by the local Hindu Sabha.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

65

in that sin. The Gita taught them that man should not differentiate between a Brahmin
and a Chandal. The interpretation which he would give to that verse was that man
should serve both Brahmin and Chandal alike and hate none. According to
Hinduism, there were only four varnas; there could not be a fifth one.
Proceeding, he said that shuddhi with him was synonymous with
atmashuddhi, self-purification. They would work this shuddhi by loving the
untouchables. Swami Shraddhanand had died for religion. The one burning passion
of his life had been the regeneration of the untouchables. They should do away with
that evil at least for the sake of the great Swami. He (the Mahatma) had of course his
honest difference of opinion with Swamiji with regard to shuddhi as he (Swamiji)
understood it. He said:1

I have made no secret of the fact that I did not approve of all
aspects of the shuddhi work. After much prayerful study of the Hindu
Shastras I have come to the conclusion that there is no room in them
for conversion such as they have in Islam and Christianity. I am also
certain on a prayerful reading of the Koran that there is no warrant
for the tabligh that is being promoted today. It is possible that I may
be mistaken. Let God correct me in that case. I for myself would love
to protect my religion with tapascharya—the way of prayerful
suffering which is the royal road to success in any noble object. The
real memorial that the Hindus can raise to Swamiji is to rid Hinduism
of the curse of untouchability. Let both Hindus and Mussalmans
cleanse their hearts with the purifying blood of Swamiji’s sacrifice. I
must be free to read the Gita or the Koran of my own accord. Why
should a Hindu compel me to read the one or a Mussalman to read
the other? Why should I need a Christian to compel me to read the
Bible? No one may stand between a man and his religion or God. He
who has no inkling of religion, whose heart is arid and purified—how
dare he purify (by proselytizing) others? But that is my opinion. And
as I am a votary of liberty I have in spite of my opinion insisted that
Shraddhanandji had as much right to propagate the Vedic dharma as
a Mussalman to propagate that of the Koran. And if Shraddhanandji
was assassinated for his shuddhi work, it did no credit to Islam.
Hinduism is proud of the sacrifice and has been enriched by it. Let no
Mussalman secretly approve of the act or believe that it has done any
good to Islam. Let not a single Hindu harbour any thought of
retaliation. If the Hindu and the Mussalman rid themselves of mutual
distrust and fear, there is no power that can stop their freedom. We are
1

The paragraph that follows has been extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter” in Young India.

66

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the makers of our own slavery. I had sealed my lips up to now on this
burning topic. It is Shraddhanandji’s sacrifice that has compelled me
to open them to a certain extent. But I can give no guidance in this
atmosphere. I shall only send my prayers to God that He may rid us
of fear and hatred and distrust, and make us rely solely on the
strength of love.
Referring to the protection of cows, he observed that it was a noncontroversial matter and he was glad that they were doing so. The Hindus themselves
were responsible for the present condition of Indian cows. If they did not sell their
cows to the butchers for money, if they took proper care of the milch cows, their
condition could not be so deplorable. He had heard that there was a goshala in Gaya.
There were many such in India. If they could properly conduct them, they could easily
maintain old and decrepit cows out of the income derived from milk, milk-products
and hides of dead cows which could be made payable by establishing tanneries.
Continuing, Mahatmaji appealed to the people to help the poor villagers by
habitually wearing khadi. Charkha, he said, was their kamadhenu. It had the power to
feed thousands of poor, starving villagers. He regretted that even a small khaddar
shop could not be conducted in a town like Gaya. It pained him to see a small khaddar
shop amidst a number of big shops full of foreign cloth. He longed to see that day
when all the big shops in the market would be stocked with khaddar, while there
would remain only one or two small shops with foreign and Indian mill-made cloth
and even those few not properly conducted.
Concluding, he appealed to the people in the name of God, to contribute what
little they could to the Deshbandhu Memorial Fund for khaddar work and thus give
financial help to the poor people of their country. . . .

The Searchlight, 21-1-1927; also Young India, 27-1-1927

51. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[January 16, 1927] 1
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter giving a description of your mishap, etc. I
thought that the Bihar itinerary was sent to you, but I now remember it
was not even ready when the first dates were sent. The Bihar dates
were sent to you yesterday. I take it that you are using your map to
locate the places and I suggest your writing the stations in Hindi
1

From the postmark

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

67

characters as an interesting and useful exercise.
With love,
BAPU

[PS.]
This is being written just after prayer time 5 a.m. for we are just
going far away.
From the original: C.W. 5197. Courtesy: Mirabehn

52. LETTER TO DAHYABHAI M. PATEL
ON TOUR,

[January 16, 1927] 1
BHAISHRI DAHYABHAI,

I got your letter. There is no doubt that the condition of the
cultivators is deteriorating in these times. But the causes of that
deterioration go deeper than you think. Impatience will harm the
cause. Anger does not mend matters. If you realize that the remedy
lies not with the Government but with the cultivators, you will go
ahead with your work without feeling unhappy all the time. If I get
even a moment free, I will write about the subject in Navajivan. I got
the cutting from the Prajabandhu 2 . I did not get the one you say you
sent before this. I think I shall come upon it by and by.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 2698. Courtesy: Dahyabhai M. Patel

53. LETTER TO V. G. DESAI
Sunday [January 16, 1927] 3
BHAISHRI VALJI ,

I got your letter. I had also got your telegram. Every effort is
being made to send you all the original writings.
I wish to engage you for translation work. I am writing to Kaka
about it. The series being contributed by Shankerlal’s brother-in-law
1
2
3

68

From the postmark
A Gujarati weekly of Ahmedabad
From the postmark
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will continue for a long time and I feel that you can be utilized in that
work. I am writing to Kaka as he is the editor.
I suppose you remember that March 11 is the date fixed for the
meeting of [All-India] Cow-protection [Association]1 . You must have
found the names of the members and written to them. Sunday you
must have despatched the Association circular regarding the meeting,
and finalized the accounts by obtaining details from Revashankerbhai2 , the Ashram3 , etc.
Are you taking care of your health?
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
BHAISHRI VALJI DESAI
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM
S ABARMATI
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7390. Courtesy: V. G. Desai

54. SPEECH AT WOMEN’S MEETING, SONEPUR 4
January 16, 1927
Think of Sita. Do you imagine she went about with Rama in his
14 years’ forest wanderings with heavy ornaments like you? Do you
think they add to your beauty? Sita cared for the beauty of her heart
and covered her body with pure khaddar. The heavy ornaments you
wear are not only ugly but harmful inasmuch as they are the
permanent receptacles of dirt. Free yourselves of these shackles and
relieve the poverty of people who have no clothes, much less ornaments, to wear.
Young India, 27-1-1927

1
2
3
4

The addressee was then secretary of the Association.
Revashanker J. Zaveri, who was then the treasurer of the Association
The Sabarmati Ashram, the headquarters of the Association
Extracted from Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

69

55. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, CHHAPRA1
January 16, 1927
Mahatmaji made a joint reply. After having thanked the Boards for kindly
presenting him the addresses, he said that although he would speak a few words on
other subjects also, his visit was mainly intended to preach the message of khaddar
and charkha. He said that one of the addresses referred to his efforts to root out the
evil of untouchability. It was the burning desire of his heart to wipe out that blot from
Hindu society. Swami Shraddhanand, he said, who died in his attempts to do so, used
to say that unless one untouchable was kept as family member in the house of each
and every Indian leader, they could not say that untouchability was removed. The fifth
varna was their own creation; the Shastras never sanctioned it. If the leaders kept the
untouchables in their houses, there was no reason why people should blame them.
‘Serve the untouchables’ was the lesson of Swami Shraddhanand’s life. They should
learn further the lesson of fearlessness from his life and that of the evils of
communalism from his death. He said that Hindu-Muslim unity was a dire necessity
for them. Unless that was attained they could not even dream of swaraj.
Continuing, he said that the poverty of their country was a universally
admitted fact. If they were true to their religion and true to their country, they could
not but have sympathy with the poor. The best way they could help the poor was by
wearing khadi. They should not spend even a cowrie over foreign or Indian mill-made
clothes.
He appealed once more to them to put on khaddar in preference to all other
clothes.
He then announced that he would himself sell khaddar in that meeting, and,
with a few pieces of Khadi in his hand, he stood on the dais and called for
purchasers. . . .

The Searchlight, 21-1-1927

1
At the meeting, which was attended by about ten thousand people, Gandhiji
was presented addresses in Hindi by the Municipality and the District Board. He later
addressed a women’s meeting at the Town Hall before proceeding to Ekma.

70

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

56. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, SEWAN 1
[January 16, 1927] 2
I am glad you say that your sub-division is better than other
parts so far as Hindu-Muslim unity is concerned. But can you say that
you are so united that your unity will stand the strain of anything
happening elsewhere? I wish there can be at least one province, one
district, one sub-division in this vast land which can proudly say that
no power on earth can foment a Hindu-Muslim quarrel there. We may
think we are living but disunited we are worse than dead. The Hindu
thinks that in quarrelling with the Mussalman he is benefiting Hinduism, and the Mussalman thinks that in fighting a Hindu he is benefiting Islam. But each is ruining his faith. And the poison has spread
as among the members of the communities themselves. And no
wonder. For one man cannot do right in one department of life whilst
he is occupied in doing wrong in any other department. Life is one
indivisible whole.
I said at Comilla that the problem had passed out of human
hands, and that God had taken it into His own. Maybe the statement
springs from my egotism. But I do not think so. I have ample reason
for it. With my hand on my breast, I can say that not a minute in my
life am I forgetful of God. For over twenty years I have been doing
everything that I have done as in the presence of God. Hindu-Muslim
unity I had made a mission of my life. I worked for it in South Africa,
I toiled for it here, I did penance for it, but God was not satisfied, God
did not want me to take any credit for the work. And so I have now
washed my hands. I am helpless. I have exhausted all my effort. But
as I am a believer in God, as I never for a moment lose faith in Him, as
I content myself with the joy and sorrow that He wills for me, I may
feel helpless, but I never lose hope. Something within me tells me that
Hindu-Muslim unity must come and will come sooner than we might
dare to hope, that God will one day force it on us, in spite of
ourselves. That is why I said that it has passed into the hands of God.
This, I said, might be taken to be an arrogant utterance—arrogant
inasmuch as it implies that it is not in the power of any other man to
1

Condensed summary of a speech delivered in Hindi
Sewan is a sub-divisional town in the district of Saran, which, according to
The Searchlight, 21-1-1927, Gandhiji covered on January 16.
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

71

achieve the work, as if no one has worked for it more than I. But there
is no arrogance in the statement. Hundreds may have done the work
with the same earnestness, love and energy, but none with more. And I
believe that all of them must be feeling as helpless as I. In 1920, I said
that not even the British Empire with all the resources of its armed
strength, diplomacy and organization could efface us, make us slaves,
or divide Hindus from Mussalmans. But that was because I thought we
were godfearing then. We trusted one another and we relied on one
another’s strength. But how am I to prevail upon you today to cast off
all fear, hatred and distrust? Shraddhanandji was not the enemy of
Mussalmans. He was a warrior, he had the courage of his convictions.
Assassination was not the way to fight him. Let us Hindus and
Mussalmans both wash the sins of our heart with his blood.
And what is it that we should be fighting for? We Hindus may
be idol-worshippers. We may be mistaken. But when God gave every
man the right to make mistakes, when God suffers us to live although
we are idol-worshippers, why should not the Mussalmans suffer us
too? And if a Mussalman thinks that he must slaughter the cow, why
should a Hindu stay his hands by force? Why should he not fall on
bended knees before him and plead with him? But we will do no such
thing. Well then, God will one day make the Mussalman and the
Hindu do what we will not do today. If you are believers, I beseech
you to retire into yourselves and pray to the In-dweller to stay your
hands from wrong and to make them do the right thing. Let that be
our prayer every morning and evening. There is no other way.
Young India, 27-1-1927

57. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
January 17, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

We are now on the north of the Ganges and therefore letters will
for the time being take longer to reach you. We are on Rajendra
Babu’s ancestral property in a remote village1 though not remote
from the railway line.
What is your progress in Hindi now? Are you speaking it without reserve? Do you get much time to talk in Hindi? Or do you have
1

72

Jeeradei
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to carry on your work through English? I hope you have continued
your weekly Hindi letter to the Ashram. It is fairly cold here. It is
never warm in the shade. The weather is also damp but bracing. One
feels like walking all day long and yet I can get but little [time].
I am there somewhere about 20th March. I suppose you would
want to be there till then but in no case if the place does not suit you.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
I hope you have got the itinerary. If not, address your letters
Khadi Office, Muradpore, Patna. It is incessant wandering. By the
[time you]r reply to this reaches me, it will be quite 10 days, I fear. I
reach Patna 30th inst.
From the original: C.W. 5198. Courtesy: Mirabehn

58. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
Silence Day [January 17, 1927] 1
CHI. MANI ,

I got your letter. There is nothing in your letter which you need
keep back from others. However, no one else except Mahadev has
read it.
Surely, I will never force you to marry, nor will Father. If I
could have my way I would rather force girls to remain unmarried. It
is the girls themselves who compel me to force them to marry. You
are, therefore, safe so far as I am concerned. I was being harassed by
people who did not understand you and so I wrote to you to ascertain
your desire and that too because I had observed your restlessness. I do
know of young women (girls) whose restlessness is due to their desire
to get married, though they themselves are not aware of this. I am sure
that is cannot be so in your case. Still it was my duty to draw your
attention to the problem, and I also wished to suggest that there was no
harm in thinking of getting married even after having expressed one’s
intention not to do so. Of course it would be different if you had
taken a vow. In that case, the heavens may fall but the vow must not be
violated. Since, however, you have not taken a vow, even a person like
me may ask you what you desire. Others may even urge you to get
1

As in the printed source

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

73

married. This does not mean that I want you to take a vow. That you
may do when you feel that it is absolutely necessary. I shall never feel
compelled again to mention the subject of marriage to you; not only
that, but I shall even prevent others from doing so. You should,
however, get over your restlessness and so live always that your
unmarried state may win people’s respect. Brahmacharya should be
understood in a spiritual sense, and in order that it may bring you
spiritual benefit, you should observe it in the manner recently
complained by me in my autobiography in Navajivan. You should,
therefore, maintain a calm and cheerful temper, be industrious in your
habits and cultivate a tolerant outlook.
Read Margopadeshika1 several times over till you have
mastered
it. Understand the meaning of every word in the Gita with the help of
the rules explained in that book.
I have sent a wire to you asking you to master ginning and
carding. I have sent a wire to Narayandas too at Karachi. But have not
received a reply from him; whether or not I hear from him, I have
received similar requests from others too. I intend to send you to
various places from time to time for teaching spinning. I have asked
for a salary of Rs. 50 and travelling expenses. This will give you good
experience too. We shall think afterwards what to do then. You should
not take up any work there for the present. You should, however,
continue drawing Rs. 30/-. You may save what you can from it. I will
ask for an account later on.
Ble

ssings from

BAPU
C HI . M ANIBEHN P ATEL
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM
S ABARMATI

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, pp. 47-51

1

74

Sanskrit Reader written by Dr. R. G. Bhandarkar
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

59. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
Silence Day, Pausa Sud 14 [January 17, 1927] 1
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have your letter. I have sent you a telegram regarding the
stores at Gondia and Amaravati. If I have to visit Gondia, I may be
able to go there too. I have to leave Patna on the 31st evening. I can
catch the Bombay Mail at Mogulsarai on the 1st. I shall be reaching
Jabalpur . . .2 on the same day. That means that I shall be arriving in
Gondia on the 2nd. I shall get a seat in the Bhusaval [Mail] at any rate
on the 3rd.
Now about Manilal. I have written to Kishorelal in that
connec-tion and have asked him to show the letter to you. My
suggestion just now is that either Gomatibehn or Vijayalakshmi
should ask Sushila, without mentioning the name, whether she intends
to get married. I gather from Kishorelal’s letter that none of the girls
is yet thinking of getting married. If this is true, why should we
persuade her to marry? Kishorelal believes that, if at all, Sushila may
be thinking of getting married. That is why it seems to me that we can
proceed further in the matter after ascertaining whether she wishes to
get married. Meanwhile I will definitely come there. Perhaps we shall
then know more clearly what to do.
My tour in these parts is going on at great speed . . .3 is arranged
well. Better arrangements . . .4 can be made though today we are in
Rajendra Babu’s village.
Although Janakibehn’s complaint of piles has become less
acute, it is better to consult a doctor and do as he suggests. I should
not like you to postpone consulting a doctor.
I hope Vinoba is keeping good health. I wish to hear about
Shivaji’s health too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2879

1

The itinerary of Gandhiji’s tour mentioned in the letter suggests that the letter was written in January 1927. Although Pausa Sud 14 corresponded to January 16,
Monday was January 17.
2
Omission is in the source.
3
omission is in the source.
4
ibid.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

75

60. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Silence Day, Pausa Sud 14 [January 17, 1927]
DEAR SISTERS,

I have your letter.
I always write to you on Mondays; but as I keep moving from
town to town, the day on which you receive my letters may vary. Till
now I was to the south of the Ganga. Yesterday I came over to the
north, crossing the river. From Patna we crossed over to the other side
by means of a boat. A car awaited us there and took us to Sonepur.
Soil here is not sticky like mud; it has a mixture of sand in it. It,
therefore, feels soft to the feet like velvet. Ba and I walked for about a
mile. We were not wearing sandals. We liked to walk on the sand very
much indeed. Mother Ganga prepares new soil every year in this part
of the country. For hundreds of miles she carries mud and silt with
her and, depositing them here, she runs along to the sea as though she
wanted to avoid feeling embarrassed by being told by anyone of the
great good she was doing to the land.
Today we are in Rajendra Babu’s village. Rajbansi Devi is here.
Chandramukhi and Vidyavati are at present in Chhapra, the town
where he (i.e., Rajendra Babu) lives. We met them in Chhapra. Both
are in relatively good health—Chandramukhi slightly worse than she
was in the Ashram and Vidyavati slightly better.
In a women’s meeting yesterday I started educating them on a
new subject. The women here wear heavy silver ornaments; they keep
their children dirty and do not comb their hair. I, therefore, criticized
their habit of wearing ornaments. The result was that some of them
gave away their anklets, necklaces and so on to me, and promised that
they would neither buy nor wear others in future. While doing this, I
thought of all of you. Ba is giving me great help in this work, but that
is because she agrees with me in this. You can do work of this kind
better than I. But that requires self-sacrifice, enthusiasm, and
opportunities. All this you can have there. Do we not sing atmavatsarvabhuteshu1 ? We should regard all as ourselves. Then, on finding
somebody’s children dirty, we would feel as if our own children were
1

76

( He sees rightly who) in all things sees himself.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

dirty and so would feel ashamed; on finding someone else suffer
would ourselves suffer and seek a remedy for the suffering.
But I have exceeded my limit. Much as I like to exceed, I feel
nervous when I look at the pile of correspondence lying before me.
Find out from a map where Patna, Sonepur, and Chhapra are
situated. This is the land where King Janaka lived.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
With whose permission did Gangabehn Zaveri let her foot be
sprained? Well, God’s will be done! If one is negligent, one deserves
punishment.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3635

61. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[January 18, 1927] 1
CHI. MIRA,

I have two more letters from you. Yes, you may go to Hardwar
as soon as you wish. You need not stay there for teaching carding and
spinning unless it is a help to learning Hindi. As you do not seem to
be getting much Hindi, it is better to go away at once. In no case must
you endanger your health. You will therefore judge for yourself and
do what you think is best. You will of course tell Vidyavati exactly as
you feel.
Your letter about the assassination makes me sad. I am hoping
that you probably did not understand what your informers were
saying or feeling. Hatred is of course there or there would have been
no strife. But to think that youngsters can be infected makes one
shudder.
Did you go to Swamiji’s house?
With love,
Yours,

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5199. Courtesy: Mirabehn

1

From the postmark

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

77

62. KHADI IN BIHAR
Sjt. Rajendra Prasad has sent me the report on the work of the
Bihar branch of the A.I.S.A. for the year ending September 1926. It
is a record of steady progress. After mentioning the vicissitudes the
organization had to pass through in the early stages, the report says:1
There are 8 production and sale centres and 11 sale depots.
Besides these there are sale agencies at 6 places and more are being
established. The agency has 65 wholetime workers including two
honorary workers. Their average earnings are Rs. 25 per month.
During the year under review 2,698 spinners earned Rs. 29,519; 489
weavers, Rs. 36,862; 6 tailors, Rs. 230 during two months; 8 dyers and
printers Rs. 2,273 during six months including the cost of dyes; and
40 washermen Rs. 1,951 during six months. It goes without saying
that the spinners and weavers too were not wholetime workers. They
worked only during their spare time and irregularly.
The report then says:
The progress that has been made is not only in regard to increased
production and sale but also in regard to the quality of khaddar and reduction in
its price.

The average price in 1923 was Rs. 1-0-5 per yard of fine cloth.
It was reduced to As. 13 in 1926. When the yarn was very weak the
weaving charge was 3 annas 3 pies per yard of 45 inches width. On
account of the improvement in the yarn, it has now been reduced to 2
annas 3 pies per yard of the same width. Nor is there any difficulty
about getting sufficient weavers to weave hand-spun yarn. Some of
these weavers weave even up to 72 inches width and the variety of
weaving includes twills, coatings of various designs, etc. Dyeing and
printing is being developed under the special care of a graduate of the
Bihar Vidyapith.
The report, after mentioning the work in different branches of
the organization, says:
If we could dispose of our present stock, it is expected that we shall be
able to reduce our prices still further by about 10 p.c.
1

The statement, which gave figures of the production and sale of khaddar, is
not reproduced here.

78

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It naturally dwells upon the successful peripatetic exhibitions
that were held during the year, of which a detailed account has
appeared from time to time in these pages. The interesting report
contains the following pregnant reflections:
The province of Bihar is particularly suited for khaddar work. The
population is agricultural; there is no industry in the province worth the name,
outside the coalfields of Chhotanagpur and apart from the great Tata Iron and
Steel Works at Jamshedpur. The tradition of spinning is still extant in most
parts of it and the number of weavers and looms is large enough to supply
almost the entire requirement of cloth of the province. Cotton, though of an
inferior quality, is also produced in many parts of it. The work of production of
khaddar is, therefore, not very difficult, although it requires organization and
technical skill to improve its quality. It can be extended almost indefinitely, if
sufficient capital and organizing and technical skill are forthcoming.
The above narrative will show the progress made in reviving the ancient
but practically all but dead industry of spinning in Bihar. We have succeeded
in touching but the merest fringe of the vast area in which spinning
can be revived and made to furnish a much-needed occupation for the idle hours
of our great agricultural population. That its possibilities are vast can hardly
be denied. That some supplementary occupation, not to speak of income, is
necessary for the population will be apparent from the fact that the average
quantity of land actually cultivated with food and non-food crops is less than
three-quarters of an acre per head. It is the yield of this small quantity of land,
nearly four-fifths of which are unirrigated and depend upon the freaks of the
monsoon, that is expected not only to keep the body and soul together of
every individual but also to supply him with cloth and other necessaries of life
and to meet among others all demands of the zamindar, the society and the
State. Looked at from this point of view the admittedly scanty earning of 7
pies per day by charkha is not after all so small and does afford, as experience
has shown, substantial relief to a class of people who need such relief but
cannot get it through forced unemployment. It is believed that agriculture does
not require more than a hundred days’ labour in the year but the work is so
distributed that the agriculturist cannot leave his farm and seek work elsewhere
at a distance. In fact, the nature of the work is such that it allows plenty of
leisure but at short intervals and a supplementary industry, which is not
capable of being taken up and put aside to be resumed later at the stage at
which it was left, cannot be usefully taken up. Experience has shown that the
charkha alone can serve the purpose.

It is hoped that the appeal made in the report to the public for
the purchase of khaddar will meet with the liberal response it deserves.
Young India, 20-1-1927
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

79

63. HINDI V. ENGLISH
Organizers of meetings seem to require constant reminders that
not English but Hindi or Hindustani is the common medium of
expression among the masses. I have observed that unlike as in 1921
the addresses hitherto presented to me during the tour have been in
most cases in English. The absurdity became patent when an address
in English on behalf of the employees of Jharia collieries was sought
to be read to me and that, at a big mass meeting attended by
thousands, hardly fifty of whom could possibly understand English.
The vast majority could have easily followed Hindi and a very large
number could have understood Bengali. The officers of the association were from Bengal. If the English drafting was meant for me, it
was wholly unnecessary. They might have written the address in
Bengali and given me a translation in Hindi or even in English. But to
inflict English on that big audience would have been an insult to
them. I hope that the time is coming when, if the proceedings are
conducted in a language the majority cannot understand, they would
leave such meetings. Be it said to the credit of the chairman at this
meeting that he saw the absurdity as soon as I drew his attention to it
and very courteously allowed the address to be taken as read. May the
incident serve as a warning to all the organizers but more especially
those in the Andhradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnatak. I know
their difficulty. But they have had now for six years in their midst an
efficient organization for the spread of Hindi. Their addresses should
be in the vernaculars of their respective provinces with a Hindi
translation for my benefit. I have always made an exception in
Dravida land and delivered my speeches in English wherever they
have so desired. But I do think that the time has come when they
should dispense with English for big public meetings. Really it is the
English-speaking leaders who are blocking the way to our rapid
progress among the masses by their refusal to learn Hindi which can
be easily picked up inside of three months even in Dravida land, if the
learners will give three hours per day. Let those who doubt give a trial
to the Hindi Prachar Karyalaya conducted in Madras under the aegis
of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag. They will find at the head
office in Triplicane and the branches in Andhradesh and elsewhere
books and teachers that will satisfy them. There is no excuse save
80

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

idleness or disinclination for not knowing Hindi which is understood
by over twenty crores of the people of Hindustan.
Young India, 20-1-1927

64. NOTES
ALL-INDIA DESHBANDHU MEMORIAL

I hope the readers of Young India have not forgotten the AllIndia Deshbandhu Memorial. When I suspended touring after the
Cawnpore Congress for one year, I knew that the collection of funds
for the All-India Deshbandhu Memorial to which I had pledged
myself would be suspended. But it was inevitable. At the time of
suspension I had stated that, if God willed it, at the end of the year I
would resume my tour for the collection. I resumed it at Calcutta and
all the collections that I am now making will be for the All-India
Deshbandhu Memorial except where the donors otherwise specify the
object of their donations. And since the object of the All-India
Deshbandhu Memorial is village organization and that through the
spinning movement, all these collections automatically become part of
the All-India Spinners’ Association which is the agency through
which the Memorial collections are to be utilized for the purpose. A
resolution to this effect was passed by the All-India Deshbandhu
Memorial Committee at Cawnpore in 1925. I trust, therefore, that
those who are in charge of the organization of meetings in connection
with my tour will take good care to inform those who may attend
meetings of the object of the tour. There should be no desire to spring
a surprise upon those who attend meetings by asking for subscription.
The honest course is to let them know beforehand that they will be
asked to pay. No one need pay unless he believes in the Memorial and
its object. I know, too, that a man may revere the memory of
Deshbandhu and still not believe in the spinning movement. But I
would venture to remind such people of what were Deshbandhu’s last
wishes expressed to his wife, his sister and his trusted lieutenants and
Satis Chandra Das Gupta of Khadi Pratishthan and to me almost
exactly 7 days before his death. He said that as soon as he descended
from Darjeeling, he would throw himself heart and soul into the
spinning movement. He could see that that was the greatest
constructive movement we could undertake and that it was the most
effective method of village organization and village reconstruction. It
was for that reason that he had asked me to send for Satis Babu with
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

81

whom he had discussed the plan of working the spinning movement
and it was for the spinning movement that he had intended to spend
the largest part of the money that had been collected for village
reconstruction. The Spinners’ Association, therefore, is the natural
outcome, if I may say so, of Deshbandhu’s wishes.
TO ORGANIZERS

If all goes well, I hope during the year to cover, besides Bihar,
part of Maharashtra, Madras Presidency including Karnatak, U.P.,
Bengal and Orissa. I should love to visit the other provinces also if
time and health permit and if they intend to subscribe to the Memorial, that is, khadi work.
To Orissa I have promised to go and pass there, so far as it is
humanly possible, the month of November, not because I expect to
make large collections but because it is to my mind an epitome of our
distressful condition. Orissa regenerate is to me the regeneration for
the whole of India. It is a land which need not be the poorest in the
country. Its people are in no way inferior to those of the other parts of
India. They have a fine history all their own. They have magnificent
temples. They have the Lord of the Universe in their midst who knows
no distinction between his creatures. And yet, sad to relate, under the
very shadow of the mighty temple people die of hunger in their
thousands. It is a land of chronic poverty, chronic famine, and chronic
disease. Nowhere have I seen in the eyes of people so much blankness,
so much despair, so much lifelessness as in Orissa. I therefore look
forward to my stay in November with sad pleasure.
It is a province that can be, ought to be, easily organized for
spinning, because the people have no work. The whole of Orissa
cannot be transplanted to the factories of Bengal or the factories of all
India put together. It would be wrong even if it was possible. Happily
it is not possible. The people must live on their own land and learn to
be resourceful, industrious, and learn even to be happy. They have
forgotten what happiness can be. Let the workers in Orissa, therefore,
understand their responsibility. I expect them to throw themselves
heart and soul into the spinning movement. Let them not think of the
whole of Orissa. Let them think of single villages where they will
establish themselves, and where they may, by prayerful and persistent
effort, lift the people out of the Slough of Despond into which they
have stuck.
82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

And though, as I have said, I do not expect to make large
collections, I shall welcome the only pies of the people who will attend
meetings, even as I welcomed them when I travelled in 1921. The
sight of old people with their trembling fingers untying the knots
which firmly held their pies and willingly surrendering them to me is
never to be forgotten. I want to see it again and renew, if a renewal is
necessary, the determination that this winter of despair is to be
changed into the summer of hope and happiness within a measurable
distance of time.
May I ask the organizers also to bear in mind that the tour is to
be almost incessant and that I must do my editing and attend to my
correspondence during the hours they may leave for me and in the
trains? Besides Mondays, at least three hours should be left for me in
addition to the time required for ablutions and meals. All night
demonstrations must be avoided. It is impossible after a strenuous
day’s work to stand the strain of disturbance during sleeping hours.
And as this is to be a purely business tour, the meetings should
be so arranged and the audiences should be so seated as to leave
passages for collectors to pass to and fro. All shoutings and noises
should be avoided. I have observed that where management is efficient, collections mount up. The audiences have invariably been
found by me to be responsive. Though the thousands of the rich are
welcome, I know that it is the coppers and the single rupees of the
poor people that bless the movement. It is theirs and let them freely
contribute to it their mite.
Young India, 20-1-1927

65. THE CENTRAL FACT
During my tour in so far as it has progressed up to now, I have
observed that spinning organizations have not an accurate register of
spinners and that the figures supplied and published by me from time
to time in these pages were based upon the deductions drawn from the
actual wages paid to the spinners. For statistical information the
calculation is sound enough because it must err on the right side, i.e.,
of understatement. But it is not good enough for the movement itself.
The spinning movement depends for its permanence upon a vital and
direct contact being established between the workers and the spinners;
for then and then only shall we be able to understand the wants,
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

83

aspirations and limitations of the spinners. The object is to penetrate
the remotest Indian homes in the innumerable villages of India and to
introduce a ray of hope and light into these homes. This we shall
never do, if we do not establish a living touch with the spinners. We
cannot, therefore, be satisfied with the work of middlemen whom we
may not and do not know. We must be able to trace the course of
every pie till it is safely deposited in the hands of the spinners. And let
it be remembered that spinning is the central fact of the movement,
not weaving, not dyeing, not printing, not even carding and ginning,
anterior though the last two processes are to spinning. For the
economic solution depends upon a supplementary employment being
found for the largest number of the semi-starved millions. That
employment by far the best is spinning and that alone, as will be seen
by a study of the figures for the various provinces given in these
pages.
The Bihar figures reproduced in this issue show 489 weavers
against 2,698 spinners. My own observation is that ten spinners are
required to feed one weaver both working for the same amount of
time. The ultimate ambition is to teach the spinners carding and
ginning so as to enable them to increase their earnings as spinners
without much effort and without much training. This is being done on
a fairly large scale in Bihar, Bengal and the Madras Presidency. The
Spinners’ Association can justify its existence therefore only upon its
achieving a progressive amelioration in the economic condition of the
vast masses who can be reached in no other way in a shorter time. The
movement depends also for its increasing influence and vitality upon
this fact of its tender care for the millions of whom it has as yet only
touched but a small part.
Workers have suggested to me that, if an accurate register is to
be kept of every spinner, it would involve extra cost. Possibly, it will.
Not being in charge of a single centre, I am unable fully to understand the difficulty of keeping such registers. But I can say without
any fear of challenge that, whatever the cost may be, a complete
register of spinners is an absolute necessity until spinning has become
an automatically working movement beyond risk of destruction. The
extra cost that the keeping of such a register may involve will be worth
undertaking if we are to put the movement on a stable foundation.
What an accurate and simultaneous entry of every pie received and
spent in a banking corporation is to its honest existence and steady
84

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

growth, an accurate register of spinners is to the honest existence and
steady growth of the spinning movement. I hope therefore that every
spinning organization will without any loss of time set about keeping
a full and up-to-date register of its spinners. Needless to say that the
workers who will be incharge of the registers and who will come in
contact with the spinners must be men—and how nice if they were
women?—of unimpeachable character and purity. The discovery of
this flaw in the movement was made by me through the hypersensitiveness of the workers of Bengal. In my notice of the Abhoy
Ashram report,1 I made an incidental observation that our statements
of figures must not contain “abouts” and “nearlies” and then I
made a general observation about the necessity of purity of character.
I had in making that observation no one in particular in mind but
owing to the juxtaposition of the general remark to the mention of the
work of the Abhoy Ashram some of its inmates suspected that my
remarks were aimed at them. I had no difficulty in disabusing their
minds of the suspicion; but the conversation enabled me to understand and convince the members of the Ashram of the necessity of
keeping an accurate up-to-date register of spinners. I am
therefore not sorry for the paragraph that I wrote in my notice of the
Abhoy Ashram, if only because it has led to the discovery of the flaw
in our human account-keeping. But let me reiterate for the
information of all concerned that in this spinning movement which is
fraught with tremendous consequences, we cannot put too much stress
upon the absolute necessity of members of our organizations being
and remaining beyond suspicion, and if we are to attain this standard
of purity, we will have to develop a thick skin enough to stand and
take in good part well-meant suggestions, criticisms and observations.
Young India, 20-1-1927

66. A CANDID CRITIC
I must not withhold the following letter from the readers :
I have perused your article ‘Swamiji the Martyr’ with the care and
reverence it deserves. I have read it five times before attempting to criticize it.
This is to avoid hasty criticism.
The article is undoubtedly written in fascinating language. I envy your
style. It attracts, but to me it appears, that it is rather dangerously attractive.
1

Vide “Abhoy Ashram Khadi Work”, 30-12-1926.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

85

My criticism is based on my estimation of your character. I have often
debated with some friends on this subject. They hold that you are a statesman
in the garb of a saint—ready to forgo truth in the cause of your country. I have
on the contrary maintained that you are a saint—who has entered politics in
fulfilment of your mission, to practise truth in the face of most trying and
perplexing circumstances. I shall be very obliged to know if my estimation is
correct. For if it is not, the criticism that follows has little value. I am of the
opinion that a man of policy is within his rights to write in the manner you
have done.
You will agree with me that to suppress truth is a form of falsehood; to
refuse to call a spade a spade when you feel it like that is cowardice; and that
fearlessness and truth go together.
Do you feel, Mahatmaji, that the murder of Swamiji was an inhuman, barbarous
and cruel act of a Muslim ruffian and that the entire Muslim community should be
ashamed of it? Why do you refuse to characterize it as such? Instead of condemning
the deed and the doer, and those who are responsible for this act (those who describe
Hindu leaders as Kafirs— the hot Muslim propagandists and the mad Muslim priests),
you have begun to defend the murderer and hold an apology for the community. You
never defended Dyer. Is not a European a brother too?
You say further, Islam means peace. Is this truth? Islam as taught by
the Koran and practised by Muslims ever since its birth never meant peace.
What makes you write a thing so patently wrong? Buddhism, Christianity,
Hinduism of course teach peace, but not Islam. May I know what makes you
think and write like this?
You never minced matters when condemning the wrongs of the
Government, you never minced matters when you condemned Arya Samaj, why
fear to condemn Muslims for even proved wrongs?
I am sure if such a black act had been committed by a Hindu against a
Muslim leader (which Heaven forbid!), you would have condemned the murderer
and the community in unsparing terms. You would have asked Hindus to repent
in sack-cloth and ashes, to offer fasts, hold hartal, raise memorial to the
departed Muslim and many other things. Why do you accord preferential
treatment to your ‘blood brothers’the Muslims?
A truth-teller knows no fear, not even of the sword of Islam and I trust
you will oblige me by giving reply to above in the columns of your esteemed
weekly.

The writer is frank and obviously in earnest and reflects the
prevalent mood.
86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

To clothe me with sainthood is too early even if it is possible. I
myself do not feel a saint in any shape or form. But I do feel I am a
votary of Truth in spite of all my errors of unconscious omission and
commission. The correspondent has judged rightly that I am not “a
statesman in the garb of a saint”. But since Truth is the highest
wisdom, sometimes my acts appear to be consistent with the highest
statesmanship. But I hope I have no policy in me save the policy of
truth and ahimsa. I will not sacrifice truth and ahimsa even for the
deliverance of my country or religion. This is as much as to say that
neither can be so delivered.
In writing about the assassination of Swamiji, I have not
suppressed truth. I do believe the act to be all that the correspondent
describes. But I feel pity for the murderer even as I felt for General
Dyer. Let not the correspondent forget that I refused to be party to
any agitation for the prosecution of General Dyer. I do claim that a
European is just as much brother to me as a Mussalman Indian or a
Hindu.
What I do feel about the assassin is that he is himself a victim of
foul irreligious propaganda in the name of religion. Hence it is that I
have held the newspapers that have corrupted the public mind to be
responsible for the murder. I do hold the maulvis and all those who
have indulged in exciting hatred against Swamiji to be responsible.
But I do regard Islam to be a religion of peace in the same sense
as Christianity, Buddhism and Hinduism are. No doubt there are
differences in degree, but the object of these religions is peace. I know
the passages that can be quoted from the Koran to the contrary. But
so is it possible to quote passages from the Vedas to the contrary.
What is the meaning of imprecations pronounced against the
Anaryas1 ? Of course these passages bear today a different meaning
but at one time they did wear a dreadful aspect. What is the meaning
of the treatment of untouchables by us Hindus? Let not the pot call
the kettle black. The fact is that we are all growing. I have given my
opinion that the followers of Islam are too free with the sword. But
that is not due to the teaching of the Koran. That is due in my opinion
to the environment in which Islam was born. Christianity has a bloody
record against it, not because Jesus was found wanting, but because the
1

Non-Aryans

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

87

environment in which it spread was not responsive to his lofty
teaching.
These two, Christianity and Islam, are after all religions of but
yesterday. They are yet in the course of being interpreted. I reject the
claim of maulvis to give a final interpretation to the message of
Mahomed as I reject that of the Christian clergy to give a final
interpretation to the message of Jesus. Both are being interpreted in
the lives of those who are living these messages in silence and in
perfect self-dedication. Bluster is no religion nor is vast learning
stored in capacious brains. The seat of religion is in the heart. We
Hindus, Christians, Mussalmans and others have to write the interpretation of our respective faiths with our own crimson blood and not
otherwise.
Young India, 20-1-1927

67. SPEECH AT MADHUBANI

1

January 20, 1927
Mahatmaji in replying thanked the Boards for presenting him addresses. He
thanked the boys of the Brahmacharya Ashram also for singing before him the sweet
Vedic hymns. He said that there was neither any necessity, nor had he so much time at
his disposal to reply separately to all the addresses presented to him. But one thing
had drawn his attention. He said that he was told in three or four addresses that
attempts were being made to start Ayurvedic dispensaries in many parts of the
province. It seemed to him that the people of Bihar were interesting themselves in
the Ayurvedic system of treatment. He had expressed his opinion on the subject on
many occasions and he would like to draw their attention to that. He believed that
there was a good deal of truth in that system, but he believed none the less that the
practitioners of that system had their own defects and joined the profession without
proper training. He admitted that the Western system of medical treatment was very
defective, but he knew this also that the Indians did not do even half of what the
people of Europe were doing for the success of their medical science. But they had
great opportunity to work for the improvement of that science. He requested the
Municipalities and District Boards to see to this matter. He further requested the
vaidyas to make a scientific study of the system. If there were defects in the system,
1

At the meeting, addresses were presented to Gandhiji on behalf of the Municipality, the District Board, the goshalas, the Youngmen’s Debating Club and the
Arya Samaj.

88

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and defects there certainly were, they should not try to conceal them; on the contrary,
every effort should be made to remove them.
Continuing, he said that he was glad to learn that the organizers of the
Madhubani goshala agreed with his views on the utilization of the hides of dead cattle
for the improvement of the cattle themselves. Goshalas, he said, had two aspects, one
economic and the other religious. The question of cow-protection was a noncontroversial matter. He did not understand why there should be any quarrel with the
Muslims on that point. His views on kurbani, he said, remained unchanged.
Continuing, he said that the existing line of work of the goshala had also
many defects in it. They should be maintained in the right and proper way. The
organizers of these houses should be thoroughly acquainted with the treatment of
animal diseases. They should know how to house and feed the cows, how to make
milk cheaper for the poor village purchasers; in fact, the conductors of goshalas
must thoroughly study the science of cattle-keeping and then alone could the purpose
of goshalas be served.
Proceeding, he said that he had done all he could for the attainment of HinduMuslim unity but had failed. For that reason he had given up reading newspapers
even. He had no time to read them either. His condition, he said, had become like
king Janaka of Mithila who had looked indifferently when his own city was burning,
for he had done all he could to prevent the fire. Similarly his (Mahatmaji’s) attitude
towards Hindu-Muslim differences was that of indifference for he knew that it was not
in his power to remedy it. He said he did not know how or when Hindu-Muslim unity
would come. The people of this country had gone mad; they were unhesitatingly
cutting the throats of each other. He could not be a party to it. His religion was of
non-violence, his faith in non-violence remained as unshaken as it was before,
although attempts were made by his friends to convince him of the utility of violence
on special occasions. To him all things were not as they seemed and he believed
firmly that non-violence was the religion through which alone one could triumph
ultimately. For all those reasons, he said, he had stopped dealing with the subject
altogether. But he believed that the unity would certainly come one day, if not
through the agency of man, through the agency of God.
Referring to khaddar, he said that he was glad that a purse was presented to him
for khaddar work. But from Madhubani he expected much more. Madhubani, he said,
was a big khaddar centre. He saw that many poor spinners of the place came four or
five miles walking on foot with their yarn to take cotton or money from the workers.
He knew that there were people who were even poorer than they. While he was at
Champaran he had heard a lady complain that she could not take her bath in the
Ganges and clean her clothes because she had no additional clothes to spare. This
might have been an exaggeration but such cases were not absent. There was no other
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

89

way to relieve the poverty of those people except by giving them an occupation and
the best possible occupation they could give them was spinning.
Continuing, he said that he had just heard a hymn from the Isopanishad which
meant that those who did not work stole other men’s property. What did it mean, he
asked. It did not mean that he actually stole other men’s property but it meant that he
lived on the food earned by other men’s labour. As a matter of fact, no man had any
right to live, unless he worked not only for himself but for all men alike, for an
individual is but a drop in the great ocean of humanity. Similarly, the Gita taught him
that no man should eat unless he had performed yajna and of the many yajnas
sanctioned by that sacred book, that of working for others was the best. Spinning,
then, was the only work which could help thousands of people; it was the universal
yajna which could be performed by all.
Addressing the ladies, he said that to him all who were clad in foreign clothes
were naked, for nothing but khaddar could cover the nakedness of Indians.
Mahatmaji appealed to the people to look into the affairs of the local national
school and of the goshala and help them with money if they deserved it. It was the
duty of a citizen, he said, to help his fellow-beings and institutions in distress.
He concluded by appealing once more for money for khaddar work and asking
people to purchase khadi which was stocked at the meeting.

The Searchlight, 26-1-1927

68. SPEECH AT PUBLIC MEETING, SAMASTIPUR
January 20, 1927
He said that he was glad to see them once more. It was impossible for him to
forget the people of Samastipur who had once brought him there in a special train
with Bapu Brajkishore Prasad and others. He had, therefore, come to Samastipur with
great hope. His tour, he said, was intended to preach the message of khaddar. It pained
him very much to see that most of the people who had come to see him had not put on
khaddar. He had preached the message of khaddar for five long years from thousands
of platforms but still the people were reluctant to use khadi. Bihar had the capacity to
produce as much khaddar as could be consumed in the province and if only the people
patronized that great cottage industry, thousands of their unemployed men and
women—ginners, carders, spinners, weavers, and even bleachers and washermen—
could be provided with food and clothing. Every farthing that they could spend on
khadi would go to the homes of their poor countrymen. It was their religious duty,
therefore, to put on khadi and khadi alone.
Continuing, he said that by purchasing mill-made cloth they were helping only
the rich mill-owners of either Lancashire or Ahmedabad. He was intimately acquainted

90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with the condition of labourers through Anasuyabehn. He knew it definitely that the
labourers were little benefited by the huge amount of money that people spent over
mill-made cloth. The rich mill-owners were not in need of money and they had a wide
market even outside India, but the poor countrymen of theirs were dying for a bit of
rough bread. He knew how poor the people of Bihar were, for he had been in
Champaran for a long time. Would they not be kind and sympathetic to these poor
people, he asked.
Proceeding, he said that money was necessary for the furtherance of khaddar
work. In order to save crores of money permanently in the country, crores of money
were to be invested in the beginning. He had come to their door to beg of them that
money. He regretted that no khaddar was stocked at the place of the meeting,
although he was told on his arrival that there were khaddar shops in the town and that
some khaddar would surely be stocked on the spot. Nevertheless he requested the
people to go at once to the khaddar shop and clothe themselves in khadi.
Concluding, Mahatmaji spoke a few words on the evils of untouchability and
paid an eloquent tribute to Shraddhanand, the martyr, who had embraced death in his
attempt to regenerate the untouchables.
An address of welcome on behalf of the Municipality was then read by Babu
Giriwardhar, Chairman, to which Mahatmaji made a short reply. He expressed his
satisfaction that there was no ill-feeling between the Hindu and the Mussalmans of
Samastipur. It was a great thing. He hoped that that state of things would continue to
exist.
Referring to their desire to have a khaddar-producing centre at Samastipur, he
said that if they sincerely desired such an organization, Rajendra Babu would surely
look into the matter. He hoped that if requisite amount of money was advanced by the
people themselves, Rajendra Babu would be coming to their help with all the energy
he possessed.
Referring to the national school, he regretted that it was not what it ought to
have been. He saw there certain charkhas and the students were also seen sitting by
them, but it was all a mockery, a mere show. Neither the teacher nor the students knew
anything about spinning. He had given proper instructions to the head master and he
(the head master) had agreed to work according to that plan. He hoped that they would
send him a satisfactory report within a month.
Continuing, he said that the municipalities could do a good deal of work if
they so desired. They could push on the khaddar work to the great profit of not only
the work but of themselves also.
A purse of Rs. 2,000 was then presented to him on which he remarked that
Samastipur should not have contributed such a small amount.

The Searchlight, 26-1-1927
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

91

69. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
AKOLA ,

February 7, 1927
MY DEAR BHRRR1 ,

I was delighted to receive your note. Of course you had great
success in Kathiawar. Ramdas told all about it.
Sohaila2 certainly will have my blessings, if she and hers will
behave themselves and wear khadi.
Here is the letter you want for Dr. Mehta. But must you go to
Rangoon for the amount? Why can you not collect what you can
locally and the rest may be collected without your going to Rangoon,
seeing that you will allow Hindus to participate in the contributions?
Of course if you go to Rangoon you will collect the small amount you
mention in a few days.
With love,
Yours,

BHRRR
From a photostat: S.N. 9557

70. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
AKOLA ,

Silence Day [February 7, 1927]
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I got your letter and Radha’s, and also other letters, acquainting
me with Rukhi’s progress. Now we need not worry on her account.
We are crushed under the triple burden of the doctor’s services as also
those rendered by others. We ought not to think of repaying it. Even
the thought of a token payment would be sinful. We can return their
kindness only with a general awakening of our conscience. How can
we make our young men and women see this? Had we been householders, even a single such illness would have consumed what-ever
Santok might have kept back. But there is no end to the illnesses
1

This was a form of greeting used by Gandhiji and Abbas Tyabji for each

2

Addressee's daughter who was engaged to Mahomed Habib of Aligarh

other.

92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

around us. Why, even amongst those whom Santok regards as her own
there is no less misery. . . .1
I expect that separate accounts of all these matters are properly
maintained; I mean they ought to be. I would say they are correctly
maintained only if the rent and other items are correctly entered. I see
you have been carrying rather a heavy burden. You alone know how
it should or could be lightened. How are things going on at Vijapur?
How much khadi has been lying with us? Hurry up with the statement
about our agricultural activities, which is to be sent to Sir Gangaram. I
have another letter from him.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Radha should not expect a separate letter for some time, but she
should write to me all the same.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7774. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

71. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[February 7, 1927] 2
. . . 3 serve us and others should attend to our comforts. Do we
really deserve all this? Please think over this. It will be long before we
really serve the world. At the moment we just accept what the world
offers us, claiming to be social workers. Let us live up to the world’s
expectations of us. May I hope you will contribute your full mite to
achieve this?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8839. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

1

As in the source
From the reference to accepting services this appears to have been written
about the same time as the preceding letter.
3
The earlier part of this letter is not available.
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

93

72. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
AKOLA ,

Silence Day [February 7, 1927]
SISTERS,

Today I am observing my day of silence in the midst of the
members of our Ashram family. Kishorelalbhai, Gomatibehn, Nathji,
Tulsi Maher and Tara—are not all these to be regarded as belonging
to our Ashram? And who would regard Nanabhai, his wife and Sushila
as outsiders? So do not expect me to write anything except about
them this week.
Gomatibehn is still having a little fever, and is confined to bed.
But she is cheerful; no one could say from her face that she was
suffering from a long and serious illness. The reason for this cheerfulness is her faith. May we all have such faith!
Kishorelalbhai is getting on as usual. It cannot be said that he
has acquired more strength. He even had fever and shivering last
night. The fever lasted for a short time and subsided.
Whenever there is illness among the dear ones, Nathji cannot but
be in their midst.
Nanabhai is perpetually ill. He is down with asthma but his face
shows great calm.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3638

73. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
AKOLA ,

Silence Day [February 7, 1927]
CHI. RAMDAS,

I have been getting your letters. You should improve your
health a great deal. Today we are here in the midst of Gomatibehn,
Kishorelalbhai and Tulsi Maher. And here too is Nathji.
Blessings from

BAPU

94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[PS.]
Programme:
9
Bhusaval
10
Jalgaon
11
Chopda
12
Amalner
13-14
Dhulia
I do not know the subsequent programme.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6853

74. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
AKOLA ,

Silence Day, February 7, 1927
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

Today we are in Akola. Kishorelal has been ill for a long time
and now Gomatibehn is bed-ridden. His elder brother, Nanabhai is
also ill. In spite of all this the family’s tranquillity and faith in dharma
is great. Meeting them is a rare pleasure.
The summer heat has already started in this part of the country.
I had already asked you about Sparrow 1 . Her letters that
followed have shocked me. I have written to her. If she shows you the
letter, read it. I was much distressed.
I am awaiting a detailed letter from you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32826

75. LETTER TO V. A. SUNDARAM
February 8, 1927
MY DEAR SUNDARAM,

I am glad you are by Devdas’s side. His stay there is bound to
do him good. You should have an operation without delay for
1

Helene Haussding

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

95

Savitri’s tonsillitis. You had become irregular about sending me
weekly verses. I am glad you have now recommenced.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 3198

76. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
ON THE TRAIN ,

Tuesday [February 8, 1927] 1
CHI. MANILAL,

Now I can let you have the news. I have almost settled the
betrothal. But although you have given me the authority to finalize
the matter I do not propose to exercise it.
Herewith a letter from Sushila; she is Tarabehn’s elder sister. At
19 she is in good health though slightly hard of hearing. She knows
Gujarati and Marathi. She also understands Hindi and a little English.
She had her schooling up to the fourth form. I send with this
Sushila’s photograph. She is Kishorelalbhai’s niece. Her parents are
alive. Sushila is good at painting and also tries a little music. She plays
on the harmonium. She is good at house work. She has herself written
the letter without any help. She has also been told that you were
almost engaged in South Africa. I would not have been able to find
out a better match. Initially the suggestion came from Jamnalalji.
Sushila’s brother is to be operated upon. The marriage can be fixed
for the 11th of March if he recovers [by then], and you can set sail
immediately. If the operation is not successful marriage would be
postponed on account of the mourning.
Now about you. I believe . . . 2 you have no disease such as
syphilis or diabetes. I also told Sushila that . . .3 if you ever go astray
she should try to stop you and if you persist she should leave you.
Now along with your approval I want a solemn assurance from
you that . . .4 you shall honour Sushila’s freedom; that you shall treat
her as your companion, never as a slave; that you shall take as much
1
2
3
4

96

Gandhiji left Akola on February 8; vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 7-2-1927.
A few lines are omitted here.
Two lines are omitted here.
A line is omitted here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

care of her person as of your own; that you shall not force her to
surrender to your passion, but that you shall take your pleasure only
with her consent. I would advise you to set certain limits to your
enjoyment.
While describing your good points I have let it be known that
you are generous, guileless, and affectionate; that you have great love
for the motherland and want to serve her.
I carry a grave responsibility. Here is a devout family. I would
be glad if we become related. They have left everything to me. You
must never deceive me. I would be mortally hurt if Sushila suffered
the least unhappiness. She has impressed me as an innocent girl true
to her name1 .
You know my attitude towards women. Men have not been treating them well. I have proposed this alliance assuming you to be capable of coming up to my ideals.
Now if you are agreeable to this engagement, wire to me and
write a detailed letter. If you do not approve of this match or if you
cannot accept the conditions I have laid down, wire to me: “Unable
accept” 2 , and if you would say ‘Yes’, then wire, “Approve match, can
satisfy your test”.3
Write to me at length. Here is my address: 10th Jalgaon; 11th
Jalgaon; 12th Chopda; 13th, 14th and 15th Dhulia.
With the fear of God in your heart, write to me only the truth.
May God bless you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9124. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

1
2
3

Sushila literally means ‘of virtuous character’.
The source has this word in English.
ibid.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

97

77. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
Tuesday, February 8, 1927
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. You are always in my thoughts but I just do
not find time to write. I did not know that Mahadev too had not been
able to write to you.
I have sent your letter to Pattani Saheb and asked him to reply
to you direct. The only reply he will send is that you should stay
there. Devdas has sent you Dr. Ansari’s letter. Let me know your
decision after reading it.
Perhaps you do not know that Revashankarbhai is going to
Ceylon, taking Dhiru2 along with him.
Even if you do not write letters, Pyarelal must. Even other wise
Pyarelal should write to me as a rule.
Blessings

BAPU

[PS.]
Dates: 10th Bhusaval, 11th Jalgaon, 12th Amalner, 13-14Dhulia.
I do not know the names of the other places.
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

78. SPEECH AT NATIONAL SCHOOL, KHAMGAON
February 8, 1927
The reason why I have taken the trouble to carry out this
examination4 is that I have heard much praise of you, and what I am
saying now is not to criticize you, but because I appreciate your effort
and wish to help you. I must inform you that I am not satisfied if this
is the standard of the most brilliant boy of the school. I am not
satisfied either with his pronunciation or with the translation. English
pronunciations were also bad. Only teachers who can teach correct
pronunciation, whether of Sanskrit or English, should be employed. If
such teachers are not available, then we should stop teaching. But we
have forsaken satyagraha and so plan our work to please the people
anyhow. Let us follow truth in our system of education too. I will now
98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

suggest a little modification in your attitude to the charkha.1
I see that the charkha has a place on your programme, but it is
one out of the four or five things you teach here. Now I want you to
understand that the charkha has a place all its own, for reasons that
should be obvious to you. For charkha is not one of the professions
that you teach. A profession is for earning a livelihood, and if charkha
was to be taught as a profession it should have no place on your
syllabus. But it has a special purpose. When you put it in line with
carpentry, clay-modelling, etc., you are guilty of a confusion of
thought. Charkha is an instrument of service. In a national school
therefore where the nation expects us to train national servants, the
scheme of studies will centre round the charkha. It is a science in itself
and it is a science which gives us a knowledge of the means of
ameliorating the condition of the masses.
Devotion to a cause is no longer a strong point in our life. A
true brahmachari is one who is devoted to his ideal and single-minded
in his pursuit of the Brahman. If you at all want to give a place to the
charkha, then it ought to have a special place. The distinctive quality
of our national schools should be that we treat them as a great yajna
and should train ourselves to run them accordingly. You must always
think how much the knowledge of English helps in the propagation of
the charkha, what support the Gita gives to the charkha, and what
improvement you can effect in it if you learn carpentry and smithy.2
Do you know that we have not a national institution where
mechanical engineering is taught and where good spindles are made?
If therefore you learn mechanics, concentrate on learning how to
make a true spindle and how to mend a wrong one. You should be
able to tell the circumference of an ideal wheel, the distance between
the axle and the poles, the number of revolutions of your spindle, etc.
A carpenter in a national school will not have as his ambition the
making of an ideal cabinet, but of an ideal charkha. In short, you
should study the charkha scientifically and with religious zeal, i.e.,
with a view to making it the mightiest lever of the nation’s salvation.
Young India, 17-2-1927

1
2

This paragraph is taken from Navajivan, 20-2-1927.
ibid.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

99

79. SPEECH ON UNTOUCHABILITY, KHAMGAON1
February 8, 1927
If I could think of anything that is untouchable it is foreign
clothes. Anything that is prejudicial to the welfare of the nation is
untouchable. Anything that is calculated to do the nation a disservice
is untouchable. Liquor therefore is untouchable, foreign cloth is
untouchable, but no human being is untouchable, and I regard it as
fiendish or satanic to regard a fifth of the land as untouchable.
Young India, 17-2-1927

80. SPEECH ON TILAK SWARAJ FUND, PACHORA
February 8, 1927
Mahatmaji addressed the meeting emphasizing the need for khaddar and the
removal of untouchability. Some questions were put to him and he answered them.
The important question was as to how the one crore of rupees collected for the Tilak
Swaraj Fund had been spent.
In replying to this question at length, Mahatmaji invited the curious to study
the audit accounts published by the All-India Congress Committee. Every pie had
been properly accounted for. Did they distrust the honesty of the treasurers like Seth
Revashanker Jagjivan Zaveri and Seth Jamnalal Bajaj? The fact was that some people
had given their contributions specially earmarked for certain purposes and they were
being spent for them. For example, Seth Revashankerbhai had himself given Rs.
40,000 for educational purposes in Kathiawar. A gentleman in Bombay had given two
to three lakhs for the removal of untouchability and they were being properly used.
Both the treasurers as well as Mr. Shankerlal Banker, the Secretary of the All-India
Spinners’ Association, had given magnificent donations and it was not likely that
they would be careless in the management of the funds. Capable business man as
every one of them was, he was, however, ready to admit that there were some losses in
some cases, but the total could not in any case exceed Rs. 50,000. They were due to
the inevitable risk that every business man has to face. In Bihar, for instance, khadi
was sold on credit to a number of people who had failed to satisfy the obligations. In
Andhra, good Konda Venkatappayya was imposed upon by certain people. He had
disbursed certain amounts, which could not be readily realized. He had put undue trust
in them and they had deceived him. Everyone knew that he had not taken a single pie
for himself. Then there were cases of loss, which the greatest carefulness on one’s
part does not always succeed in avoiding. Recently Sjt. Mahadev Desai, who had been
in the service for ten years, now as a trusted “hamal” (coolie) lost Rs. 400 at
1

100

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Bhandara. Could he ask him to repay the amount? He was bound to enter it in the
accounts as being lost, though Mahadev Desai himself was looking forward to make
good the loss as soon as possible.
These things were bound to happen in the regular course of business and he
would even warn the audience that on rare occasions there might be even frauds. But,
knowing all these things, if they thought that good work was being done, they might
give whatever they could. He for himself was bound to trust the workers, whom the
people trusted. Sjt. Dastane, for instance, was their worker. If he commanded their
trust, why should Gandhiji distrust him? Mahatmaji assured them that every pie would
be credited and accounted for and every loss accurately shown.
Knowing all these things, if they wanted to subscribe to the Deshbandhu
Memorial Fund, which is the same as the Khaddar Fund, let them subscribe; and he
assured them that whatever they gave would be carefully spent and accounted for in the
best manner possible.

The Hindu, 12-2-1927

81. BE IN TIME
The eventful month of April will be soon on us with its
memories of the birth of the nation accompanied by unparalleled
rejoicings in which lakhs upon lakhs of people took part and which
showed the possibilities of what the nation, if it could only act with
one mind, could do. It is a month which showed also what haughty,
revengeful and merciless Imperialism could do to save itself. The 6th
and the 13th of April1 are never-to-be-forgotten days in the life of the
nation. Since then the nation has been struggling not to return evil for
evil, not to act in a spirit of retaliation, but to use for self-purification
the mingled crimson stream that flowed in Jallianwala. The nation has
been struggling to express itself in a non-violent spirit expressed by
the spinning-wheel and khadi, the removal of untouchability and
solidarity of the different sects and creeds. It is clear, however, that
khadi is the only thing in which the whole nation can take part. If we
want to act non-violently, we must act constructively, patiently and
with quiet and quenchless confidence in ourselves and in our method.
We must evolve unity, strength and iron discipline. We must learn to
give effect to our views in spite of the vast odds against us. Let us
realize that the British rule is imposed upon us because British
commerce is forced upon us. If we could but purify British
commerce, we would purify the British connection. Our commercial
1

1919

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

101

transactions with the British as with the world should be on our terms
and should therefore be mutually beneficial and absolutely voluntary.
But Lancashire cloth is a symbol of our helpless exploitation, whereas
khadi is the symbol of self-help, self-reliance and freedom, not merely
of individuals or groups, sects or clans, but of the whole nation. It is a
movement in which the prince and the pauper, men and women, boys
and girls, Hindus and Mussalmans, Christians, Parsis and Jews,
Englishmen, Americans and Japanese, if they wish well to India and
get rid of the spirit of exploitation, can also take part. Thus it is a
unique movement. It is good not merely for some, not merely for the
vast majority, hut it is good for all. We may do many other and many
more things during the forthcoming National Week. But let us at least
organize khadi. Here are the ways:
1.
We can, every one of us, buy as much khadi as we can.
2.
We can sell as much khadi as we can.
3.
We can spin as much yarn as we can.
4.
We can give as much as we can to the All-India Spinners’
Association and collect from others.
5.
Lastly, if we have the will and the opportunity, we can
dedicate ourselves wholly to khadi work.
As I write this, the question arises in my own mind: ‘But what
about the immediate present, what about the Bengal detenus who are
pining away in their prison-cells without any knowledge of charges
against them, without any trial and without knowing how long they are
to be detained?’ My answer however is quite clear. If I could think of
any other more expeditious method of setting them free, I would
adopt it and suggest it today; but there is not. Slow, as this may seem,
it is, in my humble opinion, the surest and the quickest method. Let
those therefore who have belief in khadi or who have no belief in
anything else, do their best bit during the National Week. A true
soldier does not argue as he marches how success is going to be
ultimately achieved. But he is confident that if he only plays his
humble part well, somehow or other the battle will be won. It is in that
spirit that every one of us should act. It is not given to us to know the
future, But it is given to every one of us to know how to do our own
part well. Let us then do that which we know is possible for us if we
only will.
Young India, 10-2-1927

102

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

82. NATIONAL LANGUAGE
In reply to my innocent paragraph about the evil habit of using
English at our public meetings, a habit happily growing less day by
day, a correspondent writes:1
The Hindu of 28th January quotes in extenso your article 2 in Young
India suggesting that in your proposed tour to the Southern Presidency, any
address that may be presented to you should be in the vernacular of the place.
You suggest also that a Hindi translation of the address should be supplied for
your benefit. I observe further that you think that the time has come when
South India should dispense with English for large public meetings. According
to you, it is the English-speaking leaders who are blocking the way to our
rapid progress among the masses by their refusal to learn Hindi. But the truth
seems to be that, had it not been for this language, there would have been no
active political life in India as we have it today. . . .Just as you say it would be
an insult to inflict English on an audience composed of colliery workmen, I
contend that to inflict any other language but English on an audience
composed of people collected from various parts of India will be an affront to
the latter. You will remember that the President3 of this year’s Congress was in
the first instance called upon to speak in Hindi. It was only his rare courage
and his rarer wit that saved him from what looked to be a very embarrassing
situation. Supposing the President addressed that body in his own vernacular,
how many in the audience would have understood him? Or for the matter of
that, how many of the delegates assembled would have sat through the whole
speech? . . . So long therefore as a common Indian language suitable to India
and Burma is not agreed upon, English is bound to be and will be the only
medium of communication among the Indian people. Instead of therefore
setting your face against the use of the English language, and until such time
as a common language is evolved for India, a man situated in your position
should not add to the existing difficulties of the people by calling upon them
to learn altogether a different language. . . .
You remark in your article that it would be difficult to approach the
masses if English is used as the medium. I quite agree with you there. But the
masses should in the first instance be approached by people belonging to
themselves and who live in their midst. It is, of course, understood that when
approaching them their own language will be used. . . .

I publish the letter because it reflects an attitude with which one
1
2
3

Only excerpts are reproduced here.
Vide “Hindi v. English”, 20-1-1927.
S. Srinivasa Iyengar

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

103

has to reckon. The correspondent in his eagerness to defend his own
laziness, for it is difficult otherwise to characterize his mentality, has
missed the following fundamental facts: English is known hardly to
one per cent of the population. It will never be learnt by the masses
and we have to reckon daily more and more with the masses in all our
political transactions The Congress every year has delegates and
visitors the majority of whom do not know and understand English,
and when it becomes a thoroughly democratic body, whose delegates
are scavengers, cobblers, farmers, washermen, tailors and such others,
there will be very few to know English. As against hardly one per cent
of the total population knowing English, over 60 per cent of the total
population of India at the present moment understand the ordinary
rustic Hindustani. For an Indian it is any day infinitely easier to learn
Hindustani than English. These are the facts, but the correspondent
has overlooked them.
Moreover, in his zeal to make English the official language of
the Congress, the correspondent has forgotten the agitation that has
been going on in the Congress ever since its inception for a wider
recognition of Hindustani as the common medium and that there is
now already a resolution of the Congress making Hindustani the
common medium. The correspondent seems to think that I decry the
use of even learning English, which I have never done. That the
English-speaking Indians have rendered immense service to the
country nobody can deny, but unfortunately it is equally undeniable
that further progress is being blocked by us English-speaking Indians
refusing to learn the language of the masses and to work amongst
them in accordance with methods best suited to them. The instance
given by the correspondent of Mr. Chen is beside the point. I do not
know what he is doing, but I do know that he is not speaking to the
Chinese masses through English. And all I have claimed is that at our
mixed mass meetings where the language of the province will not be
understood by all, if any other language is to be adopted, it must be
Hindustani. Surely, it is a proposition which does not admit of any
challenge.
Young India, 10-2-1927

104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

83. SIR HABIBULLAH DEPUTATION
I tender heartiest welcome to Sir Habibullah Deputation on its
return home. The public have not yet sufficient knowledge for forming a definite opinion about the results of the Deputation.1 One thing
is however certain that they have by their tact, ability and cohesion
contributed not a little to the peaceful atmosphere that reigned
supreme whilst the Round Table Conference was going on. One can
only hope that the atmosphere will be reflected in the result of their
deliberations. Not much importance need be attached to the cablegram from South Africa attributing the opinion on the part of a
section of the Indian settlers, rejecting the conclusions of the Round
Table Conference. It is as yet too early. The opinion can only be
based upon conjecture, for nobody knows what the conclusions are.
We are therefore bound to suspend judgment till we have the full text
before us of the agreement said to have been arrived at between the
parties. The ever-vigilant Mr. Andrews is there to watch Indian
interests.
In this connection an Indian settler sends me the following
appropriate reflections on the deliberations:2
Recent messages from South Africa through Reuter’s agency and Mr. C.
F. Andrews suggest that with the enhanced status acquired by the Union of
South Africa. . . she has begun to view the Indian question. . . in a more
generous spirit. . . .
The Round Table Conference too according to the Hon. Mr. Sastri3 has
terminated successfully and Mr. Sastri has expressed his thorough satisfaction
with the agreement arrived at between the Union and the Indian Government
delegates. . . . We can only wish that his high hopes may be fulfilled. Mr.
Sastri has further advised the Indian settlers: “If you, our people from India,
play the game, it will not be long before you get your due. . . even in the
measure that you expect.” Mr. Sastri has thus given the Indian settlers the
hope that they would even be granted full civic rights. Whether Indians are
given full civic rights or not, even if the present policy of persecuting and
driving Indians from pillar to post is abandoned and they are allowed to earn
1
2
3

Vide “Honourable Compromise”, 24-2-1927.
Only excerpts are reproduced here.
V. S. Srinivasa Sastri

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

105

an honest livelihood undisturbed and unmolested,—the labours of the
Conference will not have been in vain.
It were well to give the advice to play the game to the Union 1
Government. Even while we are given the hope of a satisfactory settlement of
the Indian question and while we are being told that a change of heart has taken
place, we find that the policy of depriving Indians of their means of livelihood
and ousting them is being persistently pursued by the Provincial Governments
with the sanction of the Union Government.
The Town Council of Pietermaritzburg is clearing what it has chosen to
term the European locality of every single Indian trader by refusing to grant
him a renewal of his licence. Many old established firms have thus already had
to close down their businesses in those places without any compensation
whatsoever. From a report published in Indian Opinion dated December 31, we
find that several tailors, shoemakers and barbers who were carrying on their
respective occupations for the last ten, fifteen and twenty years have been
refused licences on the only ground that they were Indians, and on appeal the
decision of the Licensing Officer was upheld by the Town Council in every
case, That this should happen just when the Conference was deliberating is not
a little surprising and it is a glaring illustration of who has not been playing
the game.

Young India, 10-2-1927

84. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
Thursday, February 10, 1927
CHI. MANI,

I have two letters from you, You have done well to begin
learning Hindi, Whatever you do, you should preserve your health,
and then I shall be free from anxiety,
Never spoil your handwriting. It does not matter if you have to
spend more time on writing, Soon you will be able to write a good
hand fast.
The slivers are very good indeed, I wish that you take a
first in every single process connected with cotton. You will be most
useful to me as a spinning teacher in girls’ schools, and later on as a
welfare worker for poor women if your health permits. There is no
end to the work to be done among women, but this can be done only
1

The Source has “Indian”, a misprint, Young India, 17-2-1927, published this
correction.

106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to a limited extent by men.
Let me know everything that is wrong with the [Ashram]
kitchen, and gently draw Sankaran’s attention to it. You may even
demonstrate the right method of doing things for a couple of days,
but you must not get mixed up with it every day. You have to learn to
live with others. I shall be very pleased when I can place you anywhere without hesitation as I can place Mahadev or Devdas for
instance. I shall be satisfied when you do not hurt anyone’s feelings
or feel hurt yourself.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, pp. 52-3

85. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
Thursday [February 10, 1927] 1
CHI. JAMNALAL,

Tulsi Maherji tells me that I should let you know my opinion
about [supplying] cotton to him, and that you propose to act accordingly. I am on my way to the station and will therefore write only
this.
I think we should make up the deficit by drawing on the
Charkha Sangh or from the Ashram. If you have no objection to
drawing on the Charkha Sangh and obtaining the Council’s sanction
later, you may do so. Or else debit it to the Ashram account and let
him have the cotton.
He has Rs. 300. He wants to have a wagonload of cotton packed
in gunny bags. You may let him have that much if it would not cost
more than Rs. 800, over and above the Rs. 300.
I would think it advisable to send less cotton if there could be a saving
on railway freight. He has asked for 50 Bengali maunds presuming
that transport charges up to Raxaul will be the same for 50 maunds as
for 25. If it is so it appears advisable to send 50 maunds. Now if I
have left anything unsaid you should do as you think fit. Whatever
1

From the reference to Tulsi Maher who was with Gandhiji on February 7; vide
“Letter to Mirabehn” 7-2-1927.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

107

you think may be considered as my opinion.
When you go to Bombay take with you my things such as
books, clothes, etc. On reaching there get yourself promptly operated
upon if the doctor so advises.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2883

86. SPEECH AT JALGAON

1

February 10, 1927
One of the special features of the tour was the auctioning of the caskets
containing addresses at the meetings where they were given. The beginning was made
at Jalgaon and the process was continued until Dhulia. Gandhiji said:

You must know, friends, that excepting things which have a
special artistic value and which I can hand over to Prof. Malkani2 who
is collecting such things at the Gujarat Vidyapith, I cannot afford to
carry these caskets with me. For one thing I carry no steel trunks with
me, nor have I any provision at the Ashram to keep them. The only
course left for me therefore is to sell them. Don’t you think that in
doing so I am in any way disregarding or belittling the love with
which they are being given. On the contrary, I propose to return the
love in the best manner I can, and that is by converting the caskets
into money for the work which is nearest my heart and for which you
are showering your love on me.
The sentiment was appreciated everywhere, with the result that at a village like
Shahade a trifling casket fetched as much as Rs. 300, and at Dondaiche the plate and
other things fetched over Rs. 200.

Young India, 24-2-1927

1
2

108

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
N. R. Malkani
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

87. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
DHULIA,

Friday [February 11, 1927] 1
BHIAISHRI FULCHAND,

I have your letter. The Parishad’s stars, it appears, are not
favourable. We might therefore have to make some [propitiatory]
sacrifice. We have not yet been able to get a site for setting up the
pandal; surely we cannot afford to be so dependent. Why can we not
hold the convention in some private premises? Why not at Umarsheth’s or some other farm? Why not at Ranavav? But a player always
sees more than an onlooker. It is no use my arriving at any decision
when I am so far away. Please do whatever you think proper.
Devchandbhai asks for some dates during April or May. But it cannot
be done. The position at the moment is that a date once cancelled is
finally cancelled.
From April to July all days are engaged. A few days in August
are free. After that I shall be free only in early December. I shall
certainly be at the Ashram in the beginning of March. We shall meet
then.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Now up to the 14th write to me at Dhulia.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 2831. Courtesy: Sharadabehn Shah

88. LETTER TO JANAKIDEVI BAJAJ
Saturday [February 12, 1927] 2
CHI. JANAKIBEHN,

I am not surprised that you faced the operation with great
courage. I would have been surprised to see you break down. I have
always found you full of courage. May it endure for ever. Get well
1
It appears that the letter was written before Gandhiji reached Dhulia on
February 13.
2
The addressee was operated upon on February 11.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

109

soon and after that observe the whole regimen strictly and never fall
ill. I am in need of many women who are strong in both body and
mind.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2887

89. SPEECH ON KHADI, AMALNER1
February 12, 1927
At Amalner for instance a doubt was expressed as to the utility of carrying the
message of khaddar to a mill area like that place. “There are 2,000 labourers here and
they form the bulk of the population. Do you expect them to wear khadi? Do you
expect the mill-owners to wear khadi?”
Gandhiji gave a lengthy reply.

It is a question that you may well ask, and yet should not need
to ask at this time of the day. Truth has to be repeated a million times
if it is not understood by all. If only a single expression of truth was
sufficient everyone should have been a believer in God by now. The
fact is that the truth that God is one has a million times been told, but
the hearts of only a few have been able to receive it.
The 330 rupees that the labourers have contributed to the purse
are for me worth their weight in gold. But it is not for the first time
that labourers are giving concrete expression to their sympathy. Even
the mill-owners have done so and will do so in the conviction that they
are helping a good cause, and the labourers are doing so because of
their sympathy for a fellow-labourer like myself. But an
understanding of one’s duty and the observance thereof are different
things. If they went together we should have Ramarajya. There are for
instance those who know the value of brahmacharya but who cannot
observe it. Even so there are those who appreciate the message of
khadi but who are not able to conquer their love of ease and comfort
and exclusively wear khadi. Many come and tell me: ‘We value your
message, but show us the way to carry it out.’ And as honest
conviction is bound to be followed by practice sooner or later this
attitude fills me with more hope. You may be employing 2,000
labourers here but do not forget that you tear them from the soil, do
1

110

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

not forget that your mills can provide only a handful with labour, and
can never find employment for the millions who must be rooted to the
soil and who want more work. The question has been before the Royal
Commission of Agriculture, the question is before the Viceroy and I
challenge any-one to find a better solution than the one I have placed
before the country. Dr. Roy 1 could not carry his chemical works to
the famine areas in Bogra and Khulna; he had to fall back on the
spinn-ing-wheels. Let not your ambition be to concentrate thousands
of spindles in a mill, but to convert every home into a spinning mill.
‘Do I seek to destroy the mill industry?’ I have often been
asked. If I did I should not have pressed for the abolition of the excise
duty. I want the mill industry to prosper—only I do not want it to
prosper at the expense of the country. On the contrary if the interests
of the country demand that the industry should go, I should let it go
without the slightest compunction. The mill-owners who support me
understand my attitude and many want this movement to prosper,
even if its prosperity should mean their loss.
And you ask how those who produce mill cloth may wear
anything else. Do you know that in Manchester the manufacturers do
not wear their own products? You need not mind your inability to use
cloth produced by your own mills. The good Duchess of Sutherland
saw the miserable plight of the poor islanders of Hebrides and placed
spinning-wheels and looms at their disposal. The citizens of Manchester, including mill-owners, do wear the hand-spun stuffs prepared
by the Hebrides people, even at three times the cost of the mill stuff.
Do not hanker after cheapness and fineness. If you want cheap
and fine stuffs you must spin fine yarn as the late Jogesh Chatterji did
or you must spend more money for it. Those who talk of swaraj cannot have both cheapness and fineness. Think of the sacrifices all
fighters have to make. In Queen Elizabeth’s time heavy duties were
imposed on foreign stuffs and heavy penalties were prescribed for the
purchase of Holland laces. Am I asking for much when I ask you to
remember your poor and to purchase their khadi? Do not say you
will maintain the poor on charity. Only two classes of people are
entitled to charity and no one else—the Brahmin who possesses nothing and whose business it is to spread holy learning, and the cripple
1

P. C. Ray

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

111

and the blind. But at Jagannath Puri the iniquitous system of giving
doles to the able-bodied idle is going on to our eternal shame and
humiliation, and it is to wipe out that shame that I am going about
with the message of charkha up and down the whole country.
Young India, 24-2-1927

90. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised

DONDAICHE,

Sunday [February 13, 1927] 1
CHI. MIRA,

Today is Sunday morning before prayer whilst the others are
getting up.
Here is the further itinerary.
I have your latest letter.
I forgot to tell you how glad I was that Father and others were
coming nearer to you. It must be the natural result as you have for
them nothing but pure affection daily growing purer. Knowing
affection grows purer if also more detached.
I understand the changes in your vow. They are quite all right.
No more today.
Yours,

BAPU

15th February
16th ,,
Nasik
17th ,,
Ahmednagar
18th ,,
Kurduwadi,
Dist. Sholapur
19th ,,
20th ,,
Sholapur
21st ,,
22nd
,,
Gulbarga

Dhulia 24th February Satara
25th
,,
Belgaum
26th
,,
Vengurla,
Dist. Ratnagiri
27th
,,
28th
,,
Ratnagiri
1st March
Chiplun,
Dist. Ratnagiri
2nd

,,

Mahad,

1

According to Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter” (Young India, 24-2-1927)
Gandhiji was at Dondaiche on February 12; Sunday was February 13.

112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

23rd ,,

Pandharpur,
Dist. Sholapur

3rd

,,

Dist. Kolaba
Bombay

From the original: C. W. 5203. Courtesy: Mirabehn

91. LETTER TO KSHITISH CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
DHULIA,

February 13, 1927
MY DEAR KSHITISH BABU,

I have your two letters redirected to me at Dhulia. I am glad that
Anil is better and entirely out of danger. I send you a copy of my
itinerary. Please continue to advise me upon his progress.
I have just learnt that Tarini Babu has left Wardha. I am myself
more anxious about him than Anil because Tarini Babu’s disease has
made a home in his body whereas Anil’s was a temporary crisis.
Tarini Babu therefore requires the best attention possible. I suggest
your taking him to Dr. Bidhan Roy or Sir Nilaratan, if necessary, with
a note from Sir P. C. Roy. We must not hesitate to take the best advice
available if we are to save him.
The samples sent by you have not been forwarded to me. I shall
he writing to the people at Jalgaon about it.
I value the note you have sent me about Mr. Chatterjee. I am
going to make use of it for Young India. 1 Please give my respectful
condolences to the family of the deceased.
I hope you and other members are keeping well and that the
work at Sodepur is progressing. I know that the whole brunt now falls
upon your shoulders, but thank God they are broad enough to bear it.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

Enclosure 1
S JT KSHITISH BABU
170, B OW BAZAR S TREET
C ALCUTTA
[ENCLOSURE]

Programme
Upto 15th Dhulia
16th-17th
Ahmednagar
1

}

19th
20th

Sholapur

Vide “A Great Spinner”, 17-2-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

113

18th
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th

Kurduwadi,
Dist. Sholapur
Gulbarga,
Nizam State
Pandharpur,
Dist. Sholapur
Satara
Belgaum
Vengurla,
Dist. Ratnagiri

21st
27th
28th
1-3-27

Ratnagiri
,,
Chiplun
Dist. Ratnagiri
Mahad,
Dist. Kolaba
Bombay

2-3-27
3-3-27

From a photostat G.N. 8922

92. LETTER TO B. F. MADON
DHULIA,

February 13, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your illuminating letter. Everything coming from you
commands my attention because I like your straightforward and
popular exposition of a subject which has been [made] unnecessarily
abstruse by economists. I am taking the liberty in anticipation of your
permission of sending your letter to Prof. Wadia so that he may
understand and appreciate your viewpoint. I would love to constitute
myself a bridge over the gulf that, without cause as it seems to me,
separates economists and that makes it difficult for a layman to study
this very important subject. If all the principal economists of our
country will agree on the fundamentals and issue a brief, reasoned
joint statement, it will prove very useful to students like me who have
opportunities of educating the popular mind.
What is this thunderbolt that Mr. Shroff has hurled in our midst?
It is occasionally that I get a peep at the newspapers. Whenever therefore you get a moment and have anything to pass on to a busy man
like me, please do not hesitate. For, though I am saying nothing in the
Press, I am watching everything with an absolutely open mind.
From a photostat: S.N. 11777-A

114

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

93. LETTER TO P. A. WADIA
DHULIA,

February 13, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I send you Mr. Madon’s letter and a copy of my reply 1 to him.
These speak for themselves. I therefore add nothing beyond saying
that I know that I can implicitly rely upon your doing everything
possible to put this controversy2 on a high and moral level.
I send you my itinerary up to the end of the month so that in
the event of your wanting to say to me anything urgently you can put
yourself in direct touch with me without the intervention of my
permanent address.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

Enclosure 1 + 1
P ROF. P. A. W ADIA
MALABAR HILL
BOMBAY
From a photostat: S.N. 11777

94. LETTER TO SUSHILABEHN MASHRUWALA
Sunday [February 13, 1927] 3
CHI. SUSHILA,

Herewith the telegram I have from Manilal, and also a copy of
the letter4 I had written to him; so you will now understand what I
expect from both of you. God alone would know how fortunate you
are but Manilal, I think, has certainly been lucky in getting you.
1

Vide the preceding item.
The ratio controversy; vide also “Letter to Purushottamdas Thakurdas”,
22-2-1927 and “Letter to B. F. Madon”, 22-2-1927.
3
Inferred from the contents
4
Vide “Letter to Manilal Gandhi”, 8-2-1927.
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

115

Get used to writing in ink. Try to improve your Gujarati as
much as possible. Write to me if you get the time. Remember you can
always write to me frankly.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
My tour programme can be had from Nanabhai.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1122. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

95. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
[February 13, 1927] 1
BHAISHRI NANABHAI,

I got your letter at Jalgaon. Please go through the telegram from
Manilal, which I got at Amalner, a copy of my letter to him and my
letter 2 to Sushila and then pass them on to Chi. Sushila.
Now that Chi. Shanti is not to be operated upon for the time
being, it would suit me if the marriage is solemnized at an early date
and then the eight days of Holi3 will not come in the way. I am likely
to reach Sabarmati on the 6th which will be Phagan Sud 3. I would
suggest we discontinue consulting an astrologer for choosing a date.
For an auspicious thing the sooner the better. But in these matters I
would not insist on my own views.
I can appreciate your wish to have Akola as the venue. All my
tour dates are fixed. Only this change could be made: Since the
Kathiawar [Political] Conference has been postponed I am free from
the 4th to the 8th; on the 4th I reach Bombay. From Bombay I can
straight away come up to Akola alongwith Manilal. Thus we can have
the marriage on the 6th when I reach there and having spent there
Monday the 7th, my silence day, I can leave for Ahmedabad. I must
reach Ahmedabad by the 10th at the latest. I would like to put you to
the minimum inconvenience. If you would have the date some time
before the 6th that could be done if the marriage is performed
wherever I happen to be. The other alternative is that you should
1
2
3

116

Inferred from the contents
Vide the preceding item.
Which are considered inauspicious
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

perform the ceremony without my being present. You would all like
me to be there. I know Ba would desire it, so would Manilal. But I do
not consider my presence indispensable. If you agree to this and if
you can find out a date that suits you and falls before March 11 you
can have a day of your choice.
I do not regard marriage as always indispensable. When it
becomes indispensable it could only be a religious rite which may be
performed with or without the presence of elders. And it could be
done any time. This is why I do not insist on my being there. I importune you for an early date because Manilal’s work in Natal suffers,
and I want to send him off at the earliest opportunity.
Please consider all this and fix any day that suits you, and, if
possible, send me a wire.
Here is my tour programme:
13, 14, 15
Dhulia
22
Gulbarga
16
Nasik
23
Pandharpur
17
Ahmednagar
24
Satara
18
Kurduwadi
25
Belgaum
19, 20, 21
Sholapur
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1123. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

96. SPEECHES AT DHULIA1
February 13, 1927
The programme at Dhulia was heavy, but everything was so ordered and quiet
that Gandhiji could address six meetings during the day, spinning on his charkha
throughout the speeches! He said:

You will not regard me as impertinent if I go on spinning whilst
I address you. I do so because of the wonderful stillness here, and
because I think I can best respond to your affection by giving you an
object-lesson in the thing I most believe in. When Dr. Tagore came to
our Ashram some years ago,2 I asked him, after the morning prayers
1
From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”; the first speech is from the issue of
February 24 and the other two from that of March 3.
2
In 1920.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

117

were over, to address a few words to our boys. He said nothing, spoke
nothing by way of apology, but sang one of his sweetest songs in his
sweetest way and was quiet. That to my mind was the acme of his
courtesy. He satisfied us with the best that his soul could give. I am
simply following him in turning my wheel before you, which is my
only lyre and through which I think I can render the greatest service
to India.
There have been everywhere addresses from the local bodies. Let me summarize
Gandhiji’s reply to the Local Board address at Dhulia.

During my wanderings throughout the land I have not yet come
across a single local body which has been fanctioning of its own
independent initiative and which I could point to as an ideal body.
Mr. Lionel Curtis remarking on the contrast between an Indian village
and an English village said that whereas the one gives you an
impression of general untidiness and reminds you of a village built on
a dunghill, the other gives an impression of cleanliness and health and
beauty all around. Of course he knew nothing of the condition of the
Indian villager, he did not know that his daily income was five per
cent of that of the English villager. But let us not ignore one
substratum truth in his remark. There is no gainsaying the fact that
our villager betrays a woeful ignorance of even the rudiments of
village sanitation. One could deplore the race prejudice amongst the
South African Europeans, but their attempts to keep their towns
healthy and sanitary were heroic and worthy of imitation. Do not say
that politics occupy all your time and that you have no time for other
things. It is a lame excuse. The capacity to look after the village and
town sanitation is included in our capacity for swaraj and when we
demonstrate it, nothing on earth can stand between us and swaraj. You
may be sure that we shall be able to retain only as much as our
capacity has won for us. Some of our local bodies keep only those
roads clean as are likely to be used by Government officials, but they
have no regard for the roads which are used day and night by poor
villagers and their bullocks, and which are always and everywhere
ill-kept. Can’t we make the roads more easy and better negotiable and
make the villagers’ and the bullocks’ lot a little less irksome? . . .
At Dhulia the merchants had insisted on voting him an exclusive address and
an exclusive purse, and in the address Gandhiji as one of them, as belonging to the
Vaisya class. And in his reply they got more than they had bargained for.

118

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As I said at Jalpaiguri in 1925 1 , it is not the Brahmins, nor the
Kshatriyas nor the Sudras that lost India; it is the Vaisyas who lost
India, and it is the Vaisyas alone who can regain it. Indian history is
replete with instances of Banias who helped and served the English
shopkeeper to the prejudice of India. The shopkeepers who came here
in search of trade became warriors to protect their trade and became
Brahmins too to maintain their dominion based on trade. Our varnasharma dharma does not say that a Bania may not be a Kshatriya and
fight for the honour of his mother and sister, nor does it say that a
Bania may not acquire knowledge like the Brahmin and serve like the
Sudra. The Englishman combined all the qualities in himself; and
dazzled at his feat we forgot our dharma, we became cowards, we
forgot the real work of the Bania—agriculture, cow-pro-tection and
trade—and became traitors to the motherland. You can retrieve the
situation today by becoming true Banias again, by capturing again the
whole of the national trade. Our black caps, our mill dhotis and our
women’s fine saris are the badges of our shame and slavery. Instead
of keeping the raw produce in the country and manufacturing it we
looked to our narrow interests of the hour, sold the raw produce, and
helped the Englishman to tighten his grip on us. We are engaged in
our immoral trade today to the eternal ruin of our motherland.
Doctors may heal if we are ill, lawyers may help us in law-courts, but
only merchants can win swaraj. I want us to be the Vaisya of the
Bhagavad Gita, the Vaisya whose natural calling is protection of the
cow, agriculture and trade, for his own country. If we were true to our
calling why should a scrap of foreign cloth come to our country, why
should a cow be sold to a butcher, why should nine crore rupees worth
of hides be sent out abroad? What is it that has so deadened our sense
to our obvious duty? We think we must trade in foreign cloth, we
refuse to listen if someone asks us to keep our dead cattle and treat
their hides ourselves. We turn away in disgust when we are asked to
convert our dairies into good milk-producing centres and tanneries. I
cannot tell you the deep agony of my soul. Do you think I am
mistaken? Do you think I am in my dotage? I tell you I shall pocket
1

Vide “Speech at Public Meeting, Jalpaiguri”, 10-6-1925.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

119

all my pride and fall at the feet of anyone who proves to me that I am
wrong. Win me over to you, if you dare, otherwise follow me and take
up the cause of khadi and the cow.
Young India, 24-2-1927 and 3-3-1927

97. LETTER TO SUSHILABEHN MASHRUWALA
Sunday night [February 13, 1927]
CHI. SUSHILA,

I hope you have the letter1 I wrote earlier. Preserve that letter as
well as its enclosures. Let me have your reply. Let Nanabhai and
others read the letter. Young people, young women especially, fight
shy of discussing such matters with their elders. You need not feel the
least embarrassment. You should not even hesitate to call each other
by your names. In later life this kind of reserve comes in our way. I
see no sense in it. Manilal too has become tongue-tied. I shall write to
him to shake off his bashfulness.
Write to me about Gomatibehn’s health. I do hope Kishorelal
won’t have fever again.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1126. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

98. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised

DHULIA,

February 14, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I wrote yesterday a brief letter.
You need not worry about sending me your account2. You
should certainly keep an account of every pice spent, and that not on
scraps of paper, but in a properly kept account book. It is incredibly
simple. There are credit entries and debit entries. Cash is debtor to the
extent of moneys received by it, creditor to the extent paid out.
1

Vide “Letter to Sushilabehn Mashruwala”, 13-2-1927.
“Account-keeping was always a nightmare for me, and I finally reduced it to
writing down everything and giving it to others to add up and balance.” (Mirabehn)
2

120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Therefore receipts go to the debit side and expenditure to the credit
side. Thus:
Date
Dr. to
Date
Cr. by
Monies received
12-8
Paid for
from Ashram
150/–/–
tonga
1/8/–
postage
3/8/–
Balance
145/–/–
------------------150/–/–
150/–/–
This is how according to the English system all cash-books are
kept, and yours is a cash-book. A ledger is an index for the different
accounts in a cash-book and a day-book. A day-book contains all
transactions where no cash passes. Thus sales on credit and purchases
on credit will be entered in a day-book. This is in practice the whole
of account keeping.
I am surprised you had no wheel there. I must give you a
travelling charkha such as I have. I am asking Khadi Pratishthan to
send one to you. If you cannot manage it yourself, I must teach you
when I come there.
Dhulia is a very restful place. We are accommodated in the
house of a worker who joined me when I was working in Champaran.
And here too lives a gentleman who wears a face gentler even than
Andrews, if it is possible. Akola was another such place. And Akola
has given me a bride for Manilal. She is Kishorelal’s niece, 19 years
old. Marriage will take place almost immediately. She will accompany
Manilal when he leaves for South Africa. She belongs to a godly
family.
With love,
BAPU

[PS.]
17
18}
19 }
20}
21 }
22

}

Ahmedanagar
Kurduwadi
Sholapur

23
24
25
26
27, 28

Pandharpur
Satara
Belgaum
Vengurla
Ratnagiri

Gulbarga

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

121

If I cannot give you the other dates you may address Ratnagiri
till 3rd.
4th Bombay: Mani Bhavan, Laburnam Road, Gamdevi
From the original: C.W. 5204. Courtesy: Mirabehn

99. LETTER TO HEMAPRABHA DEVI DAS GUPTA
DHULIA,

Monday [February 14, 1927] 1
DEAR SISTER,

God is testing you severely. Never give up. Happiness and
unhappiness, birth and death, old age and disease are ever with us. 1
could not bear to see you crying when I was at Sodepur. It is good if
God would let our dear ones be with us, nor is it bad if He takes them
away. They belong to Him; and what is it to us if He takes away his
own? Surely, He is going to take away everyone. Being the greatest of
all actors we call Him Natavar, the Supreme Actor. He tosses us as He
pleases. We are after all puppets. Is it not better to dance in tune with
Him than with the world?
May God grant peace to you all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1663

100. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
DHULIA,

Monday [February 14, 1927] 2
BHAI BRIJKRISHNA,

I am awaiting your reply about the job at Jamshedpur. Have you
now regained your peace of mind?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2355

1

From the reference to the death of addressee’s son in “Letter to Hemaprabha
Devi Das Gupta”. 19-2-1927
2
Vide also “Letter to Brijkrishna Chandiwala, 22-2-1927.

122

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

101. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Silence Day [February 14, 1927] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

You must have got the news about Manilal. If Manilal has not
shown the letters written to him, you will know from letter to
Chhaganlal. Please inform everyone. I do not know if Nanabhai will
have Panditji or someone else to perform the rites; I have left it to
him. Please ask Panditji to be ready in case he has to go. The wedding
will be at Akola.
Herewith two more letters from Mirabehn. I have already asked
Mahadev to write to you about Parasram.
Please let me have the news from Vijapur. Ask John to write to
me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7764. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

102. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
DHULIA,

Monday, Maha Sud 13 [February 14, 1927] 2
SISTERS,

I am in receipt of your letter written by Chi. Manibehn.
What you write to me in regard to women who intend to visit the
Ashram is quite right. For the present, I cannot expect any of you to
keep them with you. I wish only that you will mix freely with them,
will look after them if they are ill, will not keep away from them, and
you will invite them off and on to your midst.
You might have known that Tara’s elder sister Chi. Sushila has
been betrothed to Chi. Manilal. The marriage will take place at Akola
on the 6th of March. I shall, therefore, reach the Ashram on the
evening of the 8th or on the morning of the 9th. 14th is Monday. I
1
2

From the reference to the news about Manilal’s wedding
ibid.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

123

shall stay on in the Ashram till that day, and then again I set out. So I
shall have only a few days in the Ashram.
Whether I will or no, I get involved thus in marriages. And yet
the more I am drawn into such activities, the more I see that it is very
necessary for men and women to observe brahmacharya. Chi. Manilal
remained unmarried for 32 years, merely in order to develop
self-control. He then expressed a desire to marry, and so I began
looking for a good match. As he is to marry in a family of persons
devoted to God, I expect nothing but good to result from this alliance.
We should not feel bashful to talk about marriage. But whether
married or unmarried, we should not become a prey to passion by
such talk. One who cannot control one’s passions should certainly
marry. But one who can control them, should do so and seek to obtain
moksha in this very life.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3639

103. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
Silence Day [February 14, 1927] 1
BHAISHRI NANABHAI,

I have your telegram. I am glad that the 6th suits you. Please get
either Gopalrao from Wardha or Sahasrabuddhe there for the
marriage ceremony; or shall we ask Panditji to come over from the
Ashram? Or if there is some particular person in your view, that makes
no difference for me. Nothing suits me better than if Nath himself
performs the rites. If you would have Panditji, let me know by wire.
We shall have no ceremony other than the strictly religious. You
must not incur expenditure by putting up pandals and other things.
Please have no sweets in the meals. Our new relationship is not going
to make you my in-laws nor is Sushila going to be my
daughter-in-law; she will still be a daughter to me, and you will all be
my cousins as always.
You must not give away with the bride so much as a grain
of gold. Indeed, she must not wear any jewellery on the occasion. If
afterwards she has a liking for them I shall be helpless. Because she
has as much freedom as you and I.
1

124

From the discussion about Manilal’s wedding and Gandhiji’s tour programme
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

On my part I am not bringing her anything besides a garland of
my hand-spun yarn. Of course I am going to present her a takli, the
Gita and a copy of the Bhajanavali, if available.
In South Africa Manilal wears foreign dress; he had asked my
permission for it, but Sushila would not need it. In her khaddar sari
she will be as resplendent as the celebrated Sita. Please do not gather a
crowd, nevertheless do not hesitate to invite those whom you ought to.
I shall leave Bombay along with Manilal by the Nagpur Mail and
reach Akola on the 6th morning. The 7th being a Monday, I shall stay
on there. On the 7th if there is a convenient train in the evening I shall
straight away leave for Ahmedabad.
Ramdas and Devdas may arrive there either with me or direct. I
will not stop anyone else who wants to go there.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
My Tour Programme:
15 Dhulia
16 Nasik
17 Ahmednagar
18 Kurduwadi
19, 20, 21 Sholapur
22 Gulbarga
23 Pandharpur

24
25
26
27,
4

Satara
Belgaum
Vengurla
28, 1, 2, 3 Ratnagiri
and adjoining areas
Bombay

From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1120. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

104. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[February 14, 1927] 1
CHI. MANILAL,

I have your letter. The marriage will be at Akola. The day has
been fixed for Sunday, 6th March. I have to go to Akola direct from
Bombay. I am likely to reach Bombay not earlier than the 4th. Being
a Monday, the 7th will be spent in Akola. We can leave on the 7th
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

125

evening and reach the Ashram on the 8th evening or the 9th morning.
I have written to Nanabhai asking him not to put up any show.
He should give the bride not even the most insignificant jewels. I am
giving her nothing. In South Africa, you use foreign dress with my
permission but Sushila need do nothing of the sort; in her khaddar
sari she will look as resplendent as Sita. Let me know if you want any
change in these arrangements. After you are married you are both
free to live as you like. But I certainly wish that you should give no
jewels to Sushila and that there too she should wear no cloth other
than khadi.
The more I think the more I feel that you are going to have a
jewel. My only fear is whether you would be able to take care of her.
Please keep your passion under control; let her study. The girl
would be helpful in many of your activities. She can even learn
composing. If she tries she can improve her Gujarati but it all depends
upon you whether you would make a doll or a companion out of her.
After all, she is just a child. She does not know the ways of the world.
If, henceforth, you will observe more restraint than hitherto I see a
blissful future for both of you.
May God grant strength and wisdom to both of you.
Now you can easily go to South Africa in March. You can make
the necessary preparations.
You should start from there on the 4th and meet me in Bombay
on the morning of the 5th.
I am writing to Ramdas and Devdas that they may come along if
they want to.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have sent your letter to Sushila. Write nothing to Harilal.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1130. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

105. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS PODDAR
[After February 15, 1927] 1
BHAISHRI RAMESHWARJI,

I have both your letters. The garland that you got was given [to
me] for khadi work; so the price you paid for it would be utilized for
the same cause. For cow-protection too we should do only what is
right, and now I shall need quite a lot for it since the tanning school
has started functioning. But we must be patient.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 206

106. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
February 16, 1927
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

It was a great joy to have your letter after so many months.
Yes I did receive the Schreiner volumes.2
You must not give up the struggle against life’s temptations. I do
indeed expect you one fine day in India. Do come if it is only for a
brief visit.
Manilal is to be married on 5th March.3 He will take his wife with
him. You will look after both please.
I dare not give you a long love letter as I have to work against
time. Incessant travelling is my lot this year. I have to cover about six
1
During his Maharashtra tour Gandhiji was in Dhulia, the addressee’s home
town, from February 13 to 15. It is presumed that the garland mentioned in the letter
was auctioned by Gandhiji in Dhulia.
2
Vide “Letter to H. Kallenbach”, 29-7-1926.
3
Vide “Letter to Satis Chandra Das Gupta”, 6-3-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

127

villages daily except on Mondays which, thank God, is my day of
silence.
With love,
Yours,

UPPER HOUSE
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India

107. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
ON THE WAY TO NASIK ,

Wednesday, February 161 , 1927
CHI. MANI,

I have got your letter. It looks as if I shall reach there on the 8th
at the earliest. There is no news from Karachi.
How is it that Gangadevi falls ill every now and then? We shall
arrange for her to go somewhere else for a change of climate if she
wants to. Ask her as well as Totaram. Does she have a restricted diet?
I will subject you to a test in Sanskrit, carding, spinning, etc.,
when I come. Improve still more your Gujarati handwriting and make
further progress in Gujarati grammar.
The programme for perfecting the Ashram kitchen which has
been engaging their attention much must now be brought to an end.
Do your bit.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, p. 53

1

128

The source has “18”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

108. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Wednesday [February 16, 1927] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I got all your letters. I have asked Mahadev to reply to them as
well as to take the necessary action. Something has already been done.
I still have to write about the laxity in spinning. I shall take out
some time and attend to it. I am writing this on a moving train. The
schedule was such that I could do nothing. But now I have asked the
programmes to be so arranged that I may get some more margin.
Who else but the Charkha Bhandar is to make up the losses resulting
from the transfer to Jerajani when the two stores are amalgamated? I
do not very well understand it as I have forgotten many of the facts.
Anyway we shall finally decide about it in the Conference which is to
be held at Belgaum on the 25th or 26th. Are you supposed to attend
it? Take over into the Charkha Sangh the yarn we got from South
Africa. I am very glad that you examine the strength of all the yarn.
Whatever time is spent in it is only . . .2 for us because we get to learn
much out of it.
Whatever experiences you have, whatever there is worth knowing, do write out in Gujarati and send over to me so that it can be
published in Navajivan and we can also take out of it whatever we
want for Young India.
Other things you will learn there and so I do not write about
them.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7712. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

1

From the reference to the “moving train” it appears that the letter was written
on the same date as the preceding letter. The itineraries show that Gandhiji planned to
be in Belgaum on the 25th or 26th.
2
Illegible in the source
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

129

109. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
NASIK ,

February 16, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I had first thought of asking the Khadi Pratishthan people to
debit the Ashram with the price of the travelling charkha that will he
sent to you. But I reconsidered my decision and I saw that it would be
cheaper to have the charkha by value payable parcel. If therefore you
receive a parcel from Calcutta by value payable post, please discharge
the bill there.
On the 6th and 7th of March, I shall be at Akola for Manilal’s
marriage. From the 8th to 14th March I am at the Ashram, 15th to
17th Bardoli. I entrain at Surat on the evening of the 17th for the
Gurukul.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
Better a dictated letter than none.
S HRIMATI MIRABEHN
GURUKUL KANGRI
From the original: C.W. 5205. Courtesy: Mirabehn.

110. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
Wednesday [February 16, 1927] 1
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have your letter. I shall reach Bombay some time on the 4th or
by the morning of the 5th. Dastane wants me to be in Poona on the
4th. Jaisukhlal Mehta wants me to devote a few hours to Santa Cruz. If
I can satisfy him by spending the 5th morning at Santa Cruz I can
allot the evening of the 4th to Poona and leave there on the same
night for Bombay from where I can proceed to Akola.
1

From the reference to Manilal’s wedding and Gandhiji’s programme “to
proceed to Sangamner”

130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Since Gomati has returned there she and Kishorelal need not
again come to Akola. If Nath is there please ascertain from him if he
would perform the wedding rites. I would like to have the ceremony
performed by him, if it is no inconvenience to him.
I think it would not matter if you could not come because of
Janakibehn’s operation or something else.
I have to proceed to Sangamner this very evening.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2884

111. SPEECH AT NASIK1
February 16, 1927
Some youths handed over to me several questions as soon as I
arrived here; my replies to them will be my speech today.
[1.] Don’t you think as a Hindu you should concentrate on collecting for the
Shraddhanand Fund rather than for any other fund?

I am an imperfect mortal and my capacities are limited. I know
the theory and practice of economy, and whilst all my time and
energy are given to the country, I am not vain enough to think that I
should do all things myself. The work you refer to is engaging the
attention and energies of men like Malaviyaji and Lalaji and there is
no reason why I should also put in my oar. At the first meeting held
in Calcutta2 to collect funds for raising a fitting memorial to Shraddhanandji, I was asked to be present by Pandit Malaviyaji and I did so.
I do not think he expects more from me. I claim to follow in daily life
the teachings of the Gita and I know that, humble as is the work that I
am doing, it is better for me than much other work which may be
quite as good and even better but which is not my work.
[2.] The collections you make today are only for khadi, are they not so? If they
are, how will you utilize them?

Yes, of course, this fund is only for khadi because it is being
collected for the All-India Deshbandhu Memorial Fund. The
1

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”. The introductory paragraph,
questions 2, 5 and 6, and their answers are from Navajivan, 27-2-1927.
2
Vide “Speech at Public Meeting, Calcutta”, 31-12-1926.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

131

Deshbandhu’s name has been associated with this fund because hehad
drawn up, a few days before his death, a scheme for the organization
of villages through khadi. Khadi work was dear to him. The All-India
Spinners’ Association has been set up only to collect funds for khadi
and use them to organize work. Accounts of its funds are being
maintained to a pie and everyone has a right to inspect them. The
Association has an executive committee, auditors and inspectors. This
Association has now placed before the country a scheme for an
organization of khadi service. You will ask what effective work this
association can do, paying as it will be only thirty rupees a month to
each worker. Of course, ours is a poor Association, for it has been
established with money collected from the poorest of the poor. It is
not another Indian Civil Service, so that it can afford to pay salaries of
thousands of rupees. The Indian Civil Service is maintained with taxes
paid by the people and is meant to rule the people; our poor little
association is meant to serve them.
[3.] Are you partial to the Mussalmans? Why don’t you answer the charges
some of the Mussalman leaders level against you?

I can do justice to people of other faiths by appearing to be
partial to them, and I know that I am protecting my own faith by
showing if you will a reasoned partiality for other faiths. I do not, I
cannot, wish to harm the Hindu religion, for I am after all a drop in
the ocean of Hinduism. If Mussalmans call me kaffir, what then? What
can be the answer to it? In South Africa, a nephew of mine was staying
with me. It was only when people said that I was partial to him that he
realized, and I realized, that I was only just to him. The fact that the
Mussalmans are finding fault with me possibly suggests that I am not
yet sufficiently partial to them to convince them that I am just to
them. Why should I answer their charges? All my twenty-four hours
are consecrated to the service of Lord Krishna who is ever with me,
who guides my footsteps, and whom I always pray to do whatever is
needed for me. He will answer for me, if there be any need.
[4.] If you fought for the Khilafat, why do you not fight for the Hindu
sangathan 1 today?

The question is well asked. I had pledged myself to lay down
my life for the Khilafat and I knew that I was indirectly helping
thereby the cause of the cow. ‘How much cow-protection have you
1

132

Movement for unity
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

achieved?’—you will ask. Very little, I admit. But what does that
matter to me? “To work you have the right and duty and not to fruit
thereof,” says the Gita. 1 It was at the bidding of the Lord that I
offered my co-operation to the Ali Brothers and rendered whatever
help I could. I have never had reason to regret it. I would do the same
thing should another occasion arise. That is the teaching of all our
religious books. Let the people rail at me, insult me if they like. I am
not going to pay them back in their coin. Mine is the religion of
tapascharya, the way of penance taught by the scriptures and by
Tulsidas. That is the law of my being and I cannot do otherwise. “The
whole creation,” says the Gita, “follows the law of its being. How will
restraint then avail?”2 My joy is in the fulfilment of my duty and the
confidence that when some day the Mussalmans join hands with the
Hindus in protecting the cow, everyone will say that the good result is
due to the efforts of that mad Gandhi who died working for the cause.
In my opinion, there is no sanction in Hinduism, Islam or
Christianity for the shuddhi, tabligh or proselytizing (respectively) as
it is going on today. How then can I take part in the shuddhi? The
Gita and the Tulsi Ramayana teach me to resort to self-purification
whenever I or my religion is in danger. And what is true for me is true
for all. That process of self-purification I am going through all the
twenty-four hours of my day. Parvati, Narada had foretold, would
have an ominous-looking husband. She knew that only Siva was as
blissful as he was ominous-looking and she performed penance for
winning Siva and won him. So the lesson of penance and self-purification is writ large everywhere in our scriptures and the Himalayas are
the living witness to it—the Himalayas where countless rishis ground
their bodies to dust for self-purification The Vedas, to me, are not the
texts writ on paper, but my very conscience and the In-dweller. They
tell me to observe yama and niyama (the cardinal and the causal
virtues) and trust everything to Lord Krishna. In all humility I claim
that all my work is conducive to the service of Hinduism. As a Hindu,
I could do nothing else. The way of doing it is of course my own.
[5.] Do you know that most of the donors of the money that will be presented
to you today are dealers in foreign cloth, and they give you money for the love they
bear you, not for the love of khadi?
1
2

II. 47
III. 33

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

133

I do not want a single pice offered through love for me; I want
people to appreciate my mission and help it with money. Through
love you can give me another thing. Through it you can give me your
foreign clothes, but not money. The truth is that business men give me
money in the belief that, if my business thrives, it will harm neither
them nor the country. They know that ultimately they will have to
deal in khadi. They understand the position correctly but today they
lack strength of will. They ask me to pray to God that He may grant
them that strength. Meanwhile, they donate money and help this
movement. They do not give me money in order to deceive me.
[6.] Why do you confine yourself to khadi work alone and neglect other
important or even more important political activities?

I have already said that the sphere of my work is limited.
Duryodhana described how his warriors had taken up their due
positions on the battle-field. He had asked everyone to remain in his
place and protect Bhishma. The varnashrama dharma taught in the
Gita also says the same thing. It asks everyone to know his own sphere
of work. If India wants me to serve it, it must understand my limitations. Although it is possible that 1 can do other jobs well, there are
people doing them. As I believe that no one else can do khadi work as
well as I can and since I regard khadi work as my supreme duty, I
have confined myself to that work. I favour satyagraha, I want to start
it, but I want to create a suitable atmosphere for it through khadi.
Satyagraha is like my very breath, but I regard it as impossible without
khadi.
[7.] What is the extent of the help you are getting from the Mussalmans during
this tour?

I admit that for my khadi work I have been having not much
help from them. But what does that matter? I do not bargain with my
brother or wife in my domestic affairs. I do my duty and leave the rest
to do theirs. In the same way I will not bargain with the Mussalmans,
as I will not with Pandit Motilalji or Kelkar. Why should we fear the
Mussalmans? We need fear only God and no man. Even if men
should play you false, do not be deterred from doing your duty, in
the confidence that God will take care of you.
Young India, 3-3-1927

134

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

112. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
[Before February 17, 1927] 1
DEAR SATIS BABU,

You must be well. Now that you have gone out of Calcutta, you
must give yourself prolonged rest and be thoroughly restored. You
will not be anxious about Pratishthan affairs. Leave them in God’s
hands in so far as your share of the work is concerned. After all khadi
is not and cannot be one man’s affair. If it is pleasing in the eye of
God, He will raise His own instruments and keep in order those He has
raised. Let us realize that we are nothing even as a machine is nothing.
The machinist is everything. Let us reduce the teaching, of the Gita
and the Ramayana to practice and we shall cease to worry.
Do please keep me well posted with news about yourselves. Here
are the dates:
17 Ahmednagar
18 Kurduwadi
19, 20, 21 Sholapur
22 Gulbarga
23 Pandharpur
24 Satara
With love,

25 Belgaum
26 Vengurla
27, 28 Ratnagiri
1, 2, 3 March Ratnagiri
4 Bombay

Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1633

113. OUT OF NOTHING
When one thinks of the immense possibility of the charkha it is
surprising that its simple message is taking so long to become
universal. “Nothing comes out of nothing,” says a Latin proverb. But
the charkha would seem to falsify at least the letter of the proverb. For
without destroying or replacing anything useful, it seeks to utilize the
waste and idle hours of the nation.
This idleness, whether it be regarded as enforced or voluntary, is
1

From the tour programme

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

135

killing the very soul of the nation. The more I penetrate the villages,
the greater is the shock delivered as I perceive the blank stare in the
eyes of the villagers I meet. Having nothing else to do but to work as
labourers side by side with their bullocks, they have become almost
like them. It is a tragedy of the first magnitude that millions have
ceased to use their hands as hands. Nature is revenging herself upon
us with terrible effect for this criminal waste of the gift she has
bestowed upon us human beings. We refuse to make full use of the
gift. And it is the exquisite mechanism of the hands that among a few
other things separates us from the beast. Millions of us use them
merely as feet. The result is that she starves both the body and the
mind.
The spinning-wheel alone can stop this reckless waste. It can do
that now and without any extraordinary outlay of money or intelligence. Owing to this waste, we are living in a state almost of suspended
animation. It can be revived if only every home is again turned into a
spinning-mill and every village into a weaving-mill. With it will at
once revive the ancient rustic art and the rustic song. A semi-starved
nation can have neither religion nor art nor organization.
The only objection that has been urged by its critics is that the
wheel does not pay. But even if it pays only one pice per day, it does
pay when we remember that our average income is six pice per day
against the fourteen rupees and six rupees per day respectively of the
average American and the average Englishman. The spinning-wheel is
an attempt to produce something out of nothing. If we save sixty
crores of rupees to the nation through the spinning-wheel, as we
certainly can, we add that vast amount to the national income. In the
process we automatically organize our villages. And as almost the
whole of the amount must be distributed amongst the poorest of the
land, it becomes a scheme of just and nearly equal distribution of so
much wealth. Add to this the immense moral value of such
distribution, and the case for the charkha becomes irresistible.
Young India, 17-2-1927

114. A GREAT SPINNER
When at the end of the Bihar tour and on my way to the Central
Provinces, I heard at Calcutta of the death of Babu Jogeshwar Chatterjee whom I had the privilege of knowing as a spinner who gave
136

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

promise of being able to revive the old Dacca shubnum—the
night-dew muslin—I at once sent a message 1 to Kshitish Babu of
Khadi Pratishthan to supply me with details of the deceased’s life.
These have been now received and I share them with the reader:2
Jogeshwar Chatterjee, son of Sjt. Jatileshwar Chatterjee of village
Panpur in the district of 24-Parganas . . . died on Sunday, the 30th January
morning. He left behind him his wife, a daughter aged one year, a younger
brother and aged father. . . .
Jogeshwar Babu read up to B.A., and was a teacher for some time. He
then took service in the E.B.R., and served it for seven years. . . . He was aged
35 at the time of death.
He took to spinning during the Non-co-operation days, and was an
ardent spinner. . . . At the Gauhati Exhibition a muslin of 200 counts was
exhibited by the Pratishthan, the yarn of which was spun by Jogeshwar Babu.
During one year—Cawnpore Exhibition to Gauhati Exhibition—he spun 200
count yarn for the above muslin, and sufficient yarn of 100 count, out of which
two dhotis are made. Of the last two dhotis, one was for Acharya P. C. Ray and
the other for his father. . . .
He was all along spinning on the Pratishthan’s box charkha. He was
out-and-out a khadi man, who used to spin during leisure hours, and made such
a rapid progress in spinning.

I tender my condolences to the family of the deceased and hope
that the attempt to reproduce the ancient art will not die with Jogesh
Babu’s death. Let it be remembered that Jogesh Babu’s was a labour
of patriotic love. And it is only voluntary spinners who can follow up
Jogesh Babu’s grand effort.
Young India, 17-2-1927

1
2

Vide “Letter to Kshitish Chandra Das Gupta”, 13-2-1927.
Only excerpts are reproduced here.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

137

115. TELEGRAM TO SAM HIGGINBOTTOM
AHMEDNAGAR ,

February 18, 1927
TO
ALAGIN
NAINI
YOUR
TENTH
ME AT

LETTER.
COULD
YOU
COME
SABARMATI
TWELFTH
OR
THIRTEENTH
MARCH
STAYING
LEAST TWENTYFOUR
HOURS.3

NINTH
WITH

GANDHI
From a photostat: Higginbottom Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

116. LETTER TO HARRY KINGMAN
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM,
S ABARMATI , 1

February 18, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter which is so seasonable. 2 Could you
not give me some reliable literature on the Chinese movement and
give me a truthful story of current events? I never put much reliance
upon newspapers and I am most anxious to know what is happening
now in China.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
HARRY KINGMAN, E SQ.
68, RECREATION R OAD
TIENTSIN
C HINA
From a photostat: G.N. 5043

1
2

138

Permanent address
Vide “Our Helplessness”, 3-2-1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

117. SPEECH AT AHMEDNAGAR1
February 18, 1927
I have just been to the Rashtriya Pathshala. I have inspected for
nearly an hour like a strict inspector all the management and working
of the institution and found it to my satisfaction. I have thoroughly
examined the boys in a lively heart-to-heart talk and found them
sharp in intellect and prompt in answers. In short, I see in Ahmednagar Rashtriya Pathshala a lovely little oasis in the midst of such a
vast desert of darkness.2
[Continuing,] Mr. Gandhi said that, if Ahmednagar district was poor, the rest
of India was poorer still. Hundreds of thousands of men and women were without any
kind of employment and almost starving. He had not the slightest doubt in his mind
that khadi work alone could give these people some employment and bread. He
appealed to all present to give their mite to him for his great work.

The Hindu, 19-2-1927

118. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
MIRAZGAON,

February 19, 1927
MY DEAR SATIS BABU,

So you and Hemaprabha Devi are being tried through and
through. You will stand this very severe test and come out victorious.
Read the second chapter of the Bhagavad Gita again and again and
face the battle like true warriors that you are. It is now your double
duty to take care of yourselves. Among the properties you hold in
trust for God’s purposes, your bodies are not the least important. If
we may not indulge them neither may we for-bare them through false
love [sic].
But enough of philosophy. Ever since the receipt of the
telegram I have prayed for you. And this letter is the first thing I have
1

In reply to addresses by the Municipality, District Board and Hindu Sabha
From a microfilm (S.N. 14841) of a printed pamphlet issued in 1928 by
Principal H. B. Hiray, Rashtriya Pathshala, Ahmednagar
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

139

taken up after the morning prayer. May God sustain you and bless
you.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1565

119. LETTER TO HEMAPRABHA DEVI DAS GUPTA
Saturday [February 19, 1927] 1
DEAR SISTER,

What can I write to you? May your wisdom, your faith and your
devotion all come to your succour. Can Anil die? Anil is with us for
ever, only his body has been shed. Pray, do not lose heart.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1661

120. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
Saturday [February 19, 1927] 2
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have your letter. I did not wire to you because I had no reason
to stop you from trying to meet Lalaji’s demand.
For some time I would like to have a postcard daily informing
me about Janakibehn’s health.
Anil, Satis Babu’s son, has expired. Satis Babu is at Giridih. His
address is: Home Villa, Giridih. It would however be safer to write to
the Khadi Pratishthan address. I have a telegram telling me that both
of them have sustained a great shock. I have sent them a long wire of
condolence.
Now it is certain that I shall reach Bombay on the 5th.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2885

1
2

140

Vide the preceding item.
From the reference to Anil’s death
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

121. LETTER TO PRABHUDAYAL
ON TOUR,

February 19, 1927
BHAI PRABHUDAYALJI,

Your letter has been moving along with me. I could lay my
hand on it only today.
However much the world may change, if you are convinced that
khadi brings material as well as spiritual benefit and that other stuff
merely pleases one’s fancy, you should be content with khaddar
clothes alone.
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From the Hindi original: G.N. 10063

122. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
[After February 19, 1927] 1
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your pathetic letter which I see you wrote to lighten your
burden. Gods, it is said, take away those they love most. The human
mind has devised many methods of assuaging grief. But the real fact
is not to feel the grief. But that is almost superhuman especially in
Hindu society. Please tell Hemaprabha Devi not to think of what Anil
would have done, if he had lived. His work in that body was finished.
A rare soul such as Anil’s had much higher work to do and he left the
body. Let us not grieve over our loss which may be the world’s gain.
It is as well that we do not know the mysteries of life and death. I want
you both now to get rid of your weakness. Pray do not think of
stirring till you have fully recuperated yourself.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1634

1

The letter appears to have been written on receipt of addressee’s reply to
Gandhiji’s condolence letter of February 19.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

141

123. LETTER TO KSHITISH CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
ON THE TRAIN ,

[After February 19, 1927] 1
DEAR KSHITISH BABU,

I did not know till today, and after the receipt of Satis Babu’s
letter that you had no son and that you were lavishing all your affection on Anil as your own son. Your grief I am able now to understand
more fully than I had done before. It is difficult on such occasions to
give any consolation. It has to come from within. May all your knowledge and your faith come to your assistance to give you courage and
hope. If only our faith in the immortality of soul is real, nothing like
death can matter. May God give you peace and strength.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 8923

124. LETTER TO EKAROZ
ON TOUR,

February 20, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I espoused the Khilafat cause not for the sake
of tyranny but for the sake of humanity. This insidious attempt that, I
think, was made to destroy the Khilafat had to be resisted. My resistance being non-violent prevented in my opinion, violence which
would but for the movement have undoubtedly broken out. The
Khilafat movement was not decided upon to bolster any Turkish
tyranny. Wherever tyranny exists, it must be resisted by non-violent
means.
Yours sincerely,

R EV . F R. E KAROZ
HAIFA , G ERMAN HOSPISEE OF S T. C HARLES
P ALESTINE
From a photostat: S.N. 11785

1

142

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

125. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI 1
February 20, 1927
You forget you are a son of Bapu’s niece; Manilal therefore is
your maternal uncle. Would children offer any presents to their
mother? Herein you forget even our Hindu tradition. However, if you
are so affluent, I am willing to accept the amount for cow-protection
and the tanning school. I might grab all the money that you may
offer. So, if you are not going to be disappointed, you had better take
my advice and keep quiet over it.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 92

126. SPEECH AT SHOLAPUR 2
February 20, 1927
3

As at Nasik, the speech at Sholapur was a reply to questions and criticisms
made in an open letter addressed to Gandhiji by some people from the town. Their
first criticism was that those who appeared in khadi on the occasion of Gandhiji’s
visit were hypocrites inasmuch as they would shelve it the day he left. Did that
indicate the progress of khadi? Gandhiji said:

Well, I do not know. I know that I am selling khadi wherever I
go, and there ends my work. Supposing you purchase from me
millions of rupees worth of khadi and sink it into the sea, the sale is
not vitiated. But the criticism is unfair. I know that some wear khadi
for the occasion, but they do not disguise the fact. They appreciate the
message of khadi, but they say they cannot exclusively wear it for a
number of reasons. Am I to tell them, ‘You are no good. I can do
without your khadi?’ No, no. My duty is to define our dharma in its
fulness. Their duty is to follow it as much as they can. People deceive
me, you say. I do not understand how they can harm me even if they
do. I am but a self-appointed agent of Daridranarayana and I shall
take from you only what you can give me. . . .
1
2
3

Written by Mahadev Desai to Gandhiji’s dictation
This was published under the title, “Two Speeches”.
Vide “Speech at Nasik”, 16-2-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

143

“You are good enough,” they say, “but your work has ruined
the country.” I am but an erring mortal and like any one of you I am
full of shortcomings; therefore I beseech you to reject them and
simply make the best of my capacity for service. Turn my good
points to account and reject the bad ones. If you do not pick and
choose and simply reject me wholesale, what will the world say to
you? Will you regret the service of a man as a carrier because he is
blind?
As I said at Nasik, I fail to understand the shuddhi, tabligh and
proselytization as they are carried on today. I cannot understand a
man changing the religion of his forefathers at the instance of
another. But that is my personal conviction. No one need stop
shuddhi, tabligh or proselytization at my instance. My own duty is
clear. I must go on purifying myself and hoping that only thereby
would I react on my surroundings. It is my unshakable conviction that
penance and self-purification are the only means for the protection of
Hinduism. Do any amount of sangathan, only let not that sangathan
be of the evil forces, let it be only of the forces of good. . . .
You say I am partial to the Mussalmans. So be it, though the
Mussalmans do not admit it. But my religion will not suffer by even
an iota by reason of my partiality. I shall have to answer my God and
my Maker if I give anyone less than his due, but I am sure that He will
bless me if He knows that I gave someone more than his due. I ask
you to understand me. If my hand or heart has done anything more
than was anyone’s due, you should be proud of it, rather than deplore
it. It should be a matter of pride to you as Hindus to think that there
was amongst you at least one mad Gandhi who was not only just to the
Mussalmans, but even went out of his way in giving them more than
their due. Hinduism is replete with instances of tolerance, sacrifice and
forgiveness. Think of the sacrifice of the Pandavas, think of the
forgiveness of Yudhishthira. Should it be a matter for sorrow for you,
that there is at least one man who has tried to carry out the precept of
Hinduism to the letter? . . .
If there is anything in the charge that you are wearing khadi just
to please me, and for show, I say for God’s sake do not do so. I am
not a Mahatma. If I am one, the Mahatmaship is but the expression of
some shakti 1 . Pray do nothing for my sake. I shuddered when
1

144

Power
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

someone proposed that though I was silent I should exhibit myself
for darshan1 . I assure you the words ‘darshan’ and ‘Mahatma’ stink
in my nostrils. I am unworthy of giving darshan. Even like you I am
a vessel of clay, liable to all the affections and passions that flesh is
heir to. How can I be fit to give you darshan? One and only one
darshan is necessary, viz., that of the nameless, formless, indefinable
Absolute. Try, if you can, to see Him everywhere, in a poor man’s hut
as in a palace, in a latrine as well as in a temple. Have, if you will, the
darshan of khadi and visualize its immense potentialities. Dismiss the
mortal frame called Gandhi from your mind. Its darshan will be of no
avail.
Young India, 10-3-1927

127. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
[Before February 21, 1927] 2
Haste is waste. Let me do a few places thoroughly rather than
many places indifferently. You will have to remember that I have to
do continuous travelling throughout the year. My capacity and
energy are limited. I must therefore have three forty-five minutes for
three meals, one forty-five minutes for bath, etc., and two forty-five
minutes for a quiet walk in the morning and evening. I must be made
to retire at 9 p.m., and I must have three hours for attending to
correspon-dence and editing, and I must have half an hour for sleep
during day. If you can give me these hours, I fancy that I shall not
only bear the strain of travelling but go on almost indefinitely and
shall improve in health.
The Bombay Chronicle, 22-2-1927

128. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised

S HOLAPUR,

February 21, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter from Delhi. I note your remarks about Guru1
2

Sight of a person, place or thing considered holy
Released on February 21, 1927 from Madras by the Free Press

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

145

kuls. I have not yet [got] Ramachandra’s letter. I am not at all sorry
you have gone to the Gurukul. The Gurukuls are an honest attempt. I
want you to discuss these things fully with Ramdevji and others. You
will influence them when you speak to them with a loving heart. We
must measure people with their own measure and see how far they
come up to it. You do not need this caution. But seeing that you have
set a rigorous standard for yourself and you are in a strange environment, I am anxious for you not to lose your balance even by a hair’s
breadth.
I have too much pressure today to write more.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
Satis Babu has lost his eldest son. Write to him care Khadi
Pratishthan, Sodepur, Calcutta.
26th Belgaum
5th Bombay
6th, 7th Akola (Manilal’s
marriage)

8th Bombay
9th-14th Ashram

From the original: C.W. 5206. Courtesy: Mirabehn

129. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
Monday [February 21, 1927] 1
CHI. MANILAL,

I have your letter. I do not want Sushila to make a resolve; I do
not know her that well. But you should acquaint yourself with her
people. They are a cultured family. All of them wear khadi. I agree it
is difficult for you to wear khadi. It will not be difficult for Sushila as
long as she keeps up her Indian style with sari and other things. A
presentable khaddar dress can be had at a reasonable price. People
dressed in khadi are to be found now even in distant Edinburgh.
1
From the reference to Manilal’s wedding and the message to Panditji in this
and the succeeding two letters, it appears that all the three were written on the same
date.

146

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It is not my attempt to make recluses of you or Sushila, but I
certainly intend to make you disciplined householders. If I wanted to
make you monks I would not have bothered about getting you
married. I would not disapprove if you sought your pleasure within
limits. In spite of all this you are free and should act as you please; I
do not want to exercise the least pressure.
Jamnalalji has not turned a recluse, only he has given up a
number of pleasures. You are quite grown-up and I do not look upon
you as a child.
I have been taking steps after consulting you about everything.
Do let me know if you wish for any change in the marriage ceremony
or for some merriment. I have suggested and acted as I thought fit but
I want to be as agreeable to you as I can while following my own code
of conduct1 . I know marriage is a turning point in the life of a young
man and woman. I am also aware thatparents should not interfere in it.
Do not think yourself to be under any kind of pressure. Do I need to
be more frank? Do I have to give any more reassurance?
Nanabhai has invited Panditji, so he should come with you. Both
of you can meet me by taking the Tapti Valley route; thereby you can
also save some time. But do what both of you find convenient.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1119. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

130. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
Monday [February 21, 1927] 2
BHAI NANABHAI,

I have your letter. The wedding may take place at 10-30.
Evening would never suit me.
Why should you offer a dress to Manilal? The dress he will have
on, won’t that do? However, I would not hurt your feelings.
Tell Chi. Sushila that she must cultivate the habit of writing
letters. Once she starts writing she will not be short of topics.
1
2

Vide “Letter to Manilal Gandhi”, 14-2-1927.
Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

147

I have written for Panditji’s coming over.
You need not send biscuits from there. I have collected plenty
of them on my way. Vijayalakshmi may pack a tin for me when I
reach there.
Does she still want to have Manilal stay with her for some days?
If she does I would send him there a few days ahead or he may stay
on for some days after the marriage. You already have my tour
programme.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1121. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

131. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Monday [February 21, 1927]
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I have your letter.
For the present take such work from Parasram as he can do.
Ask Panditji to be ready. He should take a train from Sabarmati
on the 5th morning to save time and money, and join me at Jalgaon
by taking the Tapti Valley route. It will do if Manilal also takes the
same train. But they may, if they want to, travel via Bombay. Panditji
should write to Nanabhai about the preparations to be made. The
marriage ceremony is to be performed on Sunday at 10-30 a.m.
I was under the impression that Ganesh’s Christian name was
John. Because of this and because I had forgotten the name Ganesh, I
wrote John.1 Give him this new letter in which I refer to him by the
name of Ganesh. And if the fellow can take a joke and would not
mind his name being forgotten, give him the one which carries the
name of John too. Otherwise destroy that letter.
Now I do not have to worry about Rukhi.
I feel we must not let the common mess close, though those who
want to, may drop out of it. Self-Cooking and common mess must he
carried on together.
We are bound to devote the minimum amount necessary for the
tannery and the [water] lift. The funds for cow-protection have to be
used for the tannery. I remember a resolution to this effect adopted at
1

148

Vide “Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”, 2-2-1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Wardha. If not we will pass one on the 11th. We must take up that
activity which involves no risk of loss.
For the lift too we shall collect the amount needed. But I shall
decide about it after I reach there on the 9th.
The amount from Mirabehn comes in regularly. All of it is to be
spent at the Ashram. Since a year is over, we can now utilize the
amount. Only you have to be careful that we do not suffer any loss on
account of an error in accounts or some other slip.
Are you now in a position to meet the demand for lifts and to
set them up? I have deliberately omitted to publish anything [about
the lift]. Write to me if you want it to be publicized so that I can
prepare an article for the next issue. Let me know what I may write.
Have you now trained people to work the lift? I believe I must
mention the minimum weight of the animal that should go with each.
Why can we not use an old buffalo? Why not a good or pliant bull?
There should be no error in our calculations. I am afraid, we might
have to depute our men in all places for quite some time. But it will be
all right if you have given thought to all this.
The same applies to hides and skins. Let me have a copy of the
pamphlet about this. I will publish it after examining it.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
A special letter for the Ashram is enclosed.
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 7762. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

132. LETTER TO ASHRAM MEMBERS
Silence Day, February 21, 1927
I see from the letters I get that attendance at the prayer is irregular and thin. A general slackness is also creeping into the spinning.
Spinning and prayer are the two beacons for us. If we do not
keep an eye on them, we will be able to do no credit either to the
Ashram or to ourselves. It is one thing not to do them after deciding
right from the beginning that we would not engage in either of them,
and another to omit doing them after undertaking them. In my
opinion, he who approves of neither can achieve nothing at the
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

149

Ashram, since we regard them both as essential religious activities.
Those who, while approving of them, grow lax in their practice will
develop a general laxity. If we wish to learn to insist on truth and to
experience the strength it gives, we must never omit to perform the
two aforesaid rites. Both require faith on our part. To a certain extent
we can adduce rational arguments in support of both, but in the last
resort faith alone can satisfy us. One sometimes feels that nothing is
gained by attendance at prayers, that one is unable to concentrate
attention, one feels a sense of lethargy, and so on. These things cannot
be reasoned out; they can be dispelled only by faith. The Gita
recommends faith alone when it speaks of dispassionate action. An
effort is never wasted. It is an act of faith to believe in the ultimate
triumph of truth in the face of failures, and to follow truth
dispassionately. We should have the same attitude to spinning as to
prayer. It is not for me to calculate how this much spinning would
benefit me or the country. One may not see any immediate benefit
from spinning but one must stick to one’s belief that it is going to
bring some benefit. The point is to learn to stick to our resolve. The
two external and common activities of prayer and spinning are likely
to develop this tenacity. If we are lax in these activities, when shall we
learn to stand firm on truth?
I therefore appeal to all, young and old, not to neglect these two
activities.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 8053. Courtesy: Raojibhai N. Patel

133. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
S HOLAPUR,

Monday, Maha Vad 5 [February 21, 1927]
SISTERS,

I have your letter.
I find that carding and other work has been going on well. If
you persevere in the same way, you will make good progress within a
short time.
The effect of regular work is like that of regular food. It
nourishes the soul. But, even as over-eating spoils one’s health, so
excessive work at a time wears out one’s spirit.
150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

We are in Sholapur today. It is a big city. There are five mills
here. The biggest of them belongs to Morarji Gokuldas. His grandson
Shantikumar is still a youth so far as age goes, but he has a great soul.
He loves khadi and wears only khadi. I do not mean that this is his
greatest virtue. He is sympathetic, generous, humble, devoted to God
and truthful. He has the virtue that his name indicates, i.e., he is
calmness incarnate. I am very glad that such a jewel amongst men is
found in a multi-millionaire family. I was not acquainted with his
wife. Yesterday, while I took my meal, I made her sit down by me and
talked to her to my heart’s content. I suggested to her that she should
take to public work like her husband. I cited all of you as an example
to her. Was I right in doing so or was it only my conceit? You alone
know whether all of you are devoted to service. Anyhow that is what
escaped my lips. It is up to you to justify my statement.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3640

134. LETTER TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ
[February 21, 1927] 1
CHI. JAMNALAL,

I have your letter. I am returning herewith both the letters from
Ghanshyamdas. Because I have faith in his word I am not afraid that
he would marry again.
I want you to come to Belgaum on 25-26 and also to present
yourself at the Ashram on the 11th. There is much work to be done at
both the places. It would be worth the while if you could stay at the
Ashram from the 9th to 13th. You may also stay with me at the time
of the Gurukul [Convocation] when Ghanshyamdas too proposes to
be present. It depends more on your own convenience in view of the
other things you have to attend to.
What is Kamala doing? I am worried on her account. This does
not mean you too should start worrying. She could perhaps settle
1

Vide the succeeding item.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

151

down if we could arrange for her education. Let her learn as much
English as she likes.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2882

135. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
Silence Day [February 21, 1927] 1
CHI. ANASUYABHEN,

I expected a letter from you but there is none. I had also
expected a letter from Miss Haussding but there is none from her
either. I am a little worried about her.
We are in Sholapur today. Shantikumar is looking after us very
well. It is getting quite hot here.
Jamnabehn has arrived from Barsi (Bardoli). There is no time
for writing more.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 32833

136. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
S HOLAPUR,

Monday [February 21, 1927] 2
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have two letters from you. Because I trust your word I am not
afraid of your reconsidering it. I trust you also in the matter of the
Assembly. But in view of the prevailing atmosphere there it is difficult
to remain absolutely independent.
On the question of sangathan I hold the same views that I have
expressed. Organization is certainly not the remedy for the case,
1
From the contents it is evident that the letter was written on this date, a
silence day, when Gandhiji was at Sholapur.
2
Gandhiji was in Sholapur on this date.

152

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

particulars of which you have sent to me. Here the remedy is either
tapascharya or individual courage. As long as we remain cowards no
wonder our women fall into the hands of the lecherous. I know of a
Hindu prince in whose territory no young girl was safe and the
husband and the father used to be helpless. But then this is a
complicated problem. Please do come to the Gurukul if you can. I
wish to have you with me for a fortnight; we cannot dispose of such
matters in a day. In the meanwhile whatever my advice do what your
inner voice bids you.
Blessings to your son and daughter-in-law.
Yours,

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
22 Gulbarga
23 Pandharpur
24-25 District Satara
26 Belgaum
27—March 3 Ratnagiri

4 Poona
5 Bombay
6-7 Akola
8 Bombay
9-14 Ashram

From the Hindi original: C.W. 6144. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

137. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
S HOLAPUR,

[February 21, 1927] 1
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

Kindly go through the enclosed letter 2 and let me have your
views on it.
Yours,

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
Tour Programme:
26 Belgaum
1
2

5 Bombay

Vide the preceding item.
Presumably, the succeeding item

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

153

27 Malvan (Distt. Ratnagiri)
28 Ratnagiri
1-2-3 Ratnagiri District
4 Poona

6-7 Akola
8 Bombay
9-14 Ashram

From the Hindi original: C.W. 6145. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

138. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAMDAS THAKURDAS
ON TOUR ,
GULBARGA ,

February 22, 1927
DEAR SIR PURUSHOTTAMDAS1 ,

As it appears to be more convenient for you to handle English
letters I am sending you this in English.
Though I have myself yet written nothing about currency
matters, perhaps you are aware that I have been closely following the
agitation2 , that is, as closely as I can, in spite of incessant travelling. I
have been studying the question carefully and carrying on an active
correspondence with experts chiefly Messrs Madon and Wadia. The
latter has sent me a draft bill which I understand he has circulated
among the members of the Assembly. Will you please let me know
whether that Bill meets your approval?
If a pure gold standard is established, free mints opened, and a
Reserve Bank established, does not the question of ratio disappear
altogether? Will not things right themselves? Whereas if the ratio is
fixed at 1 to 15 and all questions about gold, currency, mints and
Reserve Bank shelved or decided in accordance with the recommendation of the Commission, will it not be worse than the existing state
of things?
Yours sincerely,

M. K. G.
S IR P URUSHOTTAMDAS THAKURDAS
BOMBAY
From a copy: C.W. 7825. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
1

Member of Hilton-Young Commission, the Royal Commission on Indian
Currency and Finance
2
Against the fixation of the rupee at 1s 6d gold (as recommended by the
Hilton-Young Commission) instead of at 1s 4d gold (as proposed in the addressee’s
dissenting minute)

154

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

139. LETTER TO B. F. MADON
GULBARGA ,

February 22, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your latest letter for which I thank you. What do you say
to this letter? At the time of replying please return the enclosure.
I note what you say about Mr. Shroff.
Do you not think that there is considerable force in what Prof.
Wadia says, namely, that the ratio question should not be separated
from the permanent question of standard; or do you say that since
there is a statutory definition of the rupee in terms of gold, we should
be entirely satisfied if the ratio is satisfactorily settled and the other
recommendations1 of the Commission either shelved or given effect to
just as they are. In other words, if you had the choice what will you
do?
Have the ratio fixed at 1 to 15 and the status quo retained in all
other respects?
Or the ratio fixed at 1 to 50 and gold Bullion standard with the
Reserve Bank mentioned in the Commission established?
Or a pure gold standard established, mints reopened for coining
gold mohors freely and a central bank given such as Prof. Wadia
suggests, leaving the ratio undisturbed by any statutory action?
Have you read Messrs Wadia and Joshi’s draft Bill?
From a microfilm: S.N. 12900

140 LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
GULBARGA ,

Maha Vad 6 [February 22, 1927] 2
PRIEST OF DHEDS AND BHILS,

Please do come, and do bring Dheds and Bhangis along with
1
Embodied in Gold Standard and Reserve Bank of India Bill introduced in the
Legislative Assembly on January 25, 1927
2
In 1927, Gandhiji was in Gulbarga on this date.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

155

you. Please inform Jugatram or whoever is to be informed so that he
may make the necessary arrangements. If they carry their food and
bed with them as also a lota 1 and a rope and are prepared to sleep on
the ground, they need not give any prior intimation.
We have just reached Gulbarga by the train we took at Sholapur.
And I have got some time to write letters; I am stealing a few moments
to indulge in a little fun with you, and also finish off some work by
the way.
Hail, Thakkar Bapa, high priest of the lowly ones!
Whatever you would have from

BAPU

[PS.]
‘Bapu’ is certainly better than ‘Mahatma’.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2711

141. LETTER TO BRIJKRISHNA CHANDIWALA
Tuesday, [February 22, 1927] 2
CHI. BRIJKRISHNA,

I have your letter. I cannot decide about your competence to
work in Jamshedpur. I have no experience of your knowledge of the
English language. If you are confident of your ability for this work,
you should go to Jamshedpur, look about yourself, and then make the
final decision. As to the Ashram, you can come over at any time you
please. There is plenty of work to do. But then you must be prepared
to run around anywhere, and must also acquire sufficient experience
of the technique of spinning. How far have you studied English?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Tour Programme:
24-25 Satara
26 Belgaum
27-March 3 District Ratnagiri
1
2

156

5 Bombay
6-7 Akola
8 Bombay

A vessel, without handle or spout, for carrying water
From Gandhiji’s tour programme
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

4 Poona
9-14 Ashram
On the night of the 17th I shall entrain at Surat for Hardwar. I
am not stopping over at Delhi; but it is on my way to Hardwar. I have
to stay at the Gurukul for three days.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2354

142. SPEECH AT GULBARGA1
February 22, 1927
[Addressing] both the Hindus and Mussalmans gathered in the vast courtyard of
the famous Sharana Basappa Temple which still bore the marks of the mob-fury of
1924 2 , Gandhiji said:

My heart burns with agony when I see young men, dressed in
foreign caps and clothes. It is surprising that they do not see that,
whilst the rupees that they spend on foreign caps are wasted, the annas
that they need spend on khadi caps all go to the pockets of the poor.
The man who shuts his eyes to the poor of his land and seeks to
befriend the poor of the world must be mad indeed. God will find him
guilty of arrogating to himself His function. The Hindu who recites
his Gayatri regularly and the Mussalman who says his namaz five
times a day are doing so in vain, if they have no corner in their hearts
for the poor of their land. This is the message I would leave with the
Hindus and Mussalmans of this place.
Much as I would like to pour out my agony before you, I know
that it will be a cry in the wilderness. I therefore daily send out my
prayer to God: ‘Lord, do somehow deliver us from this conflagration.’ But I should be untrue to my creed if as a believing and
satyagrahi Hindu I disguised from you the feelings within me. When I
went into the temple I was shown the spot where the idol was removed
and the Nandi 3 was desecrated. I tell you the sight pained me. You
may call me an idolator if you will. I see God everywhere and in
everything. I tell you God would never approve of those acts of
desecration. Whilst in Yeravda Jail, I read Maulana Shibli’s Life of the
Prophet, I also read Usva-e-Sahaba and can say that those who did
1
2
3

This was published under the title “Two Speeches”.
Vide “Notes”, 28-8-1924.
Sacred bull

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

157

the acts were wrong, that Islam never sanctions such things and they
were guilty before God and man. When I heard of these things I was
convinced that the matter had passed out of human hands. If there
were men who devoted all their time and energy to the cause of
Hindu-Muslim unity I at least was one of them, but when my efforts
did not seem to bear any fruit I threw myself on God. When the saints
and godfearing people of Islam saw that there was discord and strife
after the passing away of the Prophet, they dissociated themselves
from them, migrated to Egypt, Persia and other lands and there retired
into seclusion and sent up their prayers to God. It is these saints that
have kept Islam alive. How often have I wished to retire thus into
seclusion! And though I know that history will take note of my efforts
as those of one who was a servant of God, who committed Himalayan
blunders but who had also the courage to confess them and repent for
them, I know that today I can do no better than be silent on this
question.
But if you will not listen to me in that matter, you certainly will
not disdain to think of the millions of the poor amongst you. Do you
know that many of the spinners in Bihar, Bengal and the Punjab out
of the 50,000 spinners in India for whom the A.I.S.A. finds
employment, are Mussalmans? Have you read the heart-rending tales
of woe of some of them? One of the workers in Gujarat asked a
Mussalman woman aged 65 as to why she bothered to spin when
spinning brought her only an anna per day. She said the fact that
there was someone to give her an anna in return for the yarn she spun
convinced her that there surely must be God somewhere. Fight,
therefore, as much as you wish, but when a man like me appeals for
help, pray forget your quarrels and your hostilities and do something
for the cause he pleads.
Young India, 10-3-1927

158

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

143. LETTER TO K. RAJAGOPALACHARI
ON TOUR,

February 23, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I enclose the discharge document fair copied
and duly signed by me.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

Enclosure 1
S JT. K. R AJAGOPALACHARI
KHADDAR S TORES
GANDHI S TREET
TIRUPATI
(CHITTORE DISTRICT)
From a photostat: G.N. 5670

144. SPEECH AT PANDHARPUR1
[February 23, 1927] 2
At Pandharpur the people in charge of the temple had somehow got the report
that Gandhiji was going there with a European friend and they were terribly exercised
as to what they should do if Gandhiji insisted on entering the temple with the friend
as he did at Banaras. They must have been relieved to find that there was no such
friend in our party. But Gandhiji made a pointed reference to this matter in his speech.
He said:

I am sorry that neither the Buddhist friend who was with me at
Banaras nor the ‘untouchable’ girl I have adopted is with me. But you
may be sure that I should not have visited the temple without them if
they had been with me. Had I left them out, I should have been guilty
of insulting Vithoba Himself. I would not mind even an atheist
entering our temple, for I know that God can take care of Himself.
Who is there in the world who can insult the God in the image? But
1

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
Gandhiji was at Pandharpur on this date; vide “Letter to G. D. Birla”,
21-2-1927.
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

159

the lady friend who was with me is a Buddhist and therefore a Hindu.
If she had no right to enter the temple, who else can have it? I have
visited many places of pilgrimage and I have been pained to see
hypocrisy and cupidity there. It is necessary first to purify the
drunken and dissolute worshippers in charge of some of these temples. If the things continue as they are today, if we do not bestir ourselves and go through the necessary penance and cleansing and
self-purification, I tell you that not even the 22 crores of Hindus can
keep Hinduism alive. The Himalayas are spotlessly snow-white in
virtue of the spotless glory of the countless sages who laid down their
lives performing penance in their caves. Only such penance can save
us and our religion from perdition today.
Young India, 10-3-1927

145. HONOURABLE COMPROMISE
Sir Mahomed Habibullah and his colleagues are to be
congratulated upon having secured a settlement that is honourable to
both parties. It is not the best that could be conceived, but it is the best
that was possible. I doubt if any other deputation could have done
more. The Class Areas Bill, which brought about the Conference and
round which the battle raged, is dead and gone. The Right Hon.
Srinivasa Sastri, who when the deputation sailed for South Africa was
of all members the most communicative and had warned us not to
expect much, did not conceal at the end of the labours of the
Conference his satisfaction at the result. A perusal of the settlement
warrants the satisfaction.
But like all compromises this one is not without its danger
points. The dropping of the Class Areas Bill is balanced by repatriation, re-emerging as re-emigration. If the name is more dignified, it is
also more dangerous. Repatriation could only be to India. Re-emigration can be to any country. The following sentence in the settlement
clearly points to that interpretation:“The Union Government therefore will organize a scheme of assisted emigration to India or other
countries where Western standards are not required.” This assisted
emigration to other countries I hold to be dangerous, for there is no
knowing what may happen to the poor ignorant men going to an
unknown land, where they would be utter strangers. Such countries as
would take them would only be either Fiji or British Guiana. Neither
160

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

has a good name in India. It is decidedly a disadvantage to have been
party to assisted emigration to any other part of the world.
The good point about this assisted emigration is that whereas
before the settlement the repatriates lost their domicile, the re-emigrants now retain it and lose it only if they absent themselves so long
as to warrant the inference that there is no intention on their part to
return to South Africa. How many assisted emigrants can hope to
refund the assistance in money they might have received or how many
can hope to return with their families is a different question. The
non-forfeiture clause is clearly designed not so much to guarantee a
substantial right as not to hurt national self-respect.
The annexure, containing a summary of “conclusions reached
by the Round Table Conference on the Indian question in South
Africa”, is a remarkable document betraying in every paragraph a
heroic attempt to reconcile conflicting interests and sentiments. The
industrious reader will have no difficulty in discovering hopeful
paragraphs. I shall therefore content myself with drawing attention to
a paragraph that is fraught with grave danger. The Union Government
is “to take special steps under the Public Health Act for an
investigation into the sanitary and housing conditions in and around
Durban, which will include the question of the limitation of sale of
municipal lands subject to restrictive conditions”. I do not know what
is aimed at in this paragraph, but my suspecting mind—and my
suspicion is based upon previous bitter experience of interpretations,
warranted and unwarranted, that a strong party places upon agreements with a weak party to the latter’s disadvantage—conjures up all
kinds of frightful consequences arising from this proposed committee
and limitation. Already the Durban Corporation has been invested
with powers which it has utilized for the suppression of its Indian
citizens. So far as I know a committee can bring to light nothing that
is not known to the Corporation or the Government. The appointment
of an advisory committee of Indians may be simple padding. The
Health Committee may bring in a hysterical report, as a previous
committee to my knowledge has done, and limitations may be put
upon the purchase of municipal lands by Indians which may cramp
the Indian community residing in Durban. Nor do I like the
paragraph which seems to imply that provincial Governments are at
liberty to take any action they might against the Indian settlers without
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

161

reference to the Central Government.
But the compromise is acceptable in spite of the dangers
referred to by me, not so much for what has been actually achieved as
for the almost sudden transformation of the atmosphere in South
Africa from one of remorseless hostility towards Indians to that of a
generous toleration and from complete social ostracism to that of
admission of Indians to social functions. Mr. Andrews sends me a
glowing account of the utmost cordiality with which the Indian
members of the Deputation were received alike by the Government
and the people, how local Indians were able to gain entry to the most
fashionable hotel in Cape Town without any let or hindrance and how
the Europeans in South Africa were flocking to him to know all about
the Indian Deputation and the Indian question. If this atmosphere of
goodwill and sociability is kept up and encouraged, the settlement can
be used as a solid foundation for erecting a beautiful temple of
freedom for the Indian settlers in South Africa. But the success of the
settlement very largely depends upon the selection of the Consul or
the Commissioner who will be selected to represent the Government of
India. He must be a person of eminence, great ability and great
strength of character, and in my opinion, he must be an Indian. They
very fact of his being an Indian will strike the imagination of the
European population and raise the Indian settlers in European
estimation. He will reach the heart of Indians in a way no Englishman,
not even perhaps Mr. Andrews, can, and if a man can be selected who
will command the equal esteem of the Union Government we need not
fear the future. Such a man in my humble opinion is Mr. Srinivasa
Sastri. I cannot conclude this hasty survey of the settlement without
placing on record my deepest conviction that the happy result is
predominantly due to the ceaseless and prayerful labours of that
godly self-effacing Englishman, Charlie Andrews.
Young India, 24-2-1927

146. NOTES
A S IMPLE S UGGESTION

During my tour I observe that at some of the meetings
volunteers thoughtlessly begin distribution of papers, such as copies
of address, etc., just after the guest has arrived and the address has
begun to be read. They do not realize that this creates a fresh
disturbance in already noisy and restless meetings. If papers are to be
distributed, they should be distributed before the proceedings
162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

commence. It is not even realized that if papers are distributed, they
should be distributed to all who want them. In mass meetings such
distribution is impossible unless thousands of copies are available. In
my opinion this would mean an utterly useless waste of public money.
Whatever is absolutely necessary will surely be printed by local papers
and the public should be satisfied with what the papers give. If they
are unable to follow the proceedings without the papers it would not
be a bad plan to sell such papers when there would be no question of
favouritism. All those who wish to possess copies can have them for a
trifling charge to cover printing expenses and a small addition so as to
form a contribution, however small, to the expense of organizing
meetings.
S TEWARDS OF THE NATION

Much trouble, time and money can be saved by a little
forethought. As it is, I often notice a reckless waste of public funds in
connection with these meetings. Let organizers of all meetings, but
especially of khadi meetings, realize that we are the poorest country in
the world, millions of whom are semi-starved, if only because their
earnings are less even than three pice per day. Let organizers
therefore understand, as stewards for the nation, it is their duty to
spend public funds like misers and never to spend a pie without
thought and without necessity. Organizers of khadi meetings should
further realize that every pice collected is a pice meant for the starving
millions and so one pice means often a day’s earning for a widow.
They must not therefore spend where they need not. For instance,
they spend money on paper decorations. This is no time for decorations. Let them save as much as they can by avoiding all decorations
save only those which may be required to attract people’s attention. In
that case they can think of several artistic things which cost nothing or
very little. Thus they can have flags and buntings out of waste
khaddar. We are now going in for extensive tailoring in connection
with khaddar sales. There is always much waste material in a tailor’s
shop which he throws away. Now every part of this waste can be used
for buntings which unlike paper buntings can be preserved for further
use.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

163

WRITE YOUR ADDRESSES

Flowers may be avoided altogether and yarn garlands may be
presented. Yarn must not be damaged by being tied into knots. It can
be presented in its natural condition so that it can be subsequently
used for weaving or any similar purpose. Money can also be saved by
avoiding the printing of addresses. The best calligraphist among the
organizers can write out the address on simple handmade paper and
the paper can be nicely sewn on to a piece of khaddar, or if a little
volunteer boy or girl would embroider the letters on a piece of
khaddar it would be still better, the thread for embroidery, too, being
hand-spun. Such work will be at once artistic and even valuable. I
have stolen the idea from the remarkable way in which Babu
Mahendra Prasad’s daughter Rama had embroidered for her father
the address presented by the Chapra Municipality of which he is
Chairman. It cost the Municipality nothing and I have become
possessor of a work of art which will adorn the museum which Adhyapak Malkani has brought into being in the Gujarat National College.
AVOID S ILVER C ASKETS

Expensive caskets are not required, for I have no use for them
nor have I any room to keep them in. Latterly I have been putting to
auction every expensive casket received by me and handing the
proceeds to the All-India Deshbandhu Memorial Fund. Although
these auctions have invariably proved profitable in that they have
fetched much more than their intrinsic value it will not be proper to
present caskets for the purpose of securing fancy prices. It will be a
good exercise for organizers if they must give their khaddar addresses
in caskets to find out something cheap, local and artistic.
NOT A P LEASURE TRIP

Well has Gangadharrao said that mine is not a pleasure trip, but
a business tour during which I expect to do substantial business for
my principal Daridranarayana. Every function therefore should be in
fitting with that setting. I have observed that often more local men
travel with me than are necessary for the purpose of the mission and
that motor-cars are hired without due regard to economy. Every item
of expenditure should be previously and carefully thought out. Unless
we do so we shall not raise into being an efficient, economical
organization calculated to serve the starving millions and we shall be
guilty of the same charge, no matter on however small a scale, of
164

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

extravagance that we legitimately bring against the Government.
Kitson burners should be avoided whenever possible. I notice, too, a
lavish expenditure on feeding. Those who travel with me do not do so
to be entertained. It is enough to provide clean lodging and clean
food. Indeed I often feel like copying for the whole of my company
the excellent example of Mr. Bharucha who always insists on carrying
his own food with him. We spend much too much money and time
upon food. It grieves me to see people sending for parcels of fruit
from Bombay or Calcutta. Much of this expense is wholly
unnecessary. Some fruit is no doubt an essential part of my dietary
and unless obtainable locally, something has no doubt to be imported.
But I am sure that the expense incurred in bringing fruit can at least
he reduced by 75 per cent. ‘But,’ argue over-zealous friends, ‘why
should not people who love you express their regard in some such
loving acts of service? They will not spend money otherwise, nor will
they give you all the money that they spend for your personal
comfort. Let them therefore have the joy of spending some little
money for you.’ The argument is no doubt flattering, but wholly
unconvincing.
TRANSMUTATION INTO S ERVICE

If those who love cannot transfer their love to the thing for
which I stand, their love is blind and of little value. I do not know if
one should live to provide mere enjoyment for friends. Friendship
means loving mutual service, and sometimes it is a positive disservice
to indulge one’s friends and to expose them to temptations. And if
there are friends who would spend lavishly for providing luxuries for
me, but would not spend for the cause I espouse, it is my clear duty to
resist such luxuries. Friends to be friends must first provide me with
necessaries of life before they think of indulging me with luxuries;
and khaddar work is a vital necessary of life for me, more vital than
food. Reception Committees please note.
AUCTION OF GARLANDS

The foregoing paragraphs were written, or rather dictated at the
halts before we reached Ahmednagar at which latter place, there was
an imposing meeting where there were several addresses presented, the
Municipal address being in a beautiful silver cylinder. The representatives of each body brought also expensive flower garlands. Mr.
Firodia who presented the inevitable purse excused himself for its
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

165

smallness by saying that Ahmednagar was a famine-ridden tract.
When therefore I began my reply1 I could not help noticing the
contrast between the palatial surroundings, the expensive ceremonial
and the statement of famine conditions. I told the audience that what
was true of Ahmednagar was true of the whole of India. Was not India
a famine-ridden land? But the fact did not prevent accumulation of
wealth on the part of a few. We the city-dwellers lived upon the
exploitation of the famine-stricken villagers and the Khaddar
movement was in tended somewhat to redress the wrong and to make
some slight return to the millions whom we were exploiting. I
therefore suggested that the acknowledgment of the fact that Ahmednagar was a famine area made it doubly the duty of its well-to-do
citizens to give more rather than less. I told them also that it would ill
become me to accept for myself such caskets and rich floral tributes. I
told them further that believing as I did that plants were as much
endowed with life as we were ourselves, I did not like the unnecessary
plucking of a single flower. But in a place like Ahmed-nagar my
dislike was heightened by the reminder that I was a self-chosen
representative of the very famine-stricken millions whom Mr. Firodia
had mentioned. Every rupee spent upon unnecessary things meant a
deprivation of the livelihood of 16 famishing women and I therefore
suggested that they should auction the silver casket as also the flowers,
and if my remarks went home they would pay not the market value of
the casket and the flowers but they would pay for the sentiment that
the things would carry with them. The auctioning was entrusted
naturally to the Chairman of the Municipality, Khan Bahadur Dorabseth. The casket was knocked down to Sheth Magniramji the local
philanthropist for Rs. 1,001 and the garlands and the bouquets were
auctioned separately under the same able management and they
fetched in all Rs. 502. The result of my appeal went beyond the
meeting and the citizens seemed to catch the spirit of my address to
them, and the purse of Rs. 1,700 for which Mr. Firodia had apologized went up to nearly Rs. 6,000 apart from a brisk sale of khadi at
the meeting. Future organizers beware! I warn them that they need not
present me with flowers and rich caskets, but if they do I shall assume
1

166

Vide “Speech at Ahmednagar”, 18-2-1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that they are presented for the purpose of being auctioned and in
order that their contribution to the poor people’s fund may be
substantially increased.
TILAK S WARAJ F UND

During the Maharashtra tour at one or two meetings I was asked
what had become of the crore collected for Tilak Swaraj Fund.1 The
questioners had every right to put this question even though they
might not have contributed a pie to the Fund. A public fund becomes
public property and therefore every member of the public is entitled
to know in detail the administration of such funds. I therefore
answered the question fairly exhaustively. The gist of my answer will
bear repetition although the question has been answered in these
pages already.
The accounts have been published regularly by the All-India
Congress Committee. Copies of the audited accounts can be had at
any time from the Congress Secretaries or the Treasurers. Every pie
has been accounted for. There is no doubt that in some instances
those to whom funds were entrusted were not faithful to the trust, but
that is as much as to say that the Congress like all human institutions is
an imperfect body having in its fold all sorts of men. I know of no
institution in the world which does not have dishonest agents. The
Congress is no exception. But I can say this that no loss has been
sustained beyond what a most careful merchant suffers. The little loss
that had been sustained is due not to negligence, but has occurred
inspite of vigilant inspection and auditing. It should be further borne
in mind that the Congress has had in Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and in
Sheth Jamnalal Bajaj an incorruptible working Secretary and an
incorruptible working Treasurer respectively. Moreover 75 per cent of
the funds were administered locally by local representatives who had
assisted in raising the funds and who were trusted by the people.
Lastly, the largest amounts were mostly earmarked and controlled by
the donors, subject no doubt to the conditions that they were to be
used only for purposes coming within the programme of
non-co-operation and the accounts were to be open to inspection by
Congress agents. Personally, I have absolutely no regret about having
raised the Fund and my conscience is clear as to its administration.
1

Vide “Speech on Tilak Swaraj Fund, Pachora”, 8-2-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

167

Everything that was humanly possible to guard against fraud, maladministration or misappropriation was done. The Fund has served an
immense national purpose. The tremendous organization that came
into being all of a sudden could not have been created without this
great national Fund to which both rich and poor contributed so
handsomely.
ALL-INDIA C OW -PROTECTION ASSOCIATION

The Secretary acknowledges further receipt of yarn as under:
MEMBERS’ YARN (YARDS)

11
12
13
14
15
16
17

Nathabhai Dahyabhai Patel
Sojitra
12,500
T. M. Kanal
Haliyal
24,000
Punabhai Mamaiya
Karachi
16,000
V. G. Joglekar
Hadvi
24,000
Patelukhana Rama Rao
Ramachandrapur
6,000
N. Bhavanishanker Rao
Bangalore
9,640
Ishvarlal Thakordas Nanavati
Surat
24,000
Nos. 5, 6, 8 and 10 have advanced their totals to 24,002, 24,000,
22,000 and 14,940 respectively.
Young India, 24-2-1927

147. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
[Before February 25, 1927] 1
[CHI.] NARANDAS,

I have just got another letter from you.
About the Bhandar I have sent you a telegram to go over to
Belgaum. You will be there on the 25th itself. I shall come only on the
26th.
Let me have your opinion about supplying spinning-wheels to
Panch Talawdi. It would of course be convenient to run the department through Amreli [office]. Why no figures about the Kotak Bhandar? They were not there last time too.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7711. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

1

168

Inferred from the contents
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

148. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
[After February 26, 1927] 1
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I have your letter. Did you not have my letter telling you about
my meeting with your father-in-law? Your father intends by the end
of March to send you, Vidyawati and, if possible, Chandramukhi too
to the Ashram.
Step up your study of the Ramayana and the Gita and never
give up spinning. Recite Ramanama while plying the wheel.
Tulsi Maherji met me for the second time.
The region I am now touring is very lovely. It is called Konkan
and forms part of Maharashtra; moreover, I am touring this district for
the first time.
I have given my tour programme in my letter to your father.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3327

149. LAST PILGRIMAGE OF A MUMUKSH

2

We refer to the demise of a saintly individual as his last pilgrimage. The wise have regarded this world as an inn or a traveller’s
lodge; there for a while we stay and then walk on. The Gita says that
the body is a dharmakshetra3 . Shri Ranchhoddas Dharshi has gone
from this kshetra. I knew him quite intimately. He lived in Karachi in
recent years. He was a great devotee of Shrimad Rajchan-dra.
Ranchhodbhai had perfect faith in the latter’s teachings. I have seen
him shedding tears of joy even at the mention of Raychandbhai. All
those who knew him and came in touch with him will certainly feel
grieved at his demise. As for himself, he has departed after fulfilling
his mission. He always worked unobtrusively in the public life of
Karachi. He did not care for fame; his only desire was to work. He
1
2

ibid,
Seeker of moksha, i. e., freedom from phenomenal existence as the goal

of life
3

Field of dharma

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

169

had full faith in khadi and carried on the khadi work in Karachi with
great enthusiasm. May his soul rest in peace and the members of his
family be consoled.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 27-2-1927

150. LETTER TO LAURA I. FINCH
February 27, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

Your letter has been redirected to me from Sabarmati. As I am
constantly on the move, you will pardon my dictating this letter. Both
you and Mrs. Blair whom I know very well would be welcome at the
Ashram whenever you both go there. For the most part I expect to be
there between 9th and 14th of March. I should be delighted to give
you personal welcome if you come during that time.
I would suggest you and Mrs. Blair carrying a mosquito net, not
that there are many mosquitoes at the Ashram but it is wise to be
forearmed especially as we do not stock mosquito-curtains at the
Ashram.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 12815

151. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
MALVAN,

February, 28 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have two letters from you.
I have no doubt in my mind that a vow is like a rudder—a life
regulator. And just as a rudderless ship is lost, so is a life without a
vow a lost life. For after all a vow means a religious determination to
carry out a decision for self-restraint even at the cost of one’s life. I
should therefore welcome your desire to take what is perhaps the
supremest vow for a man or a woman. But if it is taken let it be taken
after the maturest deliberation. It would be wrong on my part to
170

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

prevent you from taking the vow, if you are clear about the necessity
of taking it. Not to take the vow is to trust one’s little self. To take it is
to distrust oneself and to trust only God. I know where I should have
been if I had not taken the vows I have.
But there is the other side, i.e., Andrews’s. He says: “I do not
know that the voice within is always the voice of God. What I may
hold to be right today may be found to be wrong tomorrow. I must
therefore hold myself free to do the will of God as I discover it from
moment to moment.” This attitude has answered his purpose. I
should be undone. I see a fallacy behind A’s argument. He does not.
So it sustains him. Fallacy, error and the like are relative terms. What is
good for one may not be good for all even though Truth is one for all
time. The difficulty lies in our hopeless ignorance of Truth. Cruel
God has enabled us to see that Truth is one and nothing else is; but He
has disabled us for knowing its content.
If therefore you feel the call within to take the vow and if you
feel it will make you feel freer, you shall take it. Nothing need be
done in haste.
You must keep your health. Of course you will always starve
when you feel the slightest touch of fullness or indigestion. Even
weakness is preferable to apparent strength if it is accompanied by
indigestion or even a feeling of fullness.
You must not worry about your Hindi. You are doing all you
can. The rest must lie in the hands of God. A change may be
necessary after we meet. The fact evidently is that you must not
combine two things—learning Hindi and teaching charkha. It
evidently exhausts you. And you have not been helped to the extent
you needed. However the experiences you have gained are
inestimable and I am satisfied.
I have only now got Ramachandra’s letter. I must see what can
be done when I am there.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

171

[PS.]
I have no time even for revising this important letter.
From the original: C.W. 5207. Courtesy: Mirabehn.

152. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
MALVAN,

Maha Vad 11 [February 28, 1927]
SISTERS,

This is the last letter I write to you, for next Monday I should be
on my way back home.
In my tours I always address women’s meetings. Consequently I
keep learning new things about women. I realize that women hold the
key to swaraj. But who will awaken them? Many women have little to
do. Who will make them industrious? Mothers spoil their children
from birth. Who will prevent them? They load their children with
ornaments and clothes of all kinds. They get their girls married quite
young. They give them in marriage to old men. When I look at the
jewels on women, I feel very annoyed. Who will explain to them that
real beauty lies in the heart and not in these ornaments? I can write on
many such matters. But how can all this be set right? It can be done
only when a brilliant and dynamic Draupadi rises from amongst
women. You have to try and get the necessary qualifications. Make up
your mind about it and then have patience. One can achieve nothing
by being in too great a hurry.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3641

153. LETTER TO N. M. KHARE
MALVAN,

Monday [February 28, 1927]
BHAI PANDITJI,

Please go through the letter from Nanabhai which I have forwarded to Chi. Manilal. If you can find the time, please go there a day
in advance and satisfy Nanabhai. We must have the minimum rituals.
Please make it a point that the ceremony does not stretch beyond an
172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

hour. Though of course you should do all that ought to be done.
Please have two copies of the [marriage] vow, one for each of them.
We shall not have to solemnize such marriages. We cannot refuse if
other friends want it. Hence this procedure and so on. Please think
over it and try to make it as solemn and sacred as possible. Consult
Kaka; we might add to or amend it if necessary.
I think we should start the ceremony with prayers and devotional songs and also conclude it in like manner. Consult Kaka about
this too; if we decide to do so, what bhajans we should have, what
slokas we should recite in our prayers, etc. Not the usual prayers that
we offer daily but if you can find out some which would specially suit
the occasion.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 250. Courtesy: Lakshmibehn Khare

154. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[February 28, 1927] 1
CHI. MANILAL,

This should reach you on Wednesday.
Maganlal writes to me that you would board the train in Bombay. You have to leave there on Friday. On Saturday morning I shall
be in Poona. Leaving there at 10, I shall join you at Kalyan. I have a
meeting at Poona in the morning.
Herewith letters from Nanabhai and Sushila, for your
information. I think you should honour their wish to have you at
Akola for some days. Vijayalakshmi would naturally want to know
you; she is your mother-in-law.
You should not be angry nor should you worry over what
Sushila writes about jewels and dresses; I have tried to encourage all
the good traits she has cultivated. But I have not bound her to
anything. You will influence her the way you would like to, and take
such liberties as you please with her consent.
The vow to be taken at the time of the marriage ceremony is
available with Panditji. I wish you would get it in advance, think over it
and understand it. May you be always ready to observe the vow and
1

From the reference to Panditji; vide the preceding letter.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

173

may God grant you the strength for it.
I know marriage begins a new life. Therefore though I do not
get the time to write to you more often or at greater length, I am
always thinking about you.
Even if you stay over at Akola I must leave on Monday. I have
plenty of work waiting for me at Ashram.
Make a note of whatever you want to ask me or tell me, because
after this meeting we may perhaps not meet again, may be never in
our lives. In the month of March, when you will proceed to South
Africa, I do not know where I may be wandering. I see therefore that
whatever you have to ask should be done mainly on the train. On
Sunday we shall be busy with the wedding ceremony. Of course there
may not be much fuss. There would be a solemn atmosphere on the
day and also peace all round. But I am a busy man and it is quite
likely that we shall get little time to ourselves.
In his letter Nanabhai asks for Panditji to go there a day in
advance. Panditji may do so if he can. Just the same I am dropping a
line to Nanabhai assuring him that this should not be necessary. He
[Panditji] should however spare a day if possible.
Bring with you two copies of the Gita, two of the [Ashram]
Bhajanavali and a couple of taklis.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1124. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

155. LETTER TO NANABHAI I. MASHRUWALA
[February 28, 1927] 1
BHAISHRI NANABHAI,

I have your letter. You may not need Panditji to go there in
advance. All the same I have written to him that he should reach a day
earlier if he could.
You must not put up any kind of elaborate decorations or other
fanfare. Please spend as little as possible on pandals, etc. It would look
well to have the marriage ceremony in the open; it would be enough if
there is shade.
There is a religious atmosphere about your house, no doubt; but
1

174

From the reference to Panditji; vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I wish it is particularly so during these days.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I have written to Manilal to spend a few days at Akola if he can.
If he does it might become necessary to let them have a separate
room. Perhaps it is essential that immediately after marriage they live
together for some days.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1129. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

156. LETTER TO SUSHILABEHN I. MASHRUWALA
Monday [February 28, 1927] 1
CHI. SUSHILA,

So at long last I have a letter from you written with much
nervousness. I wish you could get into the practice of writing to me
without shrinking.
On Sunday Manilal and you, Nanabhai and Vijayalakshmi,
myself and Ba will have to observe fast till the marriage ceremony is
over, i.e., up to about 12 noon. Devote all that time to contemplating
on dharma and to understanding the significance of marriage. People
are now totally oblivious of the fact that marriage is not a license, it is
a discipline. A person—man or woman—has recourse to marriage to
regulate, to circumscribe the desire one feels. This is the distinction
between man and beast. Thus though pursuit of pleasure results from
marriage, the Shastras suggest that the couple should gradually shake
off its hold over them. Even those relationships which are formed for
pleasure, the Shastras try to use for the attainment of moksha. They
enjoin them to this end. So much so that seekers have described the
relationship between the individual self and the Supreme Self on the
analogy of marital union. The concept of purity underlies conjugal
love just as much as the communion of an individual with God. Thus
marriage can become a great help in rendering social service. May
your marriage prove so.
I am trying to let you have in advance a copy of the marriage
1

From the reference to the marriage vow; vide “Letter to N. M. Khare”,
28-2-1927; also “Letter to Manilal Gandhi,” 28-2-1927.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

175

vow. If you get it ponder over it. May God grant you the strength to
fulfil it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1125. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

157. SPEECH AT LANJE1
February 28, 1927
I do not know whether I should pity you or myself for keeping
you waiting until this hour 2 . But you know we have done what the
yogi of the Gita does. “The night of sleep of the ordinary mortals is a
day of wakefulness for the yogi.” I congratulate you on your yoga,
but you will better deserve my congratulations if you show that you
are true yogis by contributing for the poor, and by purchasing our
khadi.
Young India, 10-3-1927

158. SPEECH AT RATNAGIRI3
[March 1, 1927] 4
After describing Ratnagiri as a place of pilgrimage for the whole of India, as it
was Lokamanya’s birth-place, and after a feeling reference to Sjt. V. D. Savarkar,
Gandhiji said:

You know Lokamanya’s swaraj mantra. I do not think there has
been any follower of Lokamanya who has tried to carry out the
mantra more than I. There may be many whose efforts are equal to
mine, but no one can claim to have put forth greater effort. For I
know that not only is swaraj our birthright, but that it is our sacred
duty to win it. For in so far as we are removed from swaraj we are
removed from manhood. A proper manifestation of all our powers is
impossible without swaraj. And the swaraj that Lokamanya had in view
was not the swaraj for Ratnagiri people or for Maharashtrians, but for
the whole of India, poor as well as rich, and swaraj has no meaning for
1
2
3
4

176

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
Gandhiji reached Lanje after midnight.
From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
From the “Weekly Letter” in Young India, 10-3-1927
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the poor unless they have enough to eat. Why should we not serve our
mills, you ask. Sheth Narottam Morarji, the owner of the Sholapur
mills is a friend of mine, and I was the guest of his son1 who showered
his affection on me. But does that mean that I must use cloth from the
Sholapur mills and serve that “poor” Sheth Narottam and his son?
Even they will not say that I would be serving the poor by using their
cloth.
I have been told everywhere that Konkan is poor. If you are
poor, the situation must be unbearable for you. You say that poor
people from your parts go to Bombay and earn a living there. Do you
know the price that they have to pay for that living? They live in
hovels without light and air, a few feet by a few feet, where several
men and women are huddled together without regard for their bodily
cleanliness or decency. Are you ready to send your mothers and
sisters to live under such conditions? Do you not agree that the
women that go to the Bombay mills are your mothers and sisters and
the men your brothers? Are you prepared to see your brothers and
sisters take to a life of drunkenness and shame and return home and
spread the infection of their vices? Is it worth while paying this terrible
price for the eight annas they manage to earn there?
Our cattle are destroyed because we do not know true cowprotection and our villages are ruined because we do not know true
economics and sociology. The charkha can stop that ruinous process.
Do you know the daily income per head of our country? Our
economists say that it is one anna and six pies, though even that is
misleading. If someone were to work out the average depth of a river
as four feet from the fact that the river was six feet deep in certain
places and two feet in others, and proceeded to ford it, would he not
be drowned? That is how statistics mislead. The average income is
worked out from the figures of the income of the poor man as also of
the Viceroy and the millionaires. The actual income will therefore be
hardly three pice per head. Now if I supplement that income by even
three pice with the help of the charkha, am I not right in calling the
charkha my cow of plenty? Some people attribute superhuman
powers to me, some say I have an extraordinary character. God alone
knows what I am. It is also possible to disagree about the efficacy of
1

Shantikumar; vide “Letter to Ashram Women”, 21-2-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

177

satyagraha, but I do not think there is any reason for disagreement on
these obvious facts about the charkha. If someone convinces me today
that there is no poverty in India, that there are few in India who starve
for want of even a few pice a day, I shall own myself to have been
mistaken and shall destroy the spinning-wheel.
I ask you therefore to bear in mind what you mean when you
say that Konkan is poor. If you are really poor there is nothing like
the wheel which can cure your impoverishment and which is a
safeguard for the honour of your women. Seek ye first the charkha
and its concomitants and everything else will be added unto you. How
can you disregard a thing which is of such a national and universal
character? Does it behove the followers of Lokamanya to deride or
reject the wheel?
But you will ask, as a youth who sought to heckle me asked, “If
Lokamanya liked this thing, why did he not ask the country to take it
up?” Well, I cannot be taken in by your question. Whether or not
Lokamanya had khadi in mind when he defined swadeshi, surely his
swadeshi cannot but include khadi. I am but the heir of Lokamanya,
and if I do not add to the patrimony he has left me, I would not be a
worthy son of a worthy father. I pondered well over Lokamanya’s
message, applied my many years experience to it and came to the
conclusion that Lokamanya’s message must mean khadi. Do you
know what he used to do? I am telling you of an incident that
happened a short time before his death. When Maulana Shaukat Ali
approached him as regards the Khilafat question, Lokamanya said to
him: “I shall put my signature to whatever Gandhi signs, for I trust to
his better knowledge in this matter.” Supposing therefore Lokamanya
had not khadi in mind when he advised swadeshi, what does it matter?
Supposing we were manufacturing spectacles here and someone were
to say, “We cannot use them, Lokamanya did not advise the use
thereof”, would it be proper? We would dismiss him as a literalist,
Vedavadarata as the Gita would describe him. As the literalist
interpreter of the Vedas does not grasp the infinite meaning of the
Vedas, even so these literalist interpreters of Lokamanya’s message
miss its infinite power.
But someone comes and says, “When Mussalmans are converting us who is going to listen to your khadi?” Have you, I ask,
become so impotent that you will be Mussalmans because someone
compels you to embrace Islam? If you have true dharma in you, no
178

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

one dare violate it. But I want to protect even our dharma by means of
khadi. For khadi means the service not only of Hindu but of
Mussalman women. A Maulvi in Bengal went and asked some of those
women not to spin, on the ground that the khadi movement was a
Hindu movement. They listened to him for a couple of days, but the
third day they came asking for cotton. For what could they do? They
could not go on starving and the Maulvi had no food to offer them.
The learned author of the Mahabharata has described Vishvamitra,
the sage, as ready to eat what was forbidden to him and even to steal,
when he was oppressed by the pangs of hunger. One cannot say what
a hungry man or woman would not stoop to. I therefore tell you that
you must take to khadi if only to alleviate the poverty and safeguard
the honour of your women.
I am asked to take part in the shuddhi movement. How can I,
when I wish that its Muslim and Christian counterparts should also
cease? It is unthinkable that a man will become good or attain
salvation only if he embraces a particular religion—Hinduism, Christianity or Islam. Purity of character and salvation depend on the
purity of heart. I therefore say to the Hindus, “Do whatever you like,
but don’t ask a man like me, who has come to his conclusions after
the maturest thinking, to take up what he cannot.” Man’s capacity is
after all limited. I can do what is within my power, not what is beyond
it. I cannot do a hundred or even half a dozen things at a time. I
would think myself blessed even if I can do one thing well at a time. If
you agree with me that the charkha is the best sangathan that is
possible, give me as much help as you can render.
Young India, 17-3-1927

159. DISCUSSION WITH V. D. SAVARKAR 1
March 1, 1927
Sjt. Savarkar asked Gandhiji to clear his attitude about untouchability and
shuddhi. Gandhiji cleared some of the misrepresentations and said:

We cannot have long talk today, but you know my regard for
you as a lover of truth and as one who would lay down his life for the
sake of truth. Besides, our goal is ultimately one and I would like you
1

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”, Gandhiji had called on V. D.
Savarkar who was ailing at his residence in Ratnagiri.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

179

to correspond with me as regards all points of difference between us.
And more. I know that you cannot go out of Ratnagiri and I would
not mind finding out two or three days to come and stay with you if
necessary to discuss these things to our satisfaction.1
Young India, 17-3-1927

160. LETTER TO P. A. WADIA
ON TOUR,
MAHAD ,

March 2, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

Here is the result of my correspondence with Mr. Madon. There
seems to be much force in Mr. Madon’s reasoning. I send you a copy
of my letter to Mr. Madon. I shall anxiously await your reply. I now
fancy that I am getting enough material to enable me to come to a
decision.
I reproduce my itinerary for ready reference:
4th to 5th March Poona, care Swarajya Office, 6, Sukrawar Peth
6th to 7th Akola, care Nanabhai Mashruwala
8th to 14th Ashram, Sabarmati
15th to 17th Bardoli Taluk
18th to 21st Gurukul Kangri (District Bijnor)
22nd to the end of the month in Karnatak and also upto 4th
April Karnatak.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

Enclosure 1
P RO. P. A. W ADIA
HORMAZD VILLA
MALABAR HILL
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 12903

1

Savarkar replied: “I thank you, but you are free and I am bound, and I don’t
want to put you in the same case as I. But I will correspond with you.”

180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

161. RAMACHANDRA LIFT
After having advertised the Ramachandra Lift in these pages I
have been purposely silent about it all these weeks because it was
necessary to ensure a continuous supply of these lifts on the cheapest
terms possible before further notice could be taken of this ingenious
invention. I have much pleasure now in informing the reader that Sjt.
Ramachandra Aiyer has placed himself entirely at the disposal of the
Ashram, made over his patent rights to the Ashram subject to a certain
royalty being paid to him for every lift up to 1,000 lifts. Lifts can now
be had on the following terms:
Cost of the lift f.o.r. Sabarmati:
For 30 ft. depth, Rs. 125; for 35 ft. depth, Rs. 132; for 40 ft. depth,
Rs. 139 and so on; Rs. 7 extra for every additional 5 ft. depth.
These quotations are for such lifts as contain buckets up to 32 gallons.
For buckets of greater sizes special quotations will be offered.
(Prices are subject to market fluctuations and may vary without notice.)
For local governments, zamindars, native States and co-operative
societies who are willing to introduce the lift in their jurisdictions on a large
scale) special quotations will be supplied on application for orders of 50 lifts
or over at a time. A reduction in the prices will be made according to saving in
the charges for packing, despatching, etc.
When sending orders, the intending purchaser should supply the
maximum depth of the well as measured from the silt to the point of discharge,
and mention the size of bucket required.
All orders must accompany 50 per cent cash and for the balance, the
articles will be sent per V.P.P. The delivery of the lift will be made nearly a month
after the receipt of money in order of precedence.

There is no profit made by the Ashram, only cost price up to
delivery is charged. The lift that has been now at work at the Ashram
has proved entirely satisfactory and the problem at the Ashram is what
use to make of the superfluous bulls. An illustrative catalogue giving
full details has been printed. Anyone requiring further information
can have the catalogue on sending to the Ashram Manager one anna
postage stamp. All those who corresponded with Sjt. Ramachandra
Aiyer or with me may now have their lifts on complying with the
foregoing terms.
Young India, 3-3-1927
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

181

162. IS INDIA PROHIBITIONIST?
An English friend who is anxious to undertake prohibition work
for India writes:1
I know that what everyone will say to me is that the Indians
themselves have shown no overpowering desire for prohibition and that as
they have not organized any movement for this, it is interference on our part to
move in the matter. Moreover of all the Councils only one or two have
declared for prohibition. Already people are saying this to me. I always point
them to the Non-co-operation movement when the volunteers picketed the
liquor shops. But when they say that was five years ago and they have shown
no great enthusiasm lately, what is the answer?

The puzzle the friend asks me to solve is not new. The question
is bound to occur to one who does not know the history of the total
prohibition movement in India. And a stranger coming in our midst is
bound to ask himself, ‘If India wants total prohibition, why does she
not agitate for it as she does for many other things?’ One observes
that people do not agitate when they feel absolutely helpless. It is our
helplessness which prevents us from agitating beyond having resolutions by temperance societies and sometimes petitions to the
Legislative bodies. The cry for swaraj came out of a realization of
growing helplessness in matters of paramount importance to our
well-being. Take the military expenditure. Everyone recognizes that
much of it is a criminal waste of money collected from the starving
millions. Instead of agitating for reduction in military expenditure, we
agitate for swaraj, the argument being that nothing is possible without
swaraj. Who can say that there is no great deal of truth in the
argument? When in 1920 we felt that we were getting swaraj, we took
the law into our own hands, we successfully picketed the liquor shops
and the Government was frightened to notice an immediate fall in the
liquor revenue. Liquor dealers trembled in their shoes and for a
moment it appeared as if the drink evil had gone. Unfortunately the
party of non-violence had not attained sufficient control over the
people. Violence broke out. It was discovered that pickets did not
everywhere carry out the instructions to create a blockade without
resort to violence or threats to use it. The picketing had therefore to
1

182

The reference is to Muriel Lester; vide “Letter to Muriel Lester”, 17-3-1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be suspended.
But the history of 1920-21 shows in unmistakable terms what
India would do if she had the power and what she did do when she
thought that she had it. Let it be further borne in mind that millions of
Indians are teetotallers by religion and by habit. Millions therefore
cannot possibly be interested in keeping up the nefarious liquor
traffic. Thus in so far as it can be said that there is no agitation in
India in favour of total prohibition, absence of agitation is due not to
want of desire on the part of the people to secure total prohibition, but
it is due to a consciousness of helplessness and to the certain knowledge that it is an integral part of the struggle for swaraj.
The very fact that it is necessary for any Englishman to defend
liquor revenue on the grounds that there is no agitation among us for
total prohibition, makes out an irresistible case for swaraj. For, it shows
utter ignorance of Indian conditions where the opinion is honestly
held. There is no agitation on the part of the people against malaria
and scores of other diseases. Is that any reason for taking no measures
for eradicating malaria and other diseases? In order to deal with a
known evil, no agitation should be necessary for taking prompt
measures. The drink and the drug evil is in many respects infinitely
worse than the evil caused by malaria and the like; for, whilst the latter
only injures the body, the former saps both body and soul. The drink
revenue, military expenditure and the Lancashire’s exploitation of
India through its calico, constitute the threefold wrong done by British
rule to India. When Englishmen realize that it is sinful to trade upon
the drink habit of the poor labourers of India, that it is sinful to dump
down English and other foreign calico on the Indian soil when India’s
starving millions can easily produce during their spare hours all the
cloth needed for her requirements, and when they realize that it is
sinful to impose a terrific military burden upon India under the
ostensible purpose of defending her borders but in reality for the sake
of holding her people under subjection against their will, it would be a
complete demonstration of change of heart, and co-operation on a
basis of absolute equality will become a real possibility. The only
agitation therefore that India can carry on is to end the system which
makes these wrongs possible, which is the same thing as saying that
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

183

the agitation for swaraj is the agitation for the removal of these
wrongs. This removal is the acid test, in my opinion, of English
sincerity.
Young India, 3-3-1927

163. ANCIENT WISDOM
Here is wisdom sent to me by the friend whom I have already
introduced to the readers of these columns:
That which is incomplete becomes complete.
The crooked becomes straight.
The empty becomes full.
The worn-out becomes new.
He who obtains has little.
He who scatters has much.
That is why the self-controlled man holds to unity and brings it into
manifestation for men.
He looks not at self, therefore he sees clearly.
He asserts not himself, therefore he shines.
He boasts not himself, therefore he has merit.
He glorifies not himself, therefore he endures.
The Master indeed does not strive, yet no one in the world can strive against
him.
The words of the Ancients were not empty words.
“That which is incomplete becomes complete.”

Young India, 3-3-1927

164. CO-OPERATIVE KHADI PURCHASE
Sjt. K. A. Nair writes as follows:1
I commend this ingenious device for the adoption of khadi
lovers. This method enables one to buy khadi without having to pay
for it at once. But the unfortunate member of this co-operative club,
as it may be called, whose name comes last in the raffle gains no
1

The letter is not reproduced here. The correspondent, a member of the
All-India Spinners’ Association had organized a raffle, with 12 members, each paying
Rs. 2, monthly, for twelve months, all agreeing that the winner each month will be
given khadi cloth worth Rs. 24 according to his taste from a Khadi Bhandar instead of
Rs. 24 in cash.

184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

advantage from his investment save that he will have learnt the art of
buying khadi in a thrifty manner. The club will be his savings bank
and at the end of a year he is in a position to buy all his khadi worth
Rs. 24 without feeling the pinch. If the arrangement can be extended
to a longer period, as it well may be by easy adjustment, all can
receive the same advantage. But perhaps the attraction lies in the
uncertainty of advantage and in the trifling nature of the disadvantage. The success of this scheme lies entirely in the honesty of the
members. For, if the member who has received his Rs. 24 worth of
khadi ceases to pay his contributions, the remaining ones become the
losers. Therefore if this scheme has to work inexpensively and yet
effectively, the membership must be necessarily restricted and confined only to those who know one another and are also perhaps
working in a common institution or office so as to minimize the risk
of loss by death or dishonesty. I hope that the example set by Sjt. Nair
and his friends will be copied by others.
Young India, 3-3-1927

165. SPEECH AT VAISYA VIDYASHRAM, SASAVANE1
[March 3, 1927] 2
I had come entirely unprepared for these tokens of love,3 — love
not only for me, but for the poor, and my greatest joy is due to the
shape these tokens have taken. The donation of Rs. 63-3-0 4 reminds
me of a sacred donation that I received from the late Swami
Shraddhanand for my work in South Africa and which represented
the value of the labour of love rendered by his brahmacharis. It is
worth more than millions to me and it makes my responsibility for
utilizing the funds all the greater. Your yarn also is worth its weight in
gold, for what is the value of gold, but the price of labour spent in
obtaining it? Is your labour any the less? And it is more sacred
1

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
From the “Weekly Letter” in Young India, 10-3-1927
3
The inmates of the Vidyashram, an institution for imparting vocational
training to unmarried Vaisya boys, had presented to Gandhiji 1,60,000 yards of
hand-spun yarn, a piece of hand-woven cloth, Rs. 501 collected from the Vaisya
community and Rs. 190 from the neighbouring village.
4
Being the value of ghee, sugar, milk and wheat which the boys had denied
themselves for one week for Deshbandhu Fund
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

185

inasmuch as it has been all done in the spirit of sacrifice.
The rest of the speech was as a Vaisya talking to Vaisya boys.

With brahmacharya as your shield and buckler you should find
no difficulty in entering any walk of life, and if you will follow the
vocation natural to you—agriculture, cow-protection, and
commerce—in the right way, you will serve both your community and
the country. But beware that your pursuit of these professions may
not become synonymous with exploitation as it is today. If you desire
to take off the sinister aspect of greedy commerce, you will have to
make it centre round the charkha. There are exploiters enough on this
earth. If we also follow suit, we shall have to seek for our victims on
other planets. Khadi is the only wholesome national trade that we can
pursue and as Vaisyas I ask you not to neglect it.
There were garlands . . . but Gandhiji did not auction them. Nor did he make
any appeal for collections. He said:

I had not come on a business visit here. But you have given me
more than enough.
Young India, 17-3-1927

166. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI1
[Before March 4, 1927] 2
Besides these I want a takli with a case to be presented to the
bride and the groom. Manilal does not spin on the takli; so Sushila
alone is to be given one. Ask Manilal if he would ply one so that I
may give one to him also. Please send two. Manilal should himself
bring along these articles when he comes.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Please look after Professor Jugalkishore.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7765. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

1

Only the concluding paragraph of this letter is available.
From the reference to wedding gifts for Manilal who was to leave for Akola
on 4-3-1927.
2

186

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

167. SPEECH AT VAISYA VIDYASHRAM GYMNASIUM1
[March 4, 1927]
In the morning Gandhiji performed the installation ceremony of the image of
Maruti 2 as part of their gymnasium. He said:

I install this image of Maruti here, not merely because Maruti
had the strength of a giant. Even Ravana had that strength. But Maruti
had the strength of soul, and his physical strength was only a
manifestation of his spiritual strength which in its turn was the direct
fruit of his exclusive devotion to Rama and his brahmacharya. May
you therefore be like Maruti of matchless valour born out of your
brahmacharya and may that valour be dedicated to the service of the
Motherland.
Young India, 17-3-1927

168. SPEECHES AT POONA3
[March 4, 1927] 4
[Concluding his Maharashtra tour Gandhiji addressed a public meeting at Reay
Market. He said:]

Hanuman tore open his heart and showed that there was nothing
there but Ramanama. I have none of the power of Hanuman to tear
open my heart, but if any of you feel inclined to do it, I assure you
will find nothing here but love for Rama whom I see face to face in
the starving millions of India.
Gandhiji . . . [addressed a students’ meeting] at about midnight. The cry for
“English, English” was there . . . Gandhiji, pained as he was by it, acceeded to the
demand because of his overflowing love for the students. He said:

If I cannot make myself understood to Poona students, it is my
misfortune, the misfortune of my country, and shall I say your
misfortune?
But he acceeded to the students’ clamour for English only so far as he had to
express his regret for being late at the meeting . . . When he saw that he had succeeded
1
2
3
4

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
Another name of Hanuman
From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
From The Bombay Chronicle, 11-3-1927

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

187

in gaining their ear, he delivered the message itself in Hindi. He said:

It is possible that my message if delivered in English might get
more silver from you, and it is probable that you might understand
me better. But I hold my message to be far superior to myself and far
superior to the vehicle through which it is expressed. It has a power all
its own, and I hope it will produce an impression on the youth of
India. Whether it will produce an impression in my lifetime or not, I
do not care, but my faith is immovable, and as the days roll on and as
the agony of the masses becomes prolonged, it will burn itself into the
heart of every Indian who has a heart to respond to the message. You
must understand, that at a time of my life when I should be enjoying
my well-earned rest, I am not going about from one end of the
country to the other for nothing. It is because I feel within myself with
increasing force every day the strength of my conviction that I must
try until the end of my days to reach it to as many ears and hearts as
possible.
The rest was a brief history of the charkha movement, which he had conceived
as early as 1908 before he had actually seen a charkha, and the duty of the student
world to those at the cost of whose moral and material ruin they were receiving their
education.

You may, if you will, go on receiving that education, but do at
least make a decent return for it. I know you have not taken to khadi,
not because you are perverse, but because you lack the conviction that
there is anything like the stupendous problem of poverty and
unemployment, whose existence I have been declaring from the
housetops. The King of Siam refused to believe Lord Curzon when he
said to him that he was coming from a country where rivers were
frozen for a part of the year. I assure you I am describing to you conditions I have seen with my own eyes when I say that 30 million
people in our land have to go without a decent meal a day.
The rest of the speech was on brahmacharya, a thing that comes uppermost to
Gandhiji’s lips whenever he finds himself amongst students. Rubbing the thing home
into them, he said:

It is as easy as it appears to be difficult, for brahmacharya is a
quality of the soul; and your souls are not dead but slumbering. They
are only waiting to be aroused. It seems difficult to arouse them
because we have become unbelievers. It will be easy as soon as you
have faith, for with faith comes God’s grace. Then it no longer
188

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

remains a matter of effort and trouble, but of joy and peace. I tell you
this as I have known the joy of it.
Young India, 24-3-1927

169. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
Sunday [March 6, 1927] 1
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have come to Akola for a day to marry Manilal to a niece of
Kishorelal Mashruwala. I leave for the Ashram tonight. I hope you are
making steady progress.
Arrangements are being made to send you as much as possible
out of the 50,000 you ask. The hawking commission is not possible.
It is paid under the rules only to professional hawkers for their
maintenance. If we stretch the rule, we should be overwhelmed. The
rules were framed to encourage hawking for a livelihood.
I do hope that you are all now past the danger zone.
How is Tarini?
I am at the Ashram from 8th to 14th March, and then 15-17
Bardoli, 19-21 Gurukul Kangri, District Bijnor, and then I proceed to
Karnatak where perhaps it is better to locate me in Belgaum though I
shall be wandering far and near.
With love to you all,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1631

170. LETTER TO MIRABHEN
March 7,1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your two letters.
This is early morning. I am sitting in a third-class carriage at
Bhusaval with Ba, Sushila, Manilal’s wife, Manilal, Ramdas, Mahadev
and Panditji who came to perform the marriage ceremony. The
wedding was of the simplest character—no presents were accepted, no
1

From the reference to Manilal’s wedding

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

189

expense incurred.
To gain one more day, I decided to travel during my silence. I
am travelling third class because I must not spend on second class for
Manilal and his wife and I do not want to cut myself off from the new
addition the very first day of her joining the family. And as I have
about six days of rest at the Ashram in front of me, and as this is an
easy third-class journey, I do not mind it; on the contrary I like it.1
I shall read your corrections in the autobiography when I reach
the Ashram. I had anticipated your many corrections in the chapters
that had not been previously seen by you.2
With love,
Yours,

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5208. Courtesy: Mirabehn

171. LETTER TO HARI-ICHCHHA AND OTHERS
Monday [March 7, 1927] 3
CHI. HARI-ICHCHHA, CHANDAN, TARA, VASANT,

I have your letters. Every day I think of writing to you, but
where could I get the time? Now Navajivan is as good as a letter from
me to everyone; you have to be content with it. This too I write on a
train, on my way to the Ashram.
I agree you had to go to Rajkot though I did not like your
running away. It would have been much better if you could have
stayed on at the Ashram. Now let me know what you do there about
your studies, etc.
Manibehn writes to me that Chi. Prabha has started spinning.
How nice if she would do regular spinning and carding and wear
khadi.
1

“From now onwards Bapu travelled third class more and more frequently and
finally it became an unbreakable rule.” (Mirabehn)
2
“Certain chapters had been published in Young India without my seeing them,
because of postal difficulties, and I had to correct them afterwards for the book.”
3
Gandhiji travelled from Akola to Ahmedabad on March 7, 1927; vide also the
preceding item.

190

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

When are you likely to return? I shall be at the Ashram till the
14th. You girls should all write to me. Write clear bold letters and in
ink.
Write to me everything, when you get up, what you read, whether or not you take walks, etc. Does Vasant feel any more exhaustion? There she must be keeping better health than at the Ashram.
Never let slip whatever good you have acquired in the Ashram.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 4905. Courtesy: Hari-ichchha Desai

172. SILENCE DAY NOTE TO MANILAL GANDHI1
[March 7, 1927]
Now that I have got you married and introduced you [to your
wife] it is for you to take the initiative and run your own house. Go
and sit near Sushila. See what clothes she has got, find out her wishes
and then make a note of what she needs. This will break the ice and
things will get moving. Or you may try some other approach. Or shall
I ask her to come near you and . . .2 tell the others to move away?
From the Gujarati original: G.N. 4718

173. UNTOUCHABILITY, WOMEN AND SWARAJ
I gladly publish Suhasini Devi’s letter3 which the reader will find
in another column. Whilst the versatile President4 of the Congress is
well able to defend himself, I am inclined to think that my fair
correspondent has over-generalized from her own very brief
experience. No statistics are needed to demonstrate the vast strides that
the movement for the removal of untouchability has made. The
barrier is breaking down everywhere. The higher classes are to be met
1

Evidently written soon after Manilal’s marriage
As in the source
3
In this she had complained that concrete action regarding removal of
untouchability was not being taken to the extent it was demanded in the Congress
resolutions.
4
S. Srinivasa Iyengar
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

191

with in every province ministering to the wants of the suppressed
classes in the shape of conducting schools and boarding-houses for
their children. It was this phenomenon that the President evidently had
in mind when he made the reference in his address. There is however
infinitely more yet to be done than has been already accomplished.
The question of breaking down the feminine prejudice is most
difficult. It is in reality a question of female education. And in this it
is a question not merely of education of girls but it is one of the
education of married women. I have therefore repeatedly suggested
that every patriotic husband should become the wife’s own teacher
and prepare her for work among her less fortunate sisters. I have also
drawn attention to the implications of the suggestion. One of them is
for husbands to cease to treat their wives as objects of their enjoyment
but to regard them as co-partners in their work of nation-building. We
cannot have Rama without Sita. And Sita got her real schooling under
the gentle care of her partner during those terrible years of exile and
probation. Well, we are all exiles in our own land and need to imitate
Rama and Sita to the best of our abilities and opportunity. And in this
connection, I cannot help drawing Suhasini Devi’s attention to the fact
that Sjt. Iyengar has not only broken down the barrier of untouchability for himself but has carried his wife and family too with him
in the reform which perhaps he himself would have thought impossible only ten years ago.
The question of inter-dining must be kept distinct from that of
untouchability. Exclusion in culinary matters permeates the whole of
Hindu society. To confuse it with untouchability is to retard the
progress of the latter movement which is aimed at removing the ban
on the social service to which the so-called untouchable has as much
right as any other human being and on the same terms as the others
receive it.
There is, too, confusion regarding swaraj. The term swaraj has
many meanings. When Sjt. Iyengar says that removal of
untouchability has nothing to do with swaraj, I presume he means that
its existence can be no hindrance to constitutional advance. It can
surely have nothing to do with diarchy or greater and effective powers
being given to the legislatures. Removal of untouchability is a social
question to be handled by Hindus. Why should it prevent the
Mussalman and the Parsi in common with the Hindu from having the
power to regulate the military expenditure, to determine the ratio or to
achieve total prohi-bition or to impose a prohibitive tariff on foreign
192

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cloth and protecting the indigenous industries? Real organic swaraj is
a different question. That freedom which is associated with the term
swaraj in the popular mind is no doubt unattainable without not only
the removal of untouchability and the promotion of heart unity
between the different sections but also without removing many other
social evils that can be easily named. That inward growth which must
never stop we have come to understand by the comprehensive term
swaraj. And that swaraj cannot be had so long as walls of prejudice,
passion and superstition continue to stifle the growth of that stately
oak.
Young India, 10-3-1927

174. PRAVARTAK YOUNG BENGAL SANGH AND KHADI
There is no province at the present moment so sorely affected as
Bengal. Some of its best young men are rotting in jails without
knowing why. Even in the Congress camp there is division. After
Deshbandhu the Provincial Congress Committee has not been able to
reconcile itself to a single leadership. It is no wonder. There could be
only one Deshbandhu.
But in spite of all this, constructive work is going on in Bengal
almost without a stop. The number of selfless young men who are
engaged in that work is daily growing. The Pravartak Sangh of Bengal
whose headquarters are in Chandranagar and which is guided by Sjt.
Motilal Roy has been steadily increasing its activity in the production
and sale of khadi. But hitherto khadi in the Sangh has been a
subsidiary activity—a little one among big ones. But Moti Babu is
now determined to make it the centre of his system. I had a long talk
about it myself with him when he said that the conviction was being
forced upon him that it was not possible to render true service to the
masses except through the spinning-wheel as the centre piece. Messrs
Banker and Lakshmidas visited Chandranagar after me and they gave
me a glowing account of the enthusiasm of the Sangh, about the wheel
and its work at Kutubdia. They told me too how eager Moti Babu was
to learn the latest improvements in carding and spinning. The Sangh
is a comparatively old institution. Its original inspiration is derived
from the recluse of Pondichery and has a number of selfless devoted
workers in Bengal.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

193

From their khadi figures before me for January, I find that at
their production centre they manufactured over Rs. 700 worth of
khadi and their sales amounted to over Rs. 3,400 during that month.
If the Sangh could concentrate its energies on khadi production, it
could soon rival Khadi Pratishthan and Abhoy Ashram without in any
way interfering with either. For the field for both production and sale
is unlimited provided that each new organization explores and takes
up a new field. It is impossible for any single organization to cope
with a mighty province like Bengal.
Young India, 10-3-1927

175. WANTED WORKERS
One hears loose talk about village organization, about work in
the villages. Paper schemes also for village organization are now and
again presented to the country and sometimes elegantly printed and
often indifferently written. When questioned the authors tell us
frankly that they have not tried their schemes, they have not got the
resources, or the time or the inclination; but they think that any idea
that occurs to them they are in duty bound to put before the country,
however ill-digested or impracticable it might be. Some of the authors
get angry when they find that their schemes do not even get a start.
But there is one scheme which has been now before the country for
some years and which its authors have tried to work first individually,
then collectively and which is now being worked through an
ever-growing organization called the All-India Spinners’ Association.
The spinning programme which has been demonstrated to be
comparatively a success can be indefinitely extended if workers of the
right type can be had.
During the Maharashtra tour, I have been taken to villages where
there is almost continuous famine and where people are supposed to
be without enough work and without enough to eat. Some of the
villages are deserted for six or eight months during the year. The
villagers go to Bombay, work under unhealthy and often immoral
conditions, then return to their villages during the rainy season
bringing with them corruption, drunkenness and disease. If the
righttype of workers go to these villages with the message of the wheel
and with a patience that will not be exhausted and a faith that will not
be moved, not one of the villagers need leave their homes. For it is not
194

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

merely the wages earned by the spinners that are to be counted but it
is the whole reconstruction that follows in the wake of the spinningwheel. The village weaver, the village dyer, the village washerman, the
village blacksmith, the village carpenter, all and many others will then
find themselves reinstated in their ancient dignity, as is already happening wherever the spinning-wheel has gained a footing.
Who then can become a village worker? For the work that is
required of him each worker should have a thorough knowledge both
theoretical and practical of the science of spinning; he should therefore know the different varieties of cotton; he should know the
method of picking cotton suitable for hand-spinning. For mill-spinning cotton is picked anyhow. For hand-spinning if cotton is properly
picked it will save an immense amount of labour and the yarn also will
be stronger. He should know how to gin and should know the varieties
of hand-gins used in Indian villages. He should know carding and he
should know the different carding-bows in use. He should be able to
tell the different staples of cotton and should be able to spin a given
number of counts. He should be able to test the strength and evenness
and counts of yarn. He should know a good charkha from a bad one
and should be able to put dilapidated charkhas under repair. He
should be able to straighten an incorrect spindle. If the worker is to
live a model life in his village, he must know also the laws of civic
sanitation and provide an object-lesson in sanitation to the villagers.
He should know the domestic treatment of diseases of daily
occurrence. He should know simple accountancy. Above all he must
lead a pure and chaste life, if he is to make his mark amongst the
villagers and gain their confidence. Naturally a village worker must
find happiness in a simple and frugal life. Let no one think that I have
sketched what is an impossible requirement. I have not. The technique
though it reads formidable is by no means so for a patient student.
Purity of character must be a foregone conclusion in any of this work.
And no village worker can help falling a prey to some disease or other
if he does not know and observe in his own person the laws of
sanitation and does not know domestic treatment of simple diseases.
The spinning organization is capable of accommodating any number
of workers who can satisfy the simple test laid down above.
Young India, 10-3-1927

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

195

176. THE SOUTH AFRICAN SETTLEMENT
I publish this1 not so much for its intrinsic merit as for a sample
of how a thinking settler in South Africa views the Settlement.
Young India, 10-3-1927

177. BURMA AND CEYLON
A correspondent whose studious habits are evidenced by his
letter itself writes thus:
Some of the following may strike you as idle academic questions, but
the mention of India and Burma in the letter of your correspondent, who
objects to Hindustani being our inter-provincial language, published in Young
India of 10-2-1927, along with your reply2 (in which however you do not refer
to Burma), gives me the excuse to put you these questions which I have long
been thinking of doing:
1. Do you believe that Burma can properly be a partner with India in
the future swaraj, or do you think it better that Burma should have a separate
nationality ? (As Burmese opinion itself is divided on the question, yours may
guide both it and the Indian.)
2. Have you ever been to Burma in the course of your many past tours
of your country? If not, do you intend paying a visit to Burma in the future and
when ?
3. Don’t you think it fit that Ceylon should be a partner with India in
a future Swarajic Federation on account of their closer racial, linguistic and
religious ties that exist between India and Burma—provided of course that the
Ceylonese are willing to it (and they seem very likely) ?
4. Do you think that Hindustani has any appreciable vogue in Burma,
though it has been a Congress province now for some years (since 1908?), or
that Hindustani will be acceptable to the Burmese?
5.

Ditto of Ceylon and the Ceylonese.

Well, these questions coming from me who have never been to Burma
or Ceylon myself and can boast of no personal connections there may surprise
you, but my interest in them is that of a cosmopolitan, which I take you also
to be. I therefore hope you will answer them at your early convenience,
especially as I know that many Burmese and Ceylonese as well as Indians are
1
Not reproduced here. The correspondent had expressed satisfaction over the
settlement, but pointed out that owing to the “bitter experience of the way such
agreements have fared in the past one is apt to view it with the gravest suspicion.”
2
Vide “National Language”, 10-2-1927.

196

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

greatly interested in them, and are curious to know your views

I have been to Burma and know that part of the world sufficiently to enable me to answer with confidence the question put by the
correspondent. I cannot say the same thing of Ceylon, which in spite
of my desire, I have not yet been able to visit. I have no doubt in my
mind that Burma cannot form part of India under swaraj. British India
is an artificial description reminding us of foreign, that is, British
domination and therefore its boundary is contracted or expanded at
the will of those who hold us in bondage. Free India will be an organic whole and will include those only who desire to remain as its free
citizens. Therefore free India will have its geographical, ethnic and
cultural limits. A free India will therefore recognize the differences in
race and culture of the Burmese, and while it will extend the hand of
fellowship and help to the Burmese nation, it will recognize its right to
complete independence and help it to regain and retain it in so far as
it lies in India’s power. Needless to say that therefore in my scheme
there is no demand upon the Burmese to learn Hindi or Hindustani. I
expect those who are within the real Indian border to learn Hindustani
because they are the children of a common land and heirs to a
common culture and are bound together by various other considerations and their provincial dialects contain so many common words.
About Ceylon I cannot speak with equal confidence. Although
we have a common culture with Ceylon and although it is predominantly inhabited by Indians from the South, it is a separate entity. And
as I have no imperial aspirations for India of my imagination, I should
be content to regard Ceylon as an absolutely independent State; but I
should not hesitate to accept Ceylon as part of free India if the
Islanders express their wish to be so in an unmistakable language.
Young India, 10-3-1927

178. LETTER TO MAMA D. SARAIYA
Saturday, Fagan Sud 9 [March 12, 1927] 1
2

CHI. MAMA ,

I was sorry to learn you were rather unwell. But you should no
more expect pujya Gangabehn to look after you. She is spiritually
inclined and it is your duty to help her in her quest. I wish you would
1
2

The addressee died in 1927.
Daughter of Gangabehn Vaidya

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

197

appreciate this and cheerfully let her go.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 2818. Courtesy: Purushottam D.Saraiya

179. A MESSAGE
S ABARMATI ,

March 13, 1927
God is Truth. The way to Truth lies through Ahimsa (nonviolence) .
M. K. GANDHI
The Immortal Mahatma

180. READ, REFLECT AND WEEP
I have intentionally given this heading to the article below:1
It is anonymous, but a priest of Dheds is not a common sight.
This proud priest of the Dheds, therefore, has, under the pretext of
concealing his name, told us in effect that there may be many workers
for the Dheds but only Thakkar Bapa can be regarded as their priest.
The article is long, but the reader should not get tired. If he has the
slightest sympathy for the cause, he would not be able to leave it in the
middle, once he has started reading it. Love of the poor flows in every
line of it. If we let but a few drops of it moisten our hearts, our
sufferings would end and so would those of the depressed classes.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 13-3-1927

1

Not reproduced here. Written under a pseudonym, “Priest of Dheds”, the
article discussed the problems of untouchables in the villages of Gujarat.

198

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

181. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[March 14, 1927] 1
CHI. MIRA,

I have all your letters. This is my last of the few days at the
Ashram. We shall soon meet and hence no occasion to give you a
long love letter. You must regain your lost health. In spite of all your
bitter experiences and little progress in Hindi I am certainly not sorry
for your having gone there.
It is impossible for me to be there2 earlier than 19th for I finish
a Submerged Classes Conference only on 17th. I would gladly have
given up a day at the Ashram if I could have altered the dates of the
Conference. But that was not to be thought of. I have now suggested
that Ba or Mahadev should open the exhibition in Hardwar unless
they will have someone else.
I do hope the wheel has arrived from Calcutta.
Did I tell you I had gained five more Ibs. in weight? On the day
I reached here, I was nearly 108 Ibs. This is very good. I shall be
weighed again this evening.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5209. Courtesy: Mirabehn

182. LETTER TO KSHITISH CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
Unrevised

March 14, 1927

DEAR KSHITISH BABU,

I am so glad—I have sent you a wire today heartily approving
your decision. But you must keep your health and make Sodepur a
health resort, by proper drainage and what not. Do please continue to
write to me. Have you sent a travelling charkha to Mirabai, Gurukul
Kangri, Bijnor District? I wrote to you long ago about it. If you have
not, please send it by V.P.P. immediately.
Here are my dates:
19-21
Gurukul Kangri,
27-4th April Karnatak,
Dist. Bijnor
headquarters Belgaum
1
2

From Bapu’s Letters to Mira
Gurukul Kangri

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

199

23
25-26

Laburnum Road,
Gamdevi, Bombay
Kolhapur

5-12 Madras
12-27 Mysore State
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 8031

183. LETTER TO SAM HIGGINBOTTOM
March 14, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I had your two wires to which I sent a reply at Lyallpur. I then
received another wire today. I am helpless. I must keep an appointment which involves thousands of poor men and women. I could have
intercepted you on the way but I thought that you should see the
Ashram before seeing me. Pray make yourself at home at the Ashram
and examine everything critically and have a heart-to-heart chat with
my co-workers. You can then meet me near Bardoli at the
Conference1 I am taking in on the 16th or at Bardoli itself on the
17th. You can reach it via Surat. Mr. Banker will telegraph your
wishes and I shall arrange for a friend to meet you at Surat and he will
bring you to me wherever I may be on the Tapti Valley Railway.
I am sorry for all the trouble you are being put to. But my
programme is so rigid that I dare not interfere with it.
I hope you are strong and fit and that you will have no inconvenience at the Ashram.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: Sam Higginbottom Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

1

200

The Raniparaj Conference at Sathvav and Vedchhi on March 15 and 16, 1927
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

184. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
[On or after March 14, 1927] 1
DEAR SATIS BABU,

What a joy Kshitish Babu’s decision! I have telegraphed my
approval and warned him against being ill in Sodepur.
I am glad Tarini is getting better.
How about Hemaprabha Devi and the boy? I shall feel relieved
when you can really tell me that you are all yourselves again.
I shall inquire about the commission.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,

BAPU

[PS.]
19-21
23

Gurukul Kangri,
Dist. Bijnor
Bombay

25-26 Kolhapur
27-4th April2 Belgaum
5-12 Madras

From a photostat: G.N. 1632

185. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
March 15, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your two letters. There might be one more tomorrow. I
see even Sethi has been failing you.
The purpose of writing this letter is to ask you to send Mrs. Row
the letters she wants. Here is her letter. You know her. She was at the
Ashram for a day. She is the wife of the celebrated Dr. Row and the
daughter of a celebrated Sanskrit scholar. She is herself too a good
Sanskrit scholar. The rest you can gather from her letter. Please write
to her directly. You may wait if you like till we meet.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5210. Courtesy: Mirabehn

1
2

Vide the preceding item.
The source has “March”.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

201

186. LETTER TO G. A. NATESAN
March 15, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

It would delight my heart to be your guest during my stay in
Madras. I am in Rajagopalachari’s hands. Please arrange what you
like with him.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 2235

187. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Tuesday [March 15, 1927] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I write this from a jungle. I must have three hours. I have
already had three hours’ silence. Go through the enclosed letter and
do send him the essay on spinning in exchange for the spindle. The
spindle has arrived there; Krishnadas knows about it. Send him a
report about it. If it is a good spindle we should have it [made] at a
reasonable cost. You should not keep the spindle if it is not perfect.
But you should point out its defects and help him. The man seems to
be all right. Please let me know if in the first instance, I should not
refer such letters to you. I shudder to think of the load of your work.
I am therefore anxious to spare you as much work as possible.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7760. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

188. LETTER TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA
March 15, 1927
CHI. KISHORELAL,

I have your letter. Bhai Kasandas’s2 scheme is very good but he
does not have competent women workers. Bombay is not the field for
such work.
Is it not a wonder that you are well? How are you now?
1
2

202

From the addressee’s endorsement: “Date of receipt, 16-3-1927”
Karsandas Chitalia
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Manilal and Sushila are well. I left the Ashram yesterday.
5th-17th Bardoli, 19th-21st Gurukul Kangri, and on Friday Bijnor.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10722. Courtesy: Gomatibehn Mashruwala

189. LETTER TO HARIBHAU UPADHYAYA
MADHI,

[March 15, 1927] 1
BHAI HARIBHAU,

I have your letter. I get news about your health regularly. Now
you have been released. That’s good. If you cannot recoup enough
strength you had better drop your trip to Bharatpur.
Ghanshyamdasji’s letter shows his candour. It is enclosed
herewith.
How is Janakibehn now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 6142. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

1

Gandhiji was in Madhi, Mandvi taluk, Surat district, on this date; vide the
succeeding item.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

203

190. SPEECH AT MADHI, MANDVI TALUK
March 15, 1927
Many thoughts occur to me on entering this taluk. I forget my
misery by poking fun at you, but it is a sign of my pain that I resort to
that. There was a day when not only Gujarat but the whole of India
respected Surat district, and its contribution to the swaraj effort was
considered to be the best, from the point of view of monetary help,
silent work as soldiers’ and work in the field of education and for the
service of Antyajas. There was a friendly competition between two
districts. Even now I have memories of that friendly strife in which
Bardoli had excelled itself, What a contrast between that day when
Bardoli had become famous in the world, and today? If we go to
Bardoli today, we would see only a few white caps and a few Antyajas.
We would be reminded of the tragic events in Sarbhan and wonder if
we would ever get swaraj. And how can I ever forget the pledge we
had taken, the oath the forty-eight men had taken with God as their
witness and, relying on their word, the ultimatum I had sent to the
Viceroy? And now I have to come here to inaugurate this Ashram,
The lesson we should draw from this is that we should not lose heart,
should not lose faith till death and should not retreat—that is the
significance of the starting of this Ashram. It is not a matter of pride
that we have started it with money from the Gujarat Provincial
Committee. If you wish that an Ashram should be established here,
then you should not be reluctant to give the necessary money. You
should raise the money and then ask me for men. It is a wrong
procedure to get money from the Provincial Committee for work
here. Anyone who depends only on the blood in his brain for his
work is bound to fail. One should rely on the blood in every part of
one’s body. Instead of functioning as our brain, the Provincial
Committee has become our feet, and we let ourselves be dragged
behind it. This is an unhappy state of affairs.
When I see national schools and depressed communities in any
place, I am reminded of Gujarat. I wonder, then, if Gujarat is not out
of the competition. But I am an optimist, and see rays of hope even in
the face of countless disappointments. One such ray, of course, is this
modest Ashram, for there are still earnest workers to run it. May it
prosper, and may Bardoli, broken in spirit, and Surat in ruins, shine
again and shed lustre on Gujarat and the country.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 20-3-1927
204

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

191. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[Before March 16, 1927] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

Kaka Saheb had suggested that the Managing Committee should
see all relevant letters so as to know my views on various matters. This
is right and so henceforth I shall write separately on business matters
so that everyone can go through the correspondence. Again I find
you as uncharitable as before. I agree it is unavoidable since you are
not aware of it. Shake off this attitude. You will be able to do so if you
try. You must participate in the work of the School Committee. If you
wish to be nominated to the Education Committee, it can be done. Do
not stand on prestige. More when I get your letter. Try to pacify
Ramachandra. You should have a better appreciation of the difficulties of the lift.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7761. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

192. SPEECH AT RANIPARAJ CONFERENCE, VEDCHHI2
March 16, 1927
Gandhiji asked:

Those who pledged themselves to wear khaddar, raise their
hands—all. Those who pledged themselves to abjure drink—all.
Those who have kept their vows—all. Those who have broken their
vow-—none.
The earlier part [of his speech] was by way of appeal to the money-lender and
the liquor-seller, the Bania and the Parsi, to reform their ways, as the latter part was
one of congratulation to the Hillmen and urging them to carry on self-purification
more extensively. There was a quaint appeal about the way in which he commended to
them the new appellation of “Hillmen”.

Why should you be called “black” people? We are all black,
the God who coloured our skin being the same, and his brush being
the same. You will be called Hillmen from today. Be you brave as the
1
2

From the date of receipt endorsed by the addressee
This was published under the title “In a Gold Mine”.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

205

lions and tigers in the hills, so that none may cheat you, or oppress
you, or violate your purity. The denizen of the forest is either a wise
man, a rishi or a dacoit or a beast of prey. You are neither of the last
two, so you have to become rishis. And there is no lack of opportunity
for you. None of the wicked temptations of the towns lie in your way.
You are fitted by nature to live on fruit and root and to eat in order to
live, not to live in order to eat, and therefore best fitted to teach us that
healthy way of living. Learn our sacred lore and with your innate
purity of heart tame the lion and the tiger, as did the rishis of old. To
the women I would say just a word. I am glad you have taken to
khaddar, I now want you to give up your ugly ornaments which
disfigure your limbs, are receptacles of dirt, and badges of slavery.
Young India, 24-3-1927

193. MR. SPEAKER’S DONATION
It was not without regret that I had to withhold the pleasure from
the readers of sharing the news contained in the following correspondence between Sjt. Vithalbhai Patel and myself. . . .
IV1
20, A KBAR R OAD , N EW DELHI ,

March 9, 1927
MY DEAR MAHATMAJI,
I have decided, as you are already aware, to remit to you as before such
amount as I think I can reasonably save every month from my salary for the purpose
mentioned in my letter to you on the subject in the month of April2 last. I propose to
continue this arrangement as far as possible during the whole period of my office as
President of the Assembly.
I enclose herewith a cheque for Rs. 2,000 representing such savings till the
end of February.
Yours sincerely

V. J. P ATEL

But they direct their use in any manner they choose. Vithalbhai
desires to constitute of such donations a special fund and leave its
1

I, II and III are not reproduced here. For III, vide “Letter to Vithalbhai J.
Patel”, 25-7-1926.
2
In fact, May; letter No. I in the correspondence; vide Appendix “Vithalbhai
Patel’s Letter to Gandhiji”, 10-5-1926.

206

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

administration in the hands of men of known standing. If the object is
to be attained, the board of trustees should, whilst it ought to be
completely national, be representative of as many parties as it is
possible to bring at a common board. I therefore invite criticism and
suggestions from those who approve of the plan. I have no desire to
take sole charge of the funds or to use them only for the purposes to
which my life is devoted. I know that I shall be best fulfilling the
purpose of Vithalbhai’s great gift by seeking the co-operation of as
many as would help.
Young India, 17-3-1927

194. NO AND YES
“Comrade” Saklatwala is dreadfully in earnest. His sincerity is
transparent. His sacrifices are great. His passion for the poor is
unquestioned. I have therefore given his fervent open appeal 1 to me
that close attention which that of a sincere patriot and humanitarian
must command. But in spite of all my desire to say ‘Yes’ to his
appeal, I must say ‘No’ if I am to return sincerity for sincerity or if I
am to act according to my faith. But I can say ‘Yes’ to his appeal
after my own fashion. For underneath his intense desire that I should
co-operate with him on his terms, there is the emphatic implied
condition that I must say ‘Yes’ only if his argument satisfies my head
and heart. A ‘No’ uttered from deepest conviction is better and
greater than a ‘Yes’ merely uttered to please, or what is worse, to
avoide trouble.
In spite of all the desire to offer hearty co-operation, I find
myself against a blind wall. His facts are fiction and his deductions
based upon fiction are necessarily baseless. And where these facts are
true, my whole energy is concentrated upon nullifying their (to me)
poisonous results. I am sorry, but we do stand at opposite poles. There
is however one great thing in common between us. Both claim to have
the good of the country and humanity as our only goal. Though
therefore we may for the moment seem to be going in opposite
directions, I expect we shall meet some day. I promise to make ample
amends when I discover my error. Meanwhile however, my error,
since I do not recognize it as such, must be my shield and my solace.
1

Saklatwa.la’s “Open Letter to Mahatma Gandhi” was released in Bombay on
March 8 and was published in The Hindustan Times, 17-3-1927. For excerpts from it,
vide Appendix “Extracts from Shapurji Saklatvala’s Open Letter”, 17-3-1927.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

207

For unlike“Comrade” Saklatwala, I do not believe that multiplication of wants and machinery contrived to supply them is taking
the world a single step nearer its goal. “Comrade” Saklatwala swears
by the modern rush. I whole-heartedly detest this mad desire to destroy distance and time, to increase animal appetites and go to the ends
of the earth in search of their satisfaction. If modern civilization
stands for all this, and I have understood it to do so, I call it satanic
and with it the present system of Government, its best exponent. I
distrust its schemes of amelioration of the lot of the poor, I distrust its
currency reform, I distrust its army and navy. In the name of civilization and its own safety this Government has continuously bled the
masses, it has enslaved the people, it has bribed the powerful with
distinctions and riches and it has sought to crush under the weight of
its despotic regulations the liberty-loving patriots who would not be
won over either by flattery or riches. I would destroy that system
today, if I had the power. I would use the most deadly weapons, if I
believed that they would destroy it. I refrain only because the use of
such weapons would only perpetuate the system though it may destroy its present administrators. Those who seek to destroy men rather
than their manners adopt the latter and become worse than those
whom they destroy under the mistaken belief that the manners will die
with the men. They do not know the root of the evil.
The movement of 1920 was designed to show that we could not
reform the soulless system by violent means, thus becoming soulless
ourselves, but we could do so only by not becoming victims of the
system, i.e., by non-co-operation, by saying an emphatic ‘No’ to
every advance made to entrap us into the nets spread by satan.
That movement suffered a check but is not dead. My promise
was conditional. The conditions were simple and easy. But they proved too difficult for those who took a leading part in the movement.
What “Comrade” Saklatwala believes to be my error and failure
I regard to be the expression of my strength and deep conviction. It
may be an error but so long as my conviction that it is truth abides,
my very error must, as it does, sustain me. My retracing my steps at
Bardoli I hold to be an act of wisdom and supreme service to the
country. The Government is the weaker for that decision. It would
have regained all lost position if I had persisted after Chauri Chaura in
208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

carrying out the terms of what was regarded as an ultimatum 1 to the
Viceroy.
My “Comrade” is wrong in saying that the South African
movement was a failure. If it was, my whole life must be written down
as a failure. And his invitation to me to enlist under his colours must
be held to be meaningless. South Africa gave the start to my life’s
mission. Nor do I consider it to be wrong to have offered, during the
late War, the services of my companions and myself, under my then
convictions, as ambulance men.
This great M.P. is in a hurry. He disdains to study facts. Let me
inform him that the khadi movement is not on the wane. It did last
year at least twenty times as much work as during 1920. It is now
serving not less than 50,000 spinners in 1,500 villages besides weavers,
washermen, printers, dyers and tailors.
Mr. Saklatwala asks what khaddar stands for. Well, it stands for
simplicity not shoddiness. It sits well on the shoulders of the poor and
it can be made, as it was made in the days of yore, to adorn the bodies
of the richest and the most artistic men and women. It is reviving
ancient art and crafts. It does not seek to destroy all machinery but it
does regulate its use and check its weedy growth. It uses machinery
for the service of the poorest in their own cottages. The wheel is itself
an exquisite piece of machinery.
Khaddar delivers the poor from the bonds of the rich and
creates a moral and spiritual bond between the classes and the masses.
It restores to the poor somewhat of what the rich have taken from
them.
Khaddar does not displace a single cottage industry. On the
contrary, it is being daily recognized that it is becoming the centre of
other village industries. Khaddar brings a ray of hope to the widow’s
broken-up home.
But it does not prevent her from earning more if she can. It
prevents no one from seeking a better occupation. Khaddar offers
honourable employment to those in need of some. It utilizes the idle
hours of the nation. The esteemed comrade quotes with pride the
work of those who offer more lucrative employment. Let him know
that khaddar does that automatically. It cannot put annas into the
pockets of the poor without putting rupees into the pockets of some.
1

Vide “Letter to Viceroy”, 1-2-1922.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

209

Whereas those who begin their work in the cities, though they are no
doubt doing good work, touch but the fringe of the question.
Khaddar touches the very centre and therefore necessarily includes
the rest.
But the whole of the impatient communist’s letter concentrates
itself upon the cities and thus ignores India and Indian conditions
which are to be found only in her 7,00,000 villages. The half a dozen
modern cities are an excrescence and serve at the present moment the
evil purpose of draining the life-blood of the villages. Khaddar is an
attempt to revise and reverse the process and establish a better
relationship between the cities and the villages. The cities with their
insolent torts [sic] are a constant menace to the life and liberty of the
villagers.
Khaddar has the greatest organizing power in it because it has
itself to be organized and because it affects all India. If khaddar
rained from heaven it would be a calamity. But as it can only be
manufactured by the willing co-operation of starving millions and
thousands of middle-class men and women, its success means the best
organization conceivable along peaceful lines.
If cooking had to be revived and required the same organization, I should claim for it the same merit that I claim for khaddar.
My communist comrade finds fault with my work among the
labourers in Jamshedpur because I accepted an address in Jamshedpur
not from the Tatas but from the employees. His disapprobation is due,
I expect, to the fact that the late Mr. Ratan Tata was in the chair. Well,
I am not ashamed of the honour. Mr. Tata appeared to me to be a
humane and considerate employer. He readily granted, I think, all the
prayers of the employees and I heard later that the agreement was
being honourably kept. I do ask and receive donations for my work
from the rich as well as the poor. The former gladly give me their
donations. This is no personal triumph. It is the triumph of non-violence which I endeavoured to represent, be it ever so inadequately. It
is to me a matter of perennial satisfaction that I retain generally the
affection and the trust of those whose principles and policies I oppose.
The South Africans gave me personally their confidence and
extended their friendship. In spite of my denunciation of British
policy and system I enjoy the affection of thousands of Englishmen
and women, and in spite of unqualified condemnation of modern
materialistic civilization, the circle of European and American friends
210

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is ever widening. It is again a triumph of non-violence.
Lastly about labour in the cities. Let there be no misunderstanding. I am not opposed to organization of labour, but as in everything else, I want its organization along Indian lines, or if you will, my
lines. I am doing it. The Indian labourer knows it instinctively. I do
not regard capital to be the enemy of labour. I hold their co-ordination to be perfectly possible. The organization of labour that I undertook in South Africa, Champaran or Ahmedabad was in no spirit of
hostility to the capitalists. The resistance in each case and to the extent
it was thought necessary was wholly successful. My ideal is equal
distribution, but so far as I can see, it is not to be realized. I therefore
work for equitable distribution. This I seek to attain through khaddar.
And since its attainment must sterilize British exploitation at its centre,
it is calculated to purify the British connection. Hence in that sense
khaddar leads to swaraj.
The Mahatma I must leave to his fate. Though a non-cooperator
I shall gladly subscribe to a bill to make it criminal for anybody to
call me Mahatma and to touch my feet. Where I can impose the law
myself, i.e., at the Ashram, the practice is criminal.
Young India, 17-3-1927

195. LETTER TO MURIEL LESTER
(ON TOUR,)
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM, S ABARMATI , 1

March 17, 1927
MY DEAR FRIEND,

I get your letters regularly. You asked me how to answer the
conundrums that your fellow passengers had put before you regarding India’s alleged indifference about total prohibition. As, in my
travels, I had not your address, I could not write to you, but I wrote a
leading article2 in Young India based upon your letter, which I hope
you saw and which contained the answer you wanted. If you need
anything more, you will please refer to me.
I am glad you are being assisted by Tarini Sinha.
I am looking forward to your letter giving me a description of
1
2

Permanent address
Vide “Is India Prohibitionist?”, 3-3-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

211

your experiences at the India Office. I am quite sure that the steps you
are taking to equip yourself for the task are the proper and necessary
steps. They alone can give you the knowledge, experience and
confidence required for the struggle that is in front of you.
I have read your interview with The Observer. It was reproduced
in one of the Indian dailies. I certainly agree with you that if you had
not given that interview it would have been better. But, if the reporter
has correctly reported you what does it matter even if it contains some
erroneous deductions. It would be terrible if at every step we hesitate
because of the possibility of erroneous judgement.
From a photostat : G.N. 6565
Yours sincerely,

M.K. GANDHI

196. M. K. GANDHI
ON R ETURN FROM VEDCHHI ,

Thursday, [March 17, 1927] 1
CHI. TARA,

It was very good that you came to the Ashram. The training
the women get at the Ashram at present is not being provided anywhere in the world. Do whatever work you can while taking care of
your health. Look after the children well, as if they were your own
children. Keep Vimu with you if she agrees. I do not know where you
have decided to stay. If you are going to stay in the hostel, Vimu will
have to live away from you. Take particular care of her even if she
lives away. It would be great if she could by some means come under
your influence.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : G. N. 4186

197. CONVOCATION ADDRESS AT GURUKUL KANGRI2
March, 19, 1927
The Gurukul was Swamiji’s best creation and though he is
physically not with us he lives amongst us in his Gurukul. It was his
1

Inferred from the fact that Gandhiji returned to Bardoli from Vedchhi on
March 17, 1927 which was a Thursday.
2
Delivered on the occasion of its silver jubilee. This is from a report by
Mahadev Desai.

212

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

most original contribution to education, inasmuchas when we had lost
our heads over Western education he decided that we should think and
act and educate ourselves in the Vedic way. Swamiji will live with us so
long as his Gurukul lasts and the Gurukul will last so long as there is a
single graduate of the Gurukul prepared to serve it with truth and selfsacrifice, and with the courage which was Swamiji’s and which is a
synonym for forgiveness. Then there is brahmacharya on which
Swamiji laid the greatest emphasis and without which all your
education will come to naught. Avoiding lustful contact with women is
not the last word on brahmacharya. It is only the beginning and the
perf ection is reached when the brahmachari refuses to be ruffled or
angry, no matter what provocation is offered him. For anger is the
destruction of virya, the vital essence.1
I appeal to you to carry on the work, by forgetting which you
will forget Swamiji and by killing which you will kill Swamiji.
Remember Abdul Rashid has not murdered Swamiji, he has made him
a martyr. The day you forget the Swami’s mission will be his day of
death. The Swami was a great lover of untouchables. All who love him
are in duty bound to carry on his mission. It will be a great misfortune
if the Swami’s beloved cause is given up because of lack of funds or
workers.
Continuing, Mr. Gandhi said that Malaviyaji has pleaded more strongly for
khaddar than he could do, but he too wanted to appeal as khaddar helped the solution
of the problem of untouchability. Khaddar and charkha provided food to the teeming
millions, mostly the depressed classes. Hence khaddar and the removal of untouchability were interwoven and could not be separated.

If you want to save our ancient civilization and if you feel it a
duty to save the villagers from destruction, then take up the message
of khaddar from village to village.
Concluding, Mr. Gandhi said :

Truth is the bedrock of happy live. Be true to yourselves and the
country.
Young India,31-3-1927

198. SATYAGRAHA WEEK
April 6 is nearing. I assume that at that time efforts will be made
at every place to sell khadi. I draw the attention of the citizens of
Ahmedabad to the following note 2 sent by the Khadi Bhandar on
Ritchie Road in Ahmedabad announcing reduction of prices during
the period :
1
2

What follows is from The Leader, 23-3-1927
Bit reproduced here

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

213

I hope a good many citizens will buy this khadi. Everyone
should remember that this reduction will be in force only from April
6 to April 13.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 20-3-1927

199. SPEECH ON SHRADDHANAND MEMORIAL FUND,
GURUKUL KANGRI 1
March 19, 1927
We khadi workers make our collections in handkerchiefs, yours
you would do in buckets. . . .
If I have criticized the Arya Samaj, I am also anxious to give my
tribute of praise for its work. And those who give hearty praise have a
right to criticize too. Of all religious and political bodies that have
come into being of late years the Arya Samaj has made probably the
greatest contribution to bridge the gulf between the classes and the
masses that had been widening ever since the advent of the British in
India. No institution is perfect, and I could, if I would, point out some
of the defects of the Gurukul. But there is no questioning the fact that
it has rendered substantial service to the country. Whenever I see a
Punjabi youth capable of reading and writing Devanagari, I immediately conclude that he must have had his training in one of the
Gurukuls. They have done more than any other institutions in these
parts to revivify Sanskrit learning and Aryan culture.
Young India, 31-3-1927

1

214

From a report by Mahadev Desai
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

200. SPEECH AT NATIONAL EDUCATION CONFERENCE,
HARDWAR1
March 20, 1927
It is the duty of every Indian student to learn Sanskrit. It
certainly is the duty of the Hindus, but it is also the Muslims’ because,
in the final analysis, their forbears too were Rama and Krishna and
they ought to know Sanskrit in order to know them. However, to
maintain contacts with the Muslims, it is also the duty of Hindus to
learn the former’s language. Today we run away from each other’s
languages because we have become mad. Take it for a certainty that
an institution which teaches fear and hatred of others surely is not a
national institution.
Gandhiji said that national institutions should produce messengers of
Hindu-Muslim unity. Institutions producing fanatical Hindus and Muslims were worth
destruction. Educational institutions were not meant to produce bigoted persons. He
was sure that there was no reason for disappointment and still the cause could prosper
if self-reliant and self-sacrificing teachers were available.2

[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 27-3-1927

201. SILENCE-DAY NOTE TO MIRABEHN
[March 21, 1972] 3
I can’t decide. You must be guided by your own inner
promptings. I asked you before agreeing. But it is quite all right.
There is nothing in that agreement. You can discuss the pros and cons
as if no agreement was reached and then decide. I do not want you to.
But Jamnalalji does. You will go for having contact with him and there
will be nothing but Hindi there to speak. But I would leave it to you.
If you have positive disinclination you will certainly not go. It is a
2-months course.
1

Delivered as President of the Conference, held under the auspices of Gurukul

Kangri
2

This paragraph is from The Leader, 23-3-1927
Scribbled on the back of a letter to Mirabehn dated 19-3-1927, apparently
this is a silence-day note written before Mirabehn left the Bhagwadbhakti Ashram at
Rewari on March 21, for further Hindustani studies. Vide also 1st footnote to “Letter
to Ashram Women”, 22-3-1927.
3

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

215

202. SILENCE DAY NOTE TO CHAND TYAGI
March 21, 1927
I wanted to talk to you at night but you were not there. At 10 I
entered upon my silence.
What do you wish to do? If nothing worries you here and you
find you are at peace, you should propagate what you believe in and
thereby serve the country.
...
...
...1
You can go to the Ashram whenever you wish. Nowadays I do
not stay there. I do not know, therefore, if you would like to go there.
You can also write to me any time you wish.
From the Hindi original: C.W. 4276. Courtesy: Chand Tyagi

203. LETTER TO MAMA D. SARAIYA
HARDWAR,

Fagan Vad 3, 1983 [March 21, 1927]
CHI. MAMA,

I was glad to read your letter. One should say you have acted
nobly if you relieved Gangabehn without rancour and as a matter of
dharma, and I am sure you will have peace hereafter because your
mind would have regained its equanimity. We ought to be only too
glad to have some of our dear ones spiritually inclined and regarding
the entire world as their own family.
I hope you are now better. Please write to me again. Cultivate
the habit of writing tidy letters and in ink.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 2819. Courtesy: Purushottam D. Saraiya

1

216

As in the source
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

204. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
Not revised

HARDWAR

Fagan Vad 3, 1983 [March 21, 1927]
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,

Your letter about Rs. 2,000 has been referred to me. I have not a
cowrie left with me. Whatever had been saved has been spent, so I shall
have to go abegging once again.
I have written to them to send you the amount this time, whatever their difficulty. But what about later?
Now you will have to get your budget approved by me. You—
i.e., you and Devchandbhai—should have the influence to raise the
funds needed to run the Parishad. If this cannot be done, how long
can we hold on?
Budgets for all the other centres should also receive prior
approval. You should show to Nanabhai the budget for your school in
particular. He should inspect the school and I shall try to raise the
amount that he approves of. I am always thinking of affiliating all the
national schools to the Vidyapith, because it is now becoming difficult
to ask for separate funds. Of course we do collect from a great many
donors in the name of khadi. I had hoped to accomplish something at
the Parishad; but it did not come off. So now we have to think anew
since it has been postponed to August. So get your budget first
sanctioned by me before you put in your next demand. Ultimately
each [institution] will have to stand on its own as in the rest of the
country. Or we shall have to draw up some special scheme for education in Maha Gujarat. You should contact Nanabhai and consider all
23-24 Bombay
25-26 Kolhapur
27
Belgaum
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 2833. Courtesy: Sharadabehn Shah

205. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
The matters. We may be said to have taken up three tasks, viz.,
the khadi movement, work among the Antyajas and national education in general.
I see all the three combined in khadi; education it certainly
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

217

covers. I have not yet discovered any final solution for the Antyaja
problem. I write all this for your co-workers to think over. You should
write to me for clarifications, which might solve some of your problems.
Chi. Chhaganlal will go through this before delivering it to you,
so that they will all know where I am at the moment.
Blessings from

BAPU

206. ANTED WORKERS
HARDWAR ,

Silence Day [March 21, 1927]
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I have your letter which I am forwarding to Chi. Kishorelal. He
is a man of truth and aspires for moksha. You and I ought to
reconsider a matter about which he has doubts. You and I should,
therefore, endeavour to convince him that the step you propose to
take is not contrary to dharma. What Chi. Mama has written can be
considered good, provided she has not done it in anger. It is all right
if you take the step after mature deliberation. In that case Mama too
will be perfectly at peace. If the move disturbs her it would not at all
be wrong to suspect some flaw in it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8824. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

207. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
Monday [March 21, 1927] 1
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

I have your letter.
When I get the money it will help the charkha movement. I am
very glad that pujya Malaviyaji is being progressively drawn to the
charkha. I shall want large amounts for the charkha work. With his
help I can raise larger funds.
1

218

From the tour programme
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Bhaiji and Rameshwarji have decided to donate money for the
construction of reservoirs of water for the Antyajas; it will be spent as
directed by them.
I did not know Parasram collected scraps of paper. I have
warned him against this fault. He will write to you. He had no wrong
motive. He is a simpleton but I can get work out of him. He wishes to
live with pujya Malaviyaji and Rabindranath for some days. I have
asked him to try on his own to get himself admitted to their service.
In my opinion the following rules of conduct must be observed
to safeguard one’s health while staying in Europe:
1. We should not take food to which we are not used.
2. In Europe they eat six or seven times a day, but we must
not eat more than thrice. Do not get addicted to taking chocolate or
other such things between meals.
3. They eat even at 1 o’clock at night. But we must eat
nothing after 8 in the evening. When visiting people and places we are,
it is believed, expected to take tea, etc. This is not true.
4. One should go walking at least six miles daily. One should
walk both in the morning and in the evening.
5. It is not right to wear too many clothes, secret being that
one must not feel cold. Walking shakes off cold.
6. It is not at all necessary to put on European dress.
7. One should try to get acquainted with the poor people of
Europe; walking helps such acquaintance. When there is time at your
disposal, it is better to walk.
8. Do not persuade yourself for a moment that since you have
gone to Europe you have got to do something, Attempt only what
clean and spontaneous efforts can accomplish.
9. Your stay in Europe will, I feel, result in at least one good
thing. You can certainly build up your body.
10. May God save you from mental debauchery; very few
Indians escape it. While their way of living is natural to them, it only
helps to intoxicate us.
11. The practice of reading the Gita and the Ramayana must
in no case be given up. If you have not been doing it already, the
sooner you begin the better.
I am sure you did not expect advice in such minute detail. This I
am giving because I have great faith in the goodness of yourself and
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

219

your brothers. Few rich people possess your goodness and humility. I
seek an intense growth in these qualities and I want to put them to use
in the service of the nation. I have no faith in the principle of shatham
prati shathyam1 . Therefore, wherever I see purity, truth and non-violence, etc., even in the smallest degree, I start collecting the treasure
with the care of a miser, and it makes me happy.
You can ask for any further advice.
23-24 Bombay
27- April 4 Belgaum
25-26 Kolhapur
5-12 Madras
Yours,

MOHANDAS

[P.S]
Please acknowledge receipt.
From the Hindi original: C.W. 6146. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

208. ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS
[March 21, 1927] 2
[QUESTION:] 1. Do you feel it unbearable to live under the present political
thraldom or not?

[ ANSWER :] I do.
2. If so, are you yourself individually prepared to get rid of it and gain
political freedom or not?

I am.
3. Is there any objection to suppose that "your being prepared" means that
you have acquired two spiritual qualities, viz., soul-force and love of freedom ?

You may suppose so.
4. Does not "preparation for the attainment of freedom" mean making the
Indians endowed with the qualities and power necessary for such attainment which you
respectively have acquired?

It does mean.
5.

Is not intellectual and moral education necessary for acquiring such

qualities?

It is.
1
2

220

‘Roguery towards a rogue’
Vide the succeeding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

6. If so, what are the ways of educating the whole nation and how much time
will it take to do it?

Through spinning.
7. Is not the creation of a feeling of thorough disgust for political subjection
extremely necessary?

It is.
8. If so, what may be in your opinion the percentage of people having such a
feeling among the three hundred millions of Indians?

Difficult to estimate.
9. To create the consciousness of bondage is it not necessary to have the
knowledge of the past glory of the motherland and to feel real restlessness on account
of the present painful condition?

It is.
10. Is it possible to create soul-force in the absence of the said knowledge or
the said restlessness ?

Hardly.
11. Do acquisition of soul-force and the possession of the power to suffer any
pains boldly and calmly constitute the chief pillars of your spiritual activities or not?

To an extent, yes.
12. Where, under what circumstances and how are the people to make use of
their soul-force for wresting power from the rulers ?

Throughout the country by non-violent non-co-operation.
13. What kind of intellectual, moral and physical preparation is necessary on
the part of the people for the accomplishment of these two objects, viz., civil
disobedience and refusal to pay Government taxes?

Hand-spinning gives them an idea of non-violence and selfconfidence.
14. If our preparedness be looked upon as being complete, i.e., 16 annas,
what proportion of the preparedness in terms of annas is necessary, in your opinion,
on the part of your followers or the general public to bring about the attainment of
freedom?

Eight annas one pie.
15. Is the public so prepared today? If not how much time do you think, it
will take to be so prepared?

Not yet; unable to prophesy.
16. What percentage of people in the country knows the fact that there is a
unique personality like Mahatma Gandhi in India?

I have no idea.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

221

17. If it is taken for granted that one among a thousand may know it, how
many persons per hundred thousand may have, in your opinion, the knowledge of
Mahatmaji's ideas of freedom and his activities?

1/1000th of those that know.
18. It seems that there is complete darkness with respect to such knowledge;
if the darkness is to be dispelled, how long will it have to be done?

As long as is necessary.
19. Do you say that it is impossible to attain swaraj even if, in the absence of
unity between the Hindus and Muslims, people of both communities should feel the
miseries of political bondage to be unbearable and should struggle to be free from it,
and even if a feeling should arise in both the communities that life without freedom is
worse than death?

I do not, if both feel as you suggest.
20. Do you say that a painful consciousness of the unbearable political
condition has not the power to bring into being the union of the communities
belonging to two different cultures ?

It has the power.
21. The religious persecution of the Hindus by the Mohammedans was the
principal cause which contributed to the attainment of freedom in the days of Shivaji
and people belonging to different castes became united to free themselves from
religious persecutions. Readers of history do know the fact that the establishment of
maths by Ramdas proved very useful in this respect. Is it not the fact that the freedom
which the people want today is for freeing themselves from the political, industrial
and commercial oppression?

Yes; indeed.
22. Whether untouchability goes away or not, whether the Hindu- Mohammedan disunion disappears or not, if, in spite of the existence of these two things, we
could have two thousand persons maddened with the desire for freedom and endowed
with soul-force, will you say that these men will not be able to gain the freedom of
the country?

These two thousands will sweep away disunion and untouchability and bring swaraj.
23. If 1,400 civilians can hold such a vast country like India under
subjugation will you say that the said two thousand persons endowed with the said
qualities will not be able to take back India?

Vide answer 22.
24. In short, do you say that it is not possible to attain swaraj even if the
one emotion of feeling a strong disgust for bondage and regarding life without liberty
to be unbearable, pervades the whole of India?

Mere emotion will never bring swaraj.
222

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

25. If it is seen that the said emotion is quite indispensable and that it would
lead to the attainment of swaraj, can it be created by your present lectures on khaddar?

My lectures on khaddar are converting that emotion into
energy.
The Hindustan Times, 30-4-1927

209. LETTER TO G. K TILAK1
IN MOVING TRAIN ,

March 21,1927
DEAR FRIEND,

Your letter has been following me all this time. As you had
taken considerable pains over your questions, but as I must not take
them in Young India, I send you replies 2 herewith. You may publish
them if you like.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindustan Times, 30-4-1927

210. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Silence Day [March 22, 1927] 3
SISTERS,

Parting this time was particularly painful as I was anxious to talk
to you about things and to have your views on many more. But who
after all is free? We are in God’s hands and we dance as He makes us
to. If we acted according to our own desires we would come to grief.
And so I do not worry although my wish was not fulfilled. We shall
meet again when He wills. Till then we shall communicate by means
of letters.
This is what I would like you to do just now:
1. Acquire a methodical and sound knowledge of ginning,
carding and spinning--so good that you may be able to teach others.
1

A pleader of Barsi
Vide the preceding item.
3
From the reference to Mirabehn who left for Rewari Ashram on March 21;
vide the succeeding item
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

223

2. Look after the common kitchen and make it an ideal place.
For the present I do not want any one of you to give all your time to
that work, but since this duty is yours by birth and training, I entrust
to you the responsibility of seeing that the cooking is well done and
that the kitchen is clean.
These two tasks are just the right ones for you. Are they not ?
Mirabai will leave today for Rewari Ashram,1 where Jamnalalji’s
daughter is staying.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati G.N. 3642

211. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
ON THE TRAIN ,

AFTER BHARATPUR

March 22, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

The parting today was sad, because I saw that I pained you. And
yet it was inevitable. I want you to be a perfect woman. I want you to
shed all angularities. All unnecessary reserve must go. Ashram is the
centre of your home, but wherever you happen to be must be your
home. Without being a burden on people with whom we come in
contact, we must get the things we need from them. We must feel one
with all. And I have discovered that we never give without receiving
consciously or unconsciously. There is a reserve which I want us all to
have. But that reserve must be a fruit of self-denial, not sensitiveness.
Yours is due to sensitiveness. This must go. I thought I would draw
your attention. But I saw that I should have waited. However, the thing
is done.
Do throw off the nervousness. You must not cling to me as in
this body. The spirit without the body is ever with you. And that is
more than the feeble embodied imprisoned spirit with all the limitations that flesh is heir to. The spirit without the flesh is perfect, and
that is all we need. This can be felt only when we practise detachment.
This you must now try to achieve.
This is how I would grow if I were you. But you should grow
along your own lines. You will therefore reject all I have said in this
1

224

For further Hindustani studies
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that does not appeal to your heart or head. You must retain your
individuality at all cost. Resist me when you must. For I may judge
you wrongly in spite of all my love for you. I do not want you to
impute infallibility to me.
23-24 Bombay, Laburnum Road
24-26 Kolhapur
27 onwards Belgaum
With love,
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
You left money, etc. It has been sent to you.
From the original: C.W. 5211. Courtesy: Mirabehn.

212. SPEECH AT SANTA CRUZ, BOMBAY1
March 23, 1927
Replying, Gandhiji began to address the gathering in Gujarati when he was
requested to speak in Hindi as there was a large section of Madrasis and others, who
could not understand Gujarati. Gandhiji, however, took votes and according to the
majority began to speak in Gujarati but assured the minority that their claim would
not be neglected. He said:

The fear entertained by Mr. J. K. Mehta is well-founded and I
am really going to hit as hard as a man with non-violence as his creed
can do for the wide difference between the amount given at Santa
Cruz six years ago and the one 2 given today. It was only on account
of the pressing invitation of Mr. Mehta that I agreed to come here
instead of going to Rewari as was originally fixed. You perhaps know
that though I am not neglecting the cities I have been going to the
villages very often these days because India resides not in her handful
of towns but in villages. Even there it is not difficult to collect Rs.
3,000. You will perhaps be surprised to learn that the villages in
Maharashtra and Bihar contributed a lakh and a quarter each during
my last tour there. And khaddar too is spreading fast and wide in
villages. I shall quote figures which will prove, in spite of all the odd
1
In reply to a welcome address by Jaisukhlal K. Mehta, Chairman, Bombay
Suburban District Congress Committee
2
Rs. 3,000; against 52,000, six years earlier

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

225

rumours that khaddar is extinct, that khaddar is produced 20 times
more than it was being manufactured in 1920, i.e., in the beginning of
the movement. In 1926, khaddar worth at least Rs. 20 lakhs was
manufactured and at least 50,000 women scattered in 1,500 different
villages of the country were given work of spinning for which they
were paid over Rs. 9 lakhs. But this position is not at all satisfactory. It
does not satisfy me. I have found that khaddar is rarely seen in
Bombay and other cities. In Bombay in 1921, the case was quite
different. I can account for the present slackness on two grounds that
either those who were wearing khaddar before have changed their
opinion or that they were playing a false part in 1921.
Although this is not the occasion on which I can speak either on
non-co-operation or Hindu-Muslim unity, I should state clearlythat
my faith in those things is as great and as firm as it ever was. I should
say it is greater. If I want swaraj and swaraj of the type I have been
struggling for all along the last few years, I cannot help feeling that
Hindu-Muslim unity is absolutely necessary. But as one who can
know human nature, I have found that the whole atmosphere is
changed. But it is not so with khaddar. The result of the khaddar work
is not disappointing. I have found that people are not tired of it. And
for this we need not rely on newspapers which as a matter of fact are
read only in cities. I have found no newspapers in Hardwar and yet
Rs. 2 lakhs were easily collected there. That place is not like Bombay
which seems to me to be an offshoot of England.
The money that I have been collecting at present goes to the
All-India Deshbandhu Das Memorial Fund which is to be spent in
village organization. The fitting memorial to the late Deshbandhu
would be a thorough organization of villages and I dare say that
charkha is the only way to organize the villages of India. I can give
you an example of the Raniparaj community of the Surat District
where through the message of the charkha the community in about
104 villages has been thoroughly organized.1 The illiterate women of
that community have given up wearing heavy ornaments and all of
them—-men, women and children wore pure khaddar. It is for work
among such classes and villages that money is wanted. I am the selfappointed barrister of the millions of poor people—Daridran-arayanas—of India and in their name I appeal to you the richer classes to
1

226

Vide "Speech at Madhi, Mandvi Taluk", 15-3-1927
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

contribute the greatest amount for the great movement of khaddar.
The Bombay Chronicle, 24-3-1927

213. FROM HIS TREASURE CHEST
I cull the following from gems the friend whom I have already
introduced to the reader sends for my day of silence:
The tongue of man reveals so imperfectly the secret mysteries of God,
that words would have been to us rather a hindrance than a consolation.

BROTHER GILES
Settle yourselves in solitude and you will come upon God in yourselves.

TERESA
Thou needst not call Him to thee from a distance, thy opening and His
entering are but one moment. It is harder for Him to wait, than for thee.
MASTER EXKHART

Young India, 24-3-1927

214. FACE TO FACE WITH THE PAUPER
The following1 is a free translation made by Mahadev Desai of
an accurate account vividly told in the pages of Navajivan by a khadi
worker of pauperism in parts of Bardoli taluk which is supposed to be
one of the most fertile places of Gujarat The account is written in the
form of a story ‘the writer bids fair to become the peopls’s poet of a
very high order. Its artistic beauty adds to its intrinsic worth I
commend it specially to the attention of the sceptic.
Young India, 24-3-1927

215. KANGRI GURUKUL
Kangri Gurukul was the body in which the soul of Shraddhananji resided, no matter where its temporary earthly tabernacle
wandered from time to time, and Shraddhanandji lives so long as the
Gurukul lives The best memorial therefore that can be erected to the
memory of the deceased martyr is to perpetuate the Gurukul. No
doubt the really permanent memorial will have to come through the
1

Not reproduced here

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

227

character of the professors and the scholars of the Gurukul and through their determination to retain in it the predominance of ancient
teaching and conduct based on it. Shradhanandji used with ample
justification to plead that his Gurukul was a national institution in
the non-co-operation sense long before the birth of Non-co-operation. He believed that to belong to a Government educational institution was to subscribe to the predominance of Western influence
whether we willed or no. He did not object to assimilating what was
useful of the West on his own terms and in his own time. To be a
fitting memorial of the Swami the Gurukul must therefore keep its
complete independence of the Government. And it is a matter of no
small satisfaction that the Gurukul in spite of its independence of
Governrnent aid or influence continues to grow in numbers as I hope
too it does in character, in the spirit of its revered founder.
But if the memorial depends for its real existence ultimately on
the character of the scholars and the professors it has to depend
presently upon financial support from the public. Acharya Ramadeva
has issued an appeal for three lakhs of rupees. I understand that
nearly two lakhs are already subscribed. The scene I witnessed when
the appeal1 was made in that huge pandal on the Gurukul ground on
the 19th instant was a never-to-be forgotten sight.2 People—men and
women—vied with one another in pouring their rupees and notes into
the buckets with which voluntecrs moved about among the visitors.
There were hardly any coppers to be seen. I heartily commend this
appeal to the attention of the public. I have stated my differences with
the Arya Samaj and its doctrines. They abide. I have my differences
about the conduct of Gurukul. But I am not blind to the services of
the Arya Samaj and the necessity of Gurukuls. They have revivified
religion, if they have also limited its growth. Every reform has that
tendency in it. The wise sift the good from the bad and conserve what
is good. The Gurukuls has much in it to conserve and those who
would want it to be better than it is have but to prove their friendliness
before they seek to introduce changes for its betterment. I have
therefore no hesitation in identifying myself with the appeal for
funds. There should be no delay or difficulty in making up the
modest sum required.
Young India, 24-3-1927
1
2

228

Vide Appendix “Shraddhanand Memorial”, 3-3-1927.
Vide “Speech on Shraddhanand Memorial Fund, Gurukul Kangri”, 19-3-1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

216. PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION OF “SELF-RESTRAINT
v. SELF-INDULGENCE” 1
That the first edition was sold out practically within a week of its
publication is a matter of joy to me. The correspondence that the
series of articles collected in this volume has given rise to shows the
need for such a publication. May those who have not made self-indulgence a religion, but who are struggling to regain lost self-control,
which should under normal conditions be our natural state, find some
help from a perusal of these pages. For their guidance the following
instructions may prove useful:
1. Remember if you are married that your wife is your friend,
companion and co-worker, not an instrument of sexual enjoyment.
2. Self-control is the law of your being. Therefore the sexual
act can be performed only when both desire it and that too subject to
rules which in their lucidity both may have agreed upon.
3. If you are unmarried you owe it to yourself, to society and
to your future partner to keep yourself pure. If you cultivate this
sense of loyalty, you will find it as an infallible protection against
temptation.
4. Think always of that unseen Power which though we may
never see we all feel within watching and noting every impure thought
and you will find that Power ever helping you.
5. Laws governing a life of self-restraint must be necessary
different from a life of self-indulgence. Therefore you will regulate
your society, your reading, your haunts of recreation and your food.
You will seek the society of the good and the pure.
You will resolutely refrain from reading passion-breeding
novels and magazines and read the works that sustain humanity.
You will make one book your constant companion for references and guidance.
You will avoid theatres and cinemas. Recreation is where
you may not dissipate yourself but recreate yourself You will
therefore attend bhajan mandalis where the word and the tune
uplift the soul.
You will cat not to satisfy your palate but your
1

This was published under the title, “Self-control”.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

229

hunger. A self-indulgent man lives to eat; a self-restrained man
eats to live. Therefore you will abstain from all irritating condiments, alcohol which excites the nerves, and narcotics which
deaden the sense of right and wrong. You will regulate the
quantity and times of your meals.
6. When your passions threaten to get the better of you go
down on your knees and cry out to God for help. Ramanama is my
infallible Help. As extraneous aid take a hip-bath i.e., sit in a tubfull
of cold water with your legs out of it, and you will find your passions
have immediately cooled. Sit in it for a rew minutes unless you are
weak and there I danger of a chill.
7. Take brisk walking exercise in the open air early in the
morning and at night before going to bed.
8. “Early to bed and early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy
and wise,” is a sound proverb. 9 o’clock to bed and 4 o’clock to rise
is a good rule. Go to bed on an empty stomach. Therefore your last
meal must not be after 6 p.m.
9. Remember that man is a representative of God to serve all
that lives and thus to express God’s dignity and love. Let service be
your sole joy and you will need no other enjoyment in life.
Young India, 24-3-1927

217. TO A READER OF “YOUNG INDIA”
I do not propose to publish your letter in defence of the
purdah. I am of opinion that the purdah in India is recent institution
and was adopted during the period of Hindu decline. In the age when
proud Draupadi and spotless Sita lived there could be no purdah.
Gargi could not have held her discourses from behind the purdah.
Nor is the purdah universal in India. It is unknown in the Deccan,
Gujarat and the Punjab. It is unknown among the peasantry and one
does not hear of any untoward consequences of the comparative
freedom which women in these provinces and among peasantry enjoy.
Nor will it be just to say that the women or men in the other parts of
the world are less moral because of the absence of the purdah system.
“A reader of young India” seeks to defend everything that is ancient.
Whilst I hold that the ancients gave us a moral code which is not to be
230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

surpassed, I am unable to subscribe to the doctrine of their infallibility
in every detail. And who shall say what is really ancient? Are all the
hundered and eight Upanishads of equal sanctity? It seems to me that
we must test on the anvil of reason everything that is capable of being
tested by it and reject that which does not satisfy it even though it may
appear in an ancient garb.
Young India, 24-3-1927

218. ‘IN SEARCH OF KNOWLEDGE’
Thus writes Sjt. S. D. Nadkarni :
In October 1921, to a correspondent asking the question, “Is your
‘soul-force’ attainable by the masses?”, you replied : “They have it already in
abundance. Once upon a time an expediton of French scientists set out in
search of knowledge and in due course reached India. They tried hard to find it,
as they had expected, among the learned ones, but failed. Unexpectedly they
found it in a parish home” (Young India, 27-10-1927, p. 342). 1
I had then thought in my innocence that you were referring to some real
incident you had read of; and so being as curious as the French expedition
itself, I approached you for details. You kindly answered my query personally,
saying that you thought the article made it sufficiently clear that it was a
purely imaginary account.
Thereafter in 1925, at a meeting with the Christian missionaries in
Calcutta you said: “I am not able to say that here in this fair land ... 2 man is
vile. He is not vile. He is as much a seeker after truth as you and I are, possibly
more so. This reminds me of a French book translated for me by a French
friend. It is an account of an imaginary expedition in search of knowledge.
One party landed in India and found Truth and God personified in a little
pariah’s hut” (Young India, 6-8-1925, p. 274). 3
Now, if you are not going to deal with the topic in the further
reminiscences of your life, I should be obliged if you could tell us through
Young India (or communicate to me personally) the names of the book and its
author, and say who translated it for you, and when and where. Is the
translation published and available? I wish to ascertain whether the book is
one of the two referred to in Yule and Burnell’s Hobon-Jobson (s. v. pariah) as
1
2
3

Vide “The Secret of It?” 27-10-1921.
As in the source
Vide “Speech at Meeting of Missionaries”, 28-7-1925.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

231

“Bernardin de St. Pierre’s preposterous though once popular tale, La
Chaumiere Indienne (i.e., ‘The Indian Cottage’), whence too the misplaced
halo of sentiment which reached its acme in the drama of Casimir Delavigne,
and which still in some degree adheres to the name (‘pariah’)”. (There is no
question , of course, of my agreeing with the English crities’ judgment of the
French authors).

I wish I could give Mr. Nadkarni the full information he wants. I
forget the name of the story. The book was specially translated for me
by an Anglo-French friend when he was staying with me at Tolstoy
Farm near Johannesburg about 1910. I had intended to pubnlish it
but my treasure of books has suffered the same fate as my other
treasures. I lost many valuable books and manuscripts during transit
in 1915 and this precious translation was among them. But some of
my readers will probably give the information Mr. Nadkarni desires. I
have a recollection that the gifted author of the book makes his
otherwise admirable story end in a girl of the pariah home marrying a
Charistian, as if the home where his scientists found knowledge was
not complete without a love affair and without a marriage that must
tear the girl away from her surroundings and make her less useful for
the service of her neighbours.
Young India, 24-3-1927

219. INTERVIEW TO “THE BOMBAY CHRONICLE”
BOMBAY,

March 24, 1927
QUESTION: Comrade Saklatvala has asked you to be the leader of Trade Union
movement in India. What is your answer to that call?

ANSWER :

I do not consider that I am qualified for leadership.

But Mr. Saklatvala says that you are the best qualified man for the work.

It flatters my pride but it does not convince me.
How do you say that the Government is weakened by your Bardoli decision?1

Had I continued the campaign, Bardoli people would have been
done, and our cause would have suffered. There would have been
much more tension than there is today. The fact is that the people
were not prepared for non-violence and the campaign would have
ended in a widespread terrorism. The Government know that Non-co1

232

Vide “No and Yes”, 17-3-1927
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

operation is not dead. They dread nothing so much as non-cooperation. They know how to deal with a violent outbreak but they
don’t know how to deal with non-violence and non-co-operation. The
Bardoli decision was an orderly and deliberate withdrawal, not a
panicky rout. The weakening of Government prestige that had taken
place at the time of the so-called ultimatum, still continues. It is open
to us to undertake a forward movement at any time we choose. The
awe of the Government is gone for ever.
The general consensus of opinion is that your reply to Comrade Saklatvala
ought to have been a little more detailed. Do you propose giving him any more reply?

In my opinion I have given a sufficient reply. I could not treat
each and every subject in detail. If there is any obscurity about my
reply I should be prepared to remove it.
You have said in your reply that you have your own independent ways of
organizing labour. Can you explain that viewpoint a little further?

Yes, I should organize labour by efforts from within. It is not so
much discontent with capital that I want to inculcate as discontent with
themselves. I want real co-operation between labour and capital. I
shall convince the labourers that in many things they are to blame
themselves instead of blaming the capitalists. As in the political so in
the labour movement, I rely upon internal reform, i.e., self-purification. Such reform will command equitable treatment from employers.
Throughout my experience both in South Africa and India, I have
always laid the greatest stress on the principle that labourers must
evolve strength from within. Then capital will become a real servant of
labour. I seek to achieve co-operation between capital and labour, in
the same way as I seek to bring co-operation between India and
England .
Regarding the Muslim proposal for joint electorate, Mahatma Gandhi said that
the joint electorate was a happy sign and augured well. He was not willing to hazard
any detailed opinion before considering the question in all its aspects. He said the
proposed All-India Convention should finally settle the matter.

[ Q:] Do you intend visiting any foreign country in the near
future?
[ A:] I have no such intention at the present moment.
But what about China?

I cannot say anything definitely just yet, but I know I am not
visiting China this year.
Did the khaddar message impress the pilgrims and sadhus at Hardwar?
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

233

It is very difficult to say. In fact, Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviyaji had
been trying his best to enlist the sympathy of those pilgrims and
sadhus for khaddar propaganda. He is more in tough with them than I
am. He is staying at Hardwar for 10 days during the mela and he will
be doing all he can to interest the sadhus in the khaddar movement.
Would you arrange more conferences with them to secure their
services for khaddar and prohibition work and also for the removal of
untouchability?
Of course, the sadhus can do a lot in all those things but at
present I have no idea whether I shall arrange any special conferences
with them. Pandit Malaviyaji has taken the initiative in the matter and
he will exercise greater influence on them than I can.
What specific methods of propaganda would you suggest to
hasten prohibition in India? What do you think of renewing peaceful
picketing with proper safeguards?
If picketing with proper safeguards is possible I shall welcome it
at any moment but I do not know whether it can be renewed at present. Picketing requires an atmosphere of peacefulness but the question is whether that kind of atmosphere really exists in the country. I
am personally ready to start picketing the moment I acquire
confidence in a peaceful atmosphere, which I don’t possess at present.
The Bombay Chronicle, 25-3-1927

220. SPEECH AT SARVAJANIK JIVADAYA KHATA1 ,
GHATKOPAR
March 24, 1927
Accompanied by Sir Chunilal Metha, the Finance Member to the Government
of Bombay, and Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel of Ahmedabad, Gandhiji paid a visit to the
Sarvajanik Jivadaya Khata at Ghatkopar on Thursday morning. . . . After Gandhiji was
shown round the stables of the institution and the cattle, . . . the Secretary of the
institution . . . accorded a sincere welcome. . . .
[Replying,] . . . Gandhiji expressed his immense pleasure and congratulated
the Committee for the Jivadaya Khata. Since he undertook the cow-protection
work at Belgaum in 1925, he had longed to pay a visit to the institution, but he
had not been able to do so because of his preoccupations. His tour in 1925 had
given him many opportunities to study the subject of the protection of milch
1

An institution founded in 1923 to prevent milch cattle being slaughtered and
to supply pure milk to the citizens of Bombay

234

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cattle in India and he had come to the conclusion that slaughter of milch cattle could
not be effectively prevented unless those who wanted to do so took to hide industry.
The question of industry was very important in view of the fact that hides worth about
nine crores were exported from India every year. It was not a sin even for Hindus to
trade in hides and Gandhiji hoped to find a tannery in the Sarvajanik Jivadaya Khata
when he visited it next. Concluding, Gandhiji advised the Committee of the
institution to give up breeding buffaloes and concentrate all their resources on
breeding cows.
Mahatmaji said that if he were Governor of Bombay he would have those
stables removed to a distance of 20 miles and given not 10 but thousands of acres of
land with ample grass meadows. He argued the establishment of a leather factory
attached to the association stables in order to run an institution on economic lines.
The association should also link itself to agricultural institutions so that the manure
might be utilized most profitably.1

The Bombay Chronicle, 25-3-1927

221. INTERVIEW TO A.P.I. ON MAHARASHTRA TOUR
P OONA 2 ,

March 24, 1927
I never shared the fears of some of my friends that Maharashtra
would receive the message of charkha-spinning coldly. So far as
collections were concerned, they went beyond my expectations as my
estimates were only one lakh, while total collections came to Rs.
1,20,000 excluding khadi sales which were quite as good as in Bihar.
The Bombay Chronicle, 25-3-1927

222. SPEECH AT BOYS’ MEETING, KOLHAPUR3
March 25, 1927
The little boys of the school had all been waiting in the sun with the handsome purse they had collected and they had the lesson of fearlessness from Gandhiji’s
lips:

Fearlessness is the foundation of all education, the beginning
and not the end. If you do not build on that foundation, the edifice of
all your education will topple over.
And to send the lesson home to them he told them the story of Prahlada and
exhorted them to declare the truth courteously and bravely without regard for the
consequences as the twelve-year-old Prahlada did.

Young India, 31-3-1927
1
2
3

This paragraph is from The Hindustan Times, 26-3-1927
At Poona Railway Station on way to Kolhapur
From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

235

223. SPEECH TO CHRISTIANS, KOLHAPUR1
March 25, 1927
At Negala, Mahatmaji was given a cordial welcome by the Christian
community. The Principal of the Girls’ Christian High School in his welcome address
assured Mahatmaji that the Christian community was one with him in all his
activities. In his reply, Mahatmaji said:2

My experience tells me that the Kingdom of God is within us,
and that we can realize it not by saying “Lord, Lord,” but by doing
His will and His work. If therefore we wait for the Kingdom to come
as something coming from outside, we shall be sadly mistaken. I am
glad you are with me in my programme. I may assure you then that
whatever I do is done with the object of that realization. Untouchability, you say, you would like to see removed as much as I. Well,
then, I may tell you that you cannot remove untouchability without
whole-heartedly taking up khadi work, for that work includes removal
of untouchability, and goes beyond it. Do you know that there are
thousands of villages where people are starving and which are on the
brink of ruin? If we would listen to the voice of God, I assure you we
would hear Him say that we are taking His name in vain if we do not
think of the poor and help them. Mr. Sam Higginbottom, a Christian
missionary friend, came to see me the other day to discuss this very
thing. Fortunately he met me just in that area where the spinningwheel and khadi had done their work. I ask you to go and visit such
parts, and if you cannot do so, to take my word for it, that there is no
better subsidiary occupation for the poor than khadi. If you cannot
render the little help that they need, it is no use talking of service of
God and service of the poor. Please go to the exhibition3 and see
things for yourselves, and try to identify yourselves with the poor by
actually helping them.
Young India, 31-3-1927

1
2
3

236

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”.
This paragraph is from The Bombay Chronicle, 29-3-1927
Khadi Exhibition; Gandhiji had inaugurated it earlier during the day.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

224. SPEECH AT KOLHAPUR1
March 25, 1927
The Diwan saw him during the day, and he had a long talk with him. Gandhiji
asked him if there was anything like a ban on khadi in Kolhapur State. There may
have been something like it, he said, but there was nothing now.

Have I your permission then to say to the people at the public
meeting in your name that people may go to the palace and all State
offices and attend functions dressed in khadi?
The Diwan had no objection, and Gandhiji declared the thing at the public
meeting and thanked him for the assurance. He said:

Do not have any illusion about khadi. It is not that khadi invests
the wearer with any sort of saintliness. It is the duty of everyone who
has the good of the poor at heart to wear it. Even an adulterer and a
prostitute may wear it. This is how I would approach them. ‘As to our
conduct,’ I would say to them, ‘you are answerable to God. But whether you are able to mend your ways or no, you can certainly wear
khadi and do some service to the poor. He who wastes money on
liquor is a sinner. He who wastes money on tobacco is a smaller
sinner, if you will. The one who wastes money on foreign cloth is as
great a sinner as the second if not the first, and the one who uses
Indian mill cloth has neither virtue nor vice to his credit or debit. But
the khadi- wearer has distinctly something to his credit inasmuch as he
serves both the poor and his country. Khadi immediately takes him up
from a lower level and makes him the friend of the poor.’
Young India, 31-3-1927

225. LETTER TO ESTHER MENON
[Before March 26, 1927] 2
MY DEAR CHILD,

I have your pathetic letter. I was wondering why there was
nothing from you so long. Now I know. It distresses me to find you in
such a dilapidated condition. I am writing this in the midst of
distractions. I have not a moment to spare. I therefore send you my
1

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
From the reference to his South India tour it seems that this was written
before Gandhiji became ill.
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

237

love and prayerful blessings. I am in the South in April. I must make
a desperate effort to meet you during the tour.
When Maria returns I must see what can be done for spinning.
With love to you all,
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat. Courtesy: National Archives of India; also My Dear
Child, p, 87

226. DISCUSSION WITH DR. WANLESS1
[March 26, 1927] 2
That is an instance where the doctors fortunately succeeded in
prevailing upon Gandhiji. There have been instances in which they
have failed. For Gandhiji, who in many respects is an ideal patient, as
many doctors have certified, also at times becomes the despair of his
doctors. The doctor immediately after the collapse prescribed undisturbed bodily rest, including cessation from spinning.3
Well, then, take my blood-pressure, before spinning and after
spinning, and if you can convince me that after spinning it hasgone
up to an alarming extent, I shall accept your advice. On the contrary, I
assure you spinning is a positive relaxation, it soothes the nerves. And
then, doctor, you must know that mine is a code of life far different
from yours. For instance, you would prescribe all sorts of medicines.
Now I have laid down a course of life, which, in certain respects, I may
not change. So if you give me a medicine which is composed of five
ingredients I would take it, provided you agree to my forgoing my
meal which may under no circumstances exceed five articles a day. So
you must either convince me that the medicine is more essential for
my health than the diet, or must reconcile yourself to administering
no medicine. Then there is another thing. Spinning is a thing l cannot
live without. If I must eat and live I must spin. And what a glorious
death it would be if you came and found me spinning and collapsing
in the midst of it. You would abuse those about me to your heart’s
content, if you insisted on your discipline as a doctor, but if you are
1
2
3

238

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
From The Bombay Chronicle, 28-3-1927 and Young India, 31-3-1927
For the medical opinions, vide Appendix “Medical Opinions”, 29-3-1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

good you will say it has been a welcome death. You must know that I
would be conscience-stricken and make myself most miserable if I
continued to live on and was not able to spin. Yes, I may stop reading,
writing and even spinning, provided I stop feeding too. Will you
permit me that?
No, doctor, I may not implicitly obey you, unless you can claim
infallibility.
“If we could claim it,” rejoined the doctor with justice, “we should not be
administering drugs, but be oracles sitting in temples.”
No wonder Dr. Wanless frankly said that no treatment was necessary excepting
rest for an indefinite period.

Young India, 14-4-1927

227. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
[After March 26, 1927] 1
DEAR SATIS BABU,

Well, it is not much use inquiring about you now that I am
myself in the mire. I am trying to pull myself out. But if God wills
otherwise what is my trial worth? Anyway I do not expect to go
beyond 13th April, 1928. I have nothing new to say or give. I may
collect more, give a little more guidance and patch here and patch
there. But really the clock has struck for me. To reduce the message
to execution is left for you. You have therefore to live and work. If I
survive I shall not be of much use for active work evidently. Let us
see: “Thy will be done, not ours, oh Lord!” What is the use then even
of peeping into the future? Just for the moment I appear to be as fit as
a fiddle. And so I amuse myself by sending love messages to friends I
can think of and have no time to talk to.
My love to you and Hemaprabha Devi.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1635

1

It appears that this letter was written after Gandhiji fell ill.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

239

228. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
Sunday [On or before March 27] 1 1927
CHI. MANI,

I have been waiting for your letter. I know you have been
deliberately refraining from writing. But now there is no need for it.
How far have you progressed in Sanskrit? And would you now be
ranked first in carding and spinning?
No news from Karachi. How is your health?
I am improving every day. There is no cause for anxiety.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, pp. 54-5

229. NATIONAL WEEK AND GUJARAT
I hope that Gujaratis will heartily respond to the appeal made by
Shri Vallabhbhai Patel on behalf of the Gujarat Provincial Congress
Committee in connection with the National Week. One can say that
collecting a sum of Rs. 1 lakh is child’s play for Gujarat. This amount, moreover, is required for work among the suppressed classes,
which include Antyajas and the Raniparaj community. From now on,
we will describe Antyajas too as dalit. The term was first used by
Swami Shraddhanand. Swami Vivekananda chose an English word
having the same meaning. He described the untouchables not as
“depressed” 2 but as “suppressed” 3 and quite rightly. They became,
and remain, what they are because they were suppressed by the
so-called upper classes. The Hindi word for this is dalit. Among all
the suppressed classes, the untouchables are the most suppressed. The
Rani (Kali) paraj community is also suppressed, and so are other
communities, like Oghra, etc.. It is the object of the Provincial Committee to serve all these communities to the best of its resources. This
1

From the reference to Sanskrit, spinning, carding and khadi; vide “Letter to
Manibehn Patel”, 28-3-1927.
2
The source has these words in English.
3
ibid.

240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is constructive work which will win swaraj; it is a philanthropic activity
and is a part of dharma. I hope, therefore, that everyone will enthusiastically respond to this appeal and the sum of one lakh will be
collected in no time, and also that honest people will come forward
and enroll themselves immediately as volunteers for this work.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 27-3-1927

230. PROGRESS OF KHADI
I have not been able to publish Lakshmidas’s letters describing
his tour, for I have had no time at all to read and arrange them properly. A good number of useful letters from him have accumulated. I
have decided to spare time somehow and publish some of the
material. I give below1 , from among these letters, those describing the
activities of the Chandranagar Pravartak Sangh and the Khadi Pratishthan Kala Shala.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 27-3-1927

231. CONDITIONS OF COW-PROTECTION2
It has been a matter of sorrow for me to have taken up the
burden of cow-protection during the ending years of my life. But
there need be no sorrow when burdens come not of one’s seeking but
when they seek one irresistibly. And so has been for me the case with
cow-protection.
Recently at Ghatkopar, Bombay, I had the occasion to visit the
institution3 of the humanitarian society ably managed by its secretary
Sjt. Nagindas. It is now conducting an experiment in dairying with the
laudable object ultimately of replacing the illmanaged and diseasebreeding private dairies of Bombay which are situated in the heart of
the city and where there is no exercise ground for the cattle, and
where the best cattle are prematurely given to the butcher’s knife.
1

Not translated here
This was written on or before March 28, 1927; vide “Letter to Maganlal
Gandhi”, 28-3-1927.
3
Vide “Speech at Sarvajanik Jivadaya Khata, Ghatkopar”, 24-3-1927.
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

241

But though the institution is ably managed, it has some inherent
defects to which upon its invitation I had to draw the Society’s attention. Incidentally I ventured to lay down the conditions of cow-protection which are well worth repeating:
1. Every such institution should be situated out in the open
where it is possible to have plenty, i.e., thousands of acres, of open
ground capable of growing fodder and giving exercise to the cattle. If
I had the management of all the goshalas, I should sell the majority of
the present ones at handsome profits and buy suitable plots in the
vicinity except where the existing places may be needed for mere
receiving depots.
2. Every goshala should be turned into a model dairy and a
model tannery. Every single head of dead cattle should be retained
and scientifically treated and the hide, bones, entrails, etc., should be
used to the best advantage. I should regard the hide of dead cattle to
be sacred and usable as distinguished from the hide and other parts of
slaughtered cattle, which should be deemed to be unfit for human use
or at least for Hindu use.
3. Urine and dung in many goshalas are thrown away. This I
regard as criminal waste.
4. All goshalas should he managed under scientific
supervision and guidance.
5. Properly managed every goshala should be and can be
made self-supporting, donations being used for its extension. The idea
is never to make these institutions profit-making concerns, all profits
being utilized towards buying maimed and disabled cattle and buying
in the open market all cattle destined for the slaughterhouse.
6. This consummation is impossible if the goshalas take in
buffaloes, goats, etc. So far as I can see, much as I would like it to be
otherwise. not until the whole of India becomes vegetarian, can goats
and sheep be saved from the butcher’s knife. Buffaloes can be saved
if we will not insist upon buffalo’s milk and religiously avoid it in
preference to cow’s milk. In Bombay on the other hand, the practice
is to take bufffalo’s milk instead of cow’s milk. Physicians unanimously declare that cow’s milk is medically superior to buffalo’s
milk and it is the opinion of dairy experts that cow’s milk can by
judicious management be made much richer than it is at present
found to be. I hold that it is impossible to save both the buffalo and
the cow. The cow can be saved only if buffalo-breeding is given up.
242

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The buffalo cannot be used for agricultural purposes on a wide scale.
It is just possible to save the existing stock, if we will cease to breed it
any further. It is no part of religion to breed buffaloes or for that
matter cows. We breed for our own uses. It is cruelty to the cow as well
as to the buffalo to breed the latter. Humanitarians should know that
Hindu shepherds even at the present moment mercilessly kill young
male buffaloes as they cannot profitably feed them. To save the cow
and her progeny—and that only is a feasible proposition—the Hindus
will forgo profits from the trade concerning the cow and her products,
but never otherwise. Religion to be true must satisfy what may be
termed humanitarian economics, i.e., where the income and the
expenditure balance each other. The attainment of such economies is
just possible with the cow and the cow only with the assistance of
donations for some years from pious Hindus. It should be
remembered that this great humanitarian attempt is being made in the
face of a beef-eating world. Not till the whole world turns predominantly vegetarian is it possible to make any advance upon the limitations I have sought to describe. To succeed to that extent is to open
the way, for future generations, to further efforts. To overstep the
limitation is to consign the cow for ever to the slaughter-house in
addition to the buffalo and the other animals.
Hindus and the humanitarian societies in charge of goshalas and
pinjrapoles, if they are wisely religious, will bear the foregoing conditions of cow-protection in mind and proceed immediately to give
effect to them.
Young India, 31-3-1927

232. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA MUKERJEE
March 28, 1927
MY DEAR SATIS BABU,

I know you are thinking of me. To say “ d o n ’ t ” would be
cruel. But to say “pray” would be just. Ill or well, living or dying,
should not matter to you or to me. Anxiety would not add one
moment to my allotted time. Nothing is yet fixed as to what I am to
do next. I am allowing myself to be guided by the doctors as much as
is possible for me to do.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

243

“Take no thought for the morrow” is a beautiful saying
1
recorded of Jesus.
has a powerful appeal
for me at the present moment. The underlying thought is the same in
both the sayings.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a copy C.W. 9171. Courtesy: K. P. S. Malani

233. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
NIPANI ,

Silence Day [March 28, 1927] 2
CHI. MAGANLAL,

You must not be alarmed at my illness. You should remove the
inconveniences to Bhai Bomanji and do nothing more. He needs the
commode and other things upstairs.
Mrityunjaya promised to observe discipline, relying on which I
suggested that Vidyavati and Prabhavati may he accommodated within
the Ashram precincts. Do we not ourselves live there? I trust
Mrityunjaya’s word as much as I trust other persons’. He is a very
polite and truthful boy. He has all of Rajendra Babu’s qualities. But
you may, of course, accommodate him somewhere else if you want to.
Why is the Vijapur case hanging fire? We will not give any
interest. How can we? Does Deshpande Saheb decline to work?
Now you must write out the thing for Sir Gangaram.
I am writing to Chhotelal. Write what you can about cow-protection. Let us add no more buffaloes to our stock. Read my article3 in
Young India.
Purushottamdas has expressed an altogether different opinion
about the Ramachandra lift. Please consider his arguments with
patience. I hope you have arranged for the spindle and have written to
Apte. You must have sent over the essay on spinning.
It is good that you gave up your vow of taking salt-free food.
Sharadabehn says she would do four hours’ spinning and carding,
and whatever sewing there may be as also help in the kitchen as much
1

Bhagavad Gita, II. 38: “Pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat—
treating them alike.”
2
Inferred from the contents
3
Vide “Conditions of Cow-protection”, 28-3-1927.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

245

It is good that you gave up your vow of taking salt-free food.
Sharadabehn says she would do four hours’ spinning and carding,
and whatever sewing there may be as also help in the kitchen as much
as she can. Now let me know how much she has been able to carry
out.
If I can hold on till June I want to come over for the Parishad I
can do so even earlier.
Kaka must have himself read to you my letter to him. I have
letters in this connection from Kaka and the other teachers. Kaka
has withdrawn his attack on hearing of my indisposition. I wish
you would all take decisions on merits. You should attach no importance to my illness. You will not find it in my writing. Today it is just
an illness, tomorrow there may be death. Why think about it? Or let us
make our decisions after reckoning on the inevitability of death. So
that it is no special factor to be considered.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
My programme has not yet been settled.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9126. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

245

234. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
NIPANI ,

Silence Day [March 28, 1927]
DEAR SISTERS,

Do not worry if I tell you that I have been ill. Today it is only a
small illness. In a few years life itself will pass away. But what does it
matter? The Gita clearly teaches us and we too see daily ourselves that
those who are born die and those who die are born again. Everyone
repays his debt more or less and passes away.
I don’t say this lightly, but quite seriously. If it were not for
human passion there will be no disease. A person who has no passion
has also to die. But he drops gently down like a ripe fruit. I hope and
pray that I should drop like that. I ever have this hope and wish. But
who knows? Passions I still have and they play their part. The state of
complete freedom from passion can be realized only through personal experience.
Devote yourselves entirely to your duties. Youth is given to us to
conquer passions. We should not allow it to pass away fruitless.
Safeguard your purity. Do not give up the spinning-wheel. As far as
possible do not leave the Ashram either.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3643

235. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
NIPANI ,

Silence Day, March 28, 1927
CHI MANI,

Don’t waste a thought on my illness. We take no note of the
years passing by. Now, like advancing age, is not disease too written
into men’s destiny, prone as they are to passion? Some pass away in
the natural course; but go all of us must. Where then is the sense in
lamenting over it?
246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

There is yet no telegram about you; I expect one any time. Be
prepared. What is your progress in Sanskrit? I hope your carding and
spinning can now be regarded as all right, can they not?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Though this is written on the same day as the letter1 to Ashram
Women, it will reach you later because it is past the time of clearance.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Munibehn Patelne, p 54

236. LETTER TO RADHA
March 28, 1927
CHI. RADHA,

Did you forget you were forbidden to fall ill? Do not tell me
that those who live in glass-houses should not throw stones at others.
Well, I had my own illusions and I over-worked myself, for which God
has laid me low. But what had you been kicking against? Now forget
it, we are faced with the fact of your illness. Well, then, learn to be
cheerful in spite of it.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

237. LETTER TO PYARELAL NAYYAR
March 28, 1927
I hope you are not ruffled to hear that I have had an attack. An
attack may prove fatal. The present one should he regarded as a clear
notice: If not today, then some other day—I have stipulated the period
till the 13th of April, 1928. But then one who has escaped a cata1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

247

strophe may live for a hundred years. If we live we will spin and if we
cannot spin we will refuse to live. Isn’t that all right?
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

238. LETTER TO JAMNALAL
March 28, 1927
[CHI.] JAMNALALJI,

You ought not to have been upset. The light is bound to go out
one day; now it has only dimmed. It is all the same to us whether it
dims or dies away. That which gives light must grow faint and go out.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

239. LETTER TO D. B. KALELKAR
March 28, 1927
CHI. KAKA,

You seem to be working the wrong way. I may put it thus: the
relation continues to be like that between master and maid. You did
not think of your earlier resolves; did not consider the earlier letter
nor did you wait for Maganlal to come. I have letters from all the
teachers. Much of what I have said to you applies to them as well. I
shall accept whatever you decide after consulting Maganlal. Don’t let
my illness come in the way. Make no tentative decision. There should
be no violence if you reach a decision on merits. Regard the Ashram
and the school as belonging to you all and do what you please without
taking my presence into account.
Don’t worry on my account. You can all be regarded as wise, so
I do not have to cheer you up. Now what is there to follow except
death? Let that too come by the 13th of April, 1928. This interval is
not too short for the attainment of swaraj in my lifetime. I am growing
more and more convinced that only the reign of the spinning-wheel
will bring swaraj; dedicate your lives to establishing it, if you all have
the faith I have.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

248

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

240. LETTER TO VELANBEHN
March 28, 1927
Here is one sick person asking another why the latter has fallen
ill. Now never mind if you have fallen ill. I hope you are cheerful as
ever; or are you not? In our ignorance we might say we cannot
prevent or control diseases. But can it not be said that being cheerful
in spite of ill health rests entirely with us? So never lose spirit, though
ill, and always remember Rama.
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

241. LETTER TO ASHRAM CHILDREN
March 28, 1927
BOYS AND GIRLS,

You are all students of the Gita, and this study should always
weigh with you. If therefore you are alarmed at the news of my illness
you should look to the Gita for assuagement. I am stuck after I
finished translating the second chapter. I am therefore dwelling with
delight on that chapter. You too should do the same—the body
cannot escape due chastisement. What is there to lament over life and
death? Those who die are to be born again and those who live are
destined to die. Why then be glad about life and lament over death?
Yes, there is one thing to remember. Having known this we should
discover our duty and then stick to it till the end. You for your part
have found out your goal in life, by reasoning perhaps or through
faith. Now beware of slipping. You will then continue to play as usual
without being affected by news of my collapse, not to speak of just
being laid up. If anyone talks of my total collapse you should prove it
to be incon-sequential by carrying on your task. May I expect this
from you?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

249

242. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
NIPANI ,

Silence Day [March 28, 1927]
CHI. MANILAL AND CHI. SUSHILA,

I have got letters from you both. I must say I was pained. The
slightest deviation from truth pierces me like a dart. I can forgive
Sushila’s slip considering her a child with no self-mastery, but there
was no excuse for you to have slipped. Now what is done is done—
-make no more promise to me; it is enough if you keep whatever you
have already made.
Don’t worry on account of my illness. There is certainly no
need for you to be here. You can serve me best by always being
faithful in your own duties. Fleeting are the bonds of flesh; they will
not endure. Why lament over this, why brood over it?
With a wish that both of you should be noble and illustrious,
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G.N. 4714. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

243. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
Silence Day [March 28, 1927] 1
Do not be scared by the news of my illness. Being scared is
forbidden for all. You must go on doing your work as if nothing had
happened to me.
I visited Chi. Mama 2 . She is terribly worn in body. She can
recover only if God so wills. It will be good if on completion of one
year, you visit your relatives and do some heartsearching. Chi. Mama
will feel happy. Go and see her and give her what advice you think
proper. Also hear what Kishorelalbhai may have to say.
1

From the reference to Gandhiji’s illness and the addressee’s daughter’s critical
condition this letter appears to have been written at the end of March, 1927. The last
Monday in the month was March 28.
2
Mama D. Saraiya, addressee’s daughter, who died soon after; vide “Letter to
Gangabehn Vaidya”, 10-4-1927.

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

CHI. GANGABEHN,

Do not be scared by the news of my illness. Being scared is forbidden
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 11382; also C.W. 8826

244. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
NIPANI ,

Silence Day [March 28, 1927] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. Do not be worried in the least by anything
you may hear about me 2 . I am watching what happens. I shall not
write more.
You must have received the bangles.
For the present, Devdas has gone to Amaravati with Janakibehn3 .
I have told him to go to you whenever he desires.
I hope your health is improving.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

The addressee received the letter on March 30, 1927. The Monday prior to
this was March 28, when Gandhiji was at Nipani.
2
Gandhiji had developed high blood-pressure and had been advised complete
rest.
3
Janakidevi Bajaj
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

251

245. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
NIPANI ,

Silence Day [March 28, 1927] 1
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

Do not get frightened. Today the cart has fallen into a ditch,
tomorrow it will break. Sooner or later that will happen. Why need we
fear it? Remain engrossed in your work. It will be enough if we
ceaselessly strive to reach what we believe to be our ideal and do not
give it up even if we break in the effort. I am being looked after quite
well. You need not therefore worry on that account. It is not yet
decided where I should stay and what regimen I should follow. It will
be in a day or two. If Shankerlal arrives there he will read this, otherwise send the letter wherever he is. Worrying will not help in the least.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G.N. 11571

246. LETTER TO E. STANLEY JONES
NIPANI ,

March 30, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

My answer to your letter is ‘yes’. It means the discovery of
God’s laws. God has laid me low for the moment.2 But He is infinitely
merciful.
My apologies to Mrs. Jones. I have not forgotten her letter.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat : C. W. 11343. Courtesy : Mrs. Eunice Jones Mathews

1
2

Inferred from the reference to Gandhiji’s ill health and his stay at Nipani.
Gandhiji took ill on March 24 and was advised rest by doctors in a hill

station.

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

247. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
[End of March 1927] 1
CHI. MANILAL AND SUSHILA,

I got the letter you wrote before you left. I hope you have
arrived safe.
I had sent a radio set for you, but before it could reach you
your steamer had left the wharf. I had it sent within the time fixed by
you.
One who has failed to keep one’s word should become more
resolute. You could not keep your promise, so now you have resolved
not to make any. Remember this is not the way to rise; it only leads to
one’s fall. May God help you . . .2
From the Gujarati original: G.N. 4715. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

248. LETTER TO CHAND TYAGI3
[After March 31, 1927]
It does not matter if you omit to give a stamp[ed receipt] when
the party agrees. There should be no rudeness, that is all.
From the Hindi original: C.W. 4277. Courtesy: Chand Tyagi

249. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
[April 1, 1927] 4
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter and also wire5 . You must not be perturbed. The crash
was bound to come some day. You must forget me in the body. You
can’t have it for ever. You must do the work in front of you. I must
1

The addressees were to sail for South Africa immediately after their marriage.
The rest of the letter is not available.
3
In reply to his letter of March 31
4
From the postmark
5
In reply to Mahadev Desai’s telegram dated March 27, 1927 from Nipani,
which read: “Bapu has narrowly escaped attack of apoplexy. High blood-pressure still
continues. Doctors ascribe it to overwork, nervous exhaustion and advise complete
rest, cancellation all programmes, hot months at any rate. Leaving for Belgaum
twenty-eighth.”
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

253

not write more for fear of offending the doctor and those around me.
I am taking as much rest as I think I need. But I cannot pamper the
body overmuch. You must promise not to worry. Merge yourself in
your work.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
Movement uncertain yet.
S HRIMATI MIRABEHN
BHAGWADBHAKTI ASHRAM
R AMPURA
R EWARI
From the original: C.W. 5213. Courtesy: Mirabehn

250. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
AMBOLI,

Friday, April 1, 1927
HIGH PRIEST OF THE LOWLY,

My health has tied me down to the bed; yesterday therefore I
could go through your [draft] speech from one end to the other. A
person like me could learn a little from it but it is my humble opinion
that as a presidential address it will not do. I do not write this in
exercise of any right of “veto” that you have conferred on me. I am
only arguing with you as a friend.
The speech gives no evidence of a sense of proportion. We seem
to have lost it. Another reason is that it violates the implicit understanding with the Rana Saheb. A third reason is that the speech does
not suit the kind of audience we are going to muster.
I say there is no sense of proportion because this speech does
not take into account the past convention. There is a breach of our
implicit understanding with the Rana Saheb that there should be no
personal criticism, etc. And the speech will be neither appreciated nor
read by the sections whom we are at the moment trying to rouse. If
you follow Gulliver’s Travels and conceive an imaginary country in
which to apply your correctives, you could say all that you have said;
or if you emulate Aesop you could have a bird of your choice
254

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

perched on every tree in Saurashtra to expound your doctrines
through their chatter. And then you could have instructed us while
you amused us. Or like Vyasa you may create sub-human and superhuman characters, reject the past, compile a history of mankind and
then give us a miniature Mahabharata of Saurashtra.
We needs must train a new class of audience for the speech that
you have drafted or that has been drafted for you. Our first task
therefore will be to annul the constitution adopted at Bhavnagar. I
may perhaps agree to this. And then we should call a conference of
such select people as would be competent to appreciate and also act
upon the thoughts contained in your speech. We should place before
them your suggestions and have them implemented.
I would therefore make the following suggestions: You should
call a small committee and place your ideas before them. You may
then lay the foundation of your speech as was the practice followed
by the Congress in the past. Speeches by Wedderburn, Webb,
Bradlaugh and others used to be placed before Pherozeshah, Gokhale
and others for approval. In this way a tradition was maintained. This
state of affairs, I know, came down to the times of Sinha. Your speech
belongs to that tradition. I do not suggest that it is of no use; we want
a new society to make use of it. You cannot address such speeches to
peasants.
Whatever happens to me the Conference must be held in June. I
suggest that at the same time we should decide upon the constitution
of the Conference and first put our own house in order. And then start
immediately a new era by convening the newly constituted Conference. But I cannot explain all this in a letter. I think there is no
sense in discussing individual points when I am recommending a
radical revision of your draft.
Though of course I write this, at the moment I am so weak I
cannot invite any one of you to come here soon. You should therefore confer with Devchandbhai, Fulchand and Amritlal and do
whatever you have to. I would also invite Patwari, Pattani Saheb and
Shukla Saheb to this meeting. I would acquaint myself with everyone’s opinion and do what appears good for us. But then that is how I
think. If you go ahead you should also obtain Vallabhbhai’s advice.
Whatever you do let it be based on solid foundations.
Wishing success in all your noble efforts,
BAPU
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

255

[PS.]
You can ask me anything when you write to me; whether it does
any good can be judged by you or God.
Friday—Belgaum1
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

251. DISCUSSION WITH DR. JIVARAJ MEHTA 2
April 3, 19273
GANDHIJI: How long may I accept the hospitality of a Chief4 who
has been kindness itself ? And apart from the climate, I can be as
restful at Sabarmati as at any other place. It is not the heat that matters,
though I am confident of dodging even that heat by various devices.
And if we are to identify ourselves with the poor, surely we should
understand that a vast mass of our people live and work and toil in
excessive heat of the sun, and never think of going for a change when
an illness overtakes them.
The argument is unanswerable though the doctor who concerns himself mainly
with physiological considerations may brush it aside. But Gandhiji has had always
the good fortune of having as his friends doctors who, at least so far as he is
concerned, are prepared to consult not merely the needs of his body, but the needs of
his soul, and try to suit their advice as regards keeping of the body to his mental and
spiritual predilections.
GANDHIJI:

If then I am merely to vegetate, I must be content to
recuperate in my own place.
DR . MEHTA :

But you will not vegetate. Your rest is work itself, for it will set

you up and make the body stand another spell of strain.

But that rest I can have at Sabarmati.
Yes, you may have it, and yet the heat might affect the blood-pressure, and
retard recovery.
1

As in the source. The letter was apparently written in Belgium but Amboli
address was given at the top for the addressee’s benefit.
2
From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”; as a result of this discussion
Gandhiji agreed to go to Nandi Hills.
3
From a report in The Bombay Chronicle, 2-4-1927 and The Hindu, 6-4-1927
4
Chief of Savantwadi at whose bungalow Gandhiji was staying in Amboli

256

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

If you can find me some sort of work at the hill-station you
propose, or if there is near prospect of my taking up the thread of my
interrupted programme, I might reconcile myself to Bangalore or
some such place.
Work is there enough for you and always. I am not going to cut you off from
your normal activity. The strain you were putting yourself to was abnormal. As soon
as you begin to feel better people may see you, offer the purses they may have
collected, workers may present you reports of work, and receive suggestions and
advice from you. All I want you to do is to continue to direct, without taking any
actual share in the work yourself. You do as much light reading as possible, and write
your autobiography but not attend to piles of correspondence.

I am glad. But what is light reading? Reading that does not tax
me, isn’t it?
Young India, 14-4-1927

252. DISCUSSION ON NATIONAL WEEK AT AMBOLI1
[April 4, 1927]
2

Two days before the National Week Gandhiji asked how we intended to spend
the week at Amboli. Twelve hours’ continuous plying of the charkha, said I. That was
far from satisfying him. He said:

Twelve hours’ is all right, I shall also contribute my hour. But
you must go to Savantwadi and hawk khadi there during the week,
you must try to go to the untouchables’ quarters, inquire about their
welfare, see if they have schools, wells, etc. Even when Devdas and you
go to Savantwadi, I shall see that the wheel is kept turning.
Young India, 21-4-1927

253. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 4, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

Though you absolve me from having to write to you I cannot
deny myself the joy of writing to you every Monday. Writing love
letters is a recreation, not a task one would seek an excuse to shirk. I
am better though still weak.
1
2

From Mahadev Desai’s “Weekly Letter”
April 6 to 13

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

257

Dr. Mehta came all the way from Bombay to examine the body.
He is emphatically of opinion that all touring should be given up for
some months to come. He does not forbid reading in the bed or even
occasional letters to friends. If I take full rest he thinks that I would
regain most of the lost strength but never be strong enough to
undertake the exacting tours such as the one that came to an abrupt
end on the 25th ultimo. We shall see. If the tour is finally cancelled, I
must take my rest at the Ashram. I shall come to a decision today or
tomorrow. The probability is that it will be cancelled. Even so I shall
not move out before Tuesday next week.
But why are you having these attacks?1 Is it mere spiritual agony
or has the climate also anything to do with it? If you need a bracing
climate you must move out. How do you find the climate there?
It was quite right not to have gone to Bharatpur. If Shanta is
there, please give the enclosed to her.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5214. Courtesy: Mirabehn

254. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Silence Day, Chaitra Sud 3 [April 4, 1927] 2
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I am eager to know Sir Gangaram’s experience of farming.
I like your co-operation with the teachers, but only if it is
sincere and spontaneous. If it has come about owing to my illness
there will again be some snags. I yearn for such involuntary co-ordination as there is between one eye and the other. This is possible only
if we look upon all people as our own. Experience tells us that a team
of good men is better than a mere conglomeration of good results.
Disinterested action consists in the faith that everything will ultimately
lead to good results.
Did you do anything about penetrating the villages?
Take immediate action with regard to the water problem.
1
2

258

“The struggle in the heart was going on.” (Mirabehn)
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

How is the dairy working? Examine coolly Bhai Purushottam’s
arguments against the Ramachandra lift, before you dispose of them.
I shall be there soon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7763. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

255. LETTER TO JANAKIDEVI BAJAJ
AMBOLI, N EAR S AVANTWADI, K ONKAN,

Monday [April 4, 1927] 1
CHI. JANAKIBEHN,

Devdas had to leave you but I did not like it. I could see,
however, he could not help it. Maybe now he can return in a few days.
How are you now? Have you been regaining strength? Any
complaints ?
Is Chi. Kamala studying anything? Do not write to me yourself
but get Kamala to write to me a long letter.
None should worry about my health. At any rate now I am
keeping well. The old are on the verge of death, are not they?
Therefore under this or that pretext they must leave their old abodes
and inhabit new ones if they please. But if they would rather leave the
cage altogether they might soar in the air and enjoy freedom. But
then our case is similar to that of a prisoner who, owing to his long
detention, comes to be attached to his cell. We do not wish to give up
the body because we identify ourselves with it. I do not know what I
wish. As far as my reason goes I do not find it worth caring for. But
poor reason is helpless before delusion. The truth will be known when
the end comes.
Who is at present attending on you?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2880

1

From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

259

256. LETTER TO RAMDAS
April 4, 1927
Not for one moment should we forget the fact that we are poor.
It appears you have come to realize it.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

257. LETTER TO ASHRAM CHILDREN
April 4, 1927
CHILDREN,

Look here, make the Satyagraha Week 1 a success. Those who
cannot be interested in the Gita, those who have no ear for the music
of the spinning-wheel, do not at all understand life. Since we ourselves
are the fountains of delight, we should know how to derive it from
tunes which would bring us felicity. Therein lies real art. It is servile to
seek delight from without; true happiness lies in evoking delight from
within. If we cannot impart this knowledge to you now, all of us would
be adjudged not as teachers but as mere barbers. How can anyone call
you unworthy disciples?
I am fine.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

258. LETTER TO HEMAPRABHA DEVI DAS GUPTA
Silence Day [April 4, 1927] 2
DEAR SISTER,

No letter from you these many days; please write to me if you
have the strength. Such letters are no nuisance to me, they do me
good.
1
2

260

April 6 to 13
Gangadharrao had left for Mysore State before the 10th.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am all right. Ba, Mahadev, Devdas, Krishnadas and others are
with me. Rajaji and Gangadharrao too are here. It’s a quiet place.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1662

259. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
April 6, 1927
MY DEAR FRIEND,

This is from a sick-bed. I had hoped to see you in Bangalore
and press my suit. But it cannot be for some time yet. I have no reply
to my wire which I hope you did get. You will break the heart of
Indians in South Africa if you do not go.1 Mrs. Sastri should certainly
go with you.2 I do not know that it is an advantage to have both host
and hostess as brilliant talkers in English. You will be her interpreter
or you can take for her one of the gifted Tamil graduate girls of
whom you have so many. She will be her companion, teacher and
interpreter. What did Queen Victoria do when she was hostess to the
Shah of Persia who knew no English? And you can make it clear to
Lord Irwin that you would want to be here when the Royal
Commission comes. Lastly, there will be no fear of pinpricks whilst
Lord Irwin is Viceroy. He knows you so well. I urge you to reconsider
your decision and go even if it is for a year. You alone can inaugurate
the working of the compact, you alone can set the tone.
May God guide you.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Letters of Srinivasa Sastri, p. 164

1
2

As the first Agent of the Government of India
Mrs. Sastri did not accompany Mr. Sastri.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

261

260. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVALEKAR
AMBOLI, S AVANTWADI S TATE ,

April 6, 1927
BHAI SATAVALEKAR,

I am confined to a sick-bed. I could therefore easily get the time
to read your book on brahmacharya. I liked the book. For years I
have regarded you as a devotee of truth; hence this letter.
1. Do you regard the asanas [postures] as an infallible means
to brahmacharya?
2. If this is true does it not mean that a man who practises
asanas retains his vital fluid under all circumstances? Does it also
mean that such an aspirant becomes free from passion ? You are
perhaps aware of a certain process in Western medicine by which a
man can retain the fluid but is not freed from passion. This method is
followed by those who propose to enjoy sex without losing the fluid.
Do our systems mean this thing when they speak of becoming
urdhvareta? If it were so, the state of the urdhvareta would be
detrimental to pure brahmacharya. And then there would be a lurking
danger of harm in retaining semen with the help of the asanas. A
friend from Delhi writes to me saying that with the help of asanas he
has attained brahmacharya to such an extent that he can take any
kind or quantity of food and enjoy almost all pleasures without losing
his vital fluid. I did not continue further correspondence with him as I
was not impressed by his letter. Another friend writes to say that with
the help of pranayama1 , asanas and the like the final stage of
brahmacharya can be attained within six months. Him I know. He is a
simple straightforward man with no guile. And he goes on insisting
that I should practise asanas and the like. I have not yet acted on his
advice but your book has moved me. I came in contact with many
students and I cannot satisfy them all by my own experiments. Besides
restrictions of diet, etc., all my experiments are purely psychological. I
write this as it appears to me that a section of the student community
has fallen so low that asanas and the like can [alone] be of any help
to them.
1

262

Breath-control
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

3. Do you have personal experience of what you write about
brahmacharya in plants,1 etc.? You would be aware that Western
scholars of natural sciences nowadays write against brahmacharya. I
have refuted their arguments with the help of my little experience and
by the exercise of whatever talents I have. But it is essential that these
Western treatises are examined by our own experts since they greatly
influence our young men.
4. I have also gone through your book Suryabhedan
Vyayam. Do you think there is no harm if a man like me takes that
exercise merely with the aid of the book?
5. Am I right if I find a slight difference between your
method and the rules laid down in the commentaries on the Rigveda
and the other texts for interpreting the hymns?
I shall be in Amboli till the 18th of this month.
Yours,

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: S.N. 12771

261. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
AMBOLI [via] BELGAUM ,

Satyagraha Day [April 6, 1927]
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,

I have written to you but have had no reply.
Please see that my capacity to raise funds has gone down
considerably owing to my failing health. I had made some provision
but it is not available at the moment.
Had I not had the attack I could have somehow coped with the
situation.
I had asked Mahadev to write to Devchandbhai about the speech
[drafted] by Bhai Amritlal Bapa. It has to be examined carefully. I
think the [Kathiawar] Political Conference and the charkha movement
should be kept apart. Let it be like this. There are three heads of
expenditure which can be arranged as follows:
1

Non-germination or passivity in germination in plants and limiting
copulation to periods of ‘heat’ in animals
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

263

1. Entrusting khadi activity to the Charkha Sangh as it will
survive me and carry on in whatever manner it can.
2. The schools and the Antyaja work be handed over to the
Vidyapith which too will survive me.
And an independent activity for Kathiawar.
We have not yet been able to make separate arrangements to run
these three programmes on their own. I can therefore make only these
suggestions. Khadi activities can also be entrusted to the Gujarat
Khadi Mandal. This can be finalized after we have a discussion with
Bhai Lakshmidas. Besides these three, no other programme is, at
present, likely to engage my attention. I see however that there ought
to be an independent institution for those pursuing other interests and
the Political Conference may serve this purpose. But then these are the
sick thoughts of a sick man.
You should contact Devchandbhai and others and find out a
way after cool deliberation. If you want to see me you should all
come at your own expense; that too a fortnight hence. I think at the
moment I have not the strength to discuss the matter at length.
God willing, I hope to keep the appointed date in the month of
June. But I can say nothing definite just now.
What you do, do unhesitatingly and dispassionately like voluntary trustees.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Most probably on the 19th I shall be taken from Belgaum to
Nandi Hills, near Bangalore, where we are to reach on the 20th.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 2856. Courtesy: Sharadabehn Shah

264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

262. LETTER TO VALJI G. DESAI
AMBOLI,

Chaitra Sud 5 [April 6, 1927]
BHAISHRI VALJI,

I have gone through the letter from murabbi1 Revashankarbhai;
what he says is right. You have got to know the rules to be observed at
meetings and those governing the institution. A copy of the
resolutions passed must immediately be sent to the Treasurer. Are
there your initials. . . 2 to the other members also . . . 3 the resolution
itself. Now you should send to Revashankarbhai . . . 4 copies of the
resolutions adopted at Wardha as also of those passed at the general
meeting.
It would also be right to send copies to members of the
Committee.
Write to the newly-elected members requesting them to send in
their acceptance.
How is Champa pulling on? A copy of the resolutions, etc.,
should have appeared in Navajivan. I forgot to give you the hint
because I left in a hurry. But then would you not take up the burden
of all this worry?
Hari-ichchha and others may live rent-free. Consult Maganlal
about accommodating them and then ask them to come over. If you
find they cannot be accommodated with anyone we will have to wait
for a while.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS

[PS.]
I have already written to Revashankarbhai to pass on the money.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7391. Courtesy: Valji G. Desai

1
2
3
4

Respected
Illegible in the source
ibid.
ibid.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

265

263. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
Chaitra Sud 5 [April 6, 1927] 1
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I have been getting your letters. There is absolutely no breach
of vow in your going to Chi. Mama. A visit on such an occasion was
naturally expected. Now you should return to your place in the
Ashram only after Chi. Mama is completely at rest. You should make
Chi. Mama learn this formula: It is none of our concern whether the
body falls or lasts, the soul cannot depart. Why should we bother
about the body? We should be satisfied with thought of the immortal
self.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I am fine.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8825. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

264. WHAT SHALL I DO?
The Satyagraha Week has come again. By the time this appears
in print, one day of the precious week will have gone. I would urge
the reader not to fritter away the week by asking the question, ‘What
shall we do?’, but to make the best possible use of it by asking, ‘What
shall I do?’ There was a time when we could usefully ask and did ask
the other question. And if each one will do his or her duty to the
fullest measure possible, we shall soon be able to ask, ‘What shall we
do next?’
The foundation of satyagraha as of nation-building is undoubtedly self-purification, self-dedication, selflessness. Let each one ask
oneself: ‘How then can I purify myself in terms of the nation?’
Rectitude of private character is surely the beginning of the structure.
If my private character is foul, I am like “ a sounding brass and
tinkling cymbal”. If then I am not right inside, I must this very instant
purge myself and be a fit vessel for dedication. Government cannot
1

The addressee’s daughter Mama was ill and passed away in 1927. Vide “Letter
to Damodar Lakshmidas” and “Letter to Gangabehn Vaidya”, 10-4-1927.

266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

help me or interfere with me here. I must be the sole author of my
making or unmaking.
Having ensured a pure personal character I must ask the next
question, what shall I do as a national servant? If a Hindu, I hate the
Mussalman or a person of another faith, I must at once make an
honourable peace with him. If I regard any single person as an
untouchable, I must blot the sin from my heart and hug the one whom
I have hitherto in my arrogance or ignorance regarded as untouchable
and as a token I must render him some personal service, be it only
going to his quarters and calling the children together and playing
with them. In these things again, I need no support from the
Government and yet in doing these things whole-heartedly I have
surely brought swaraj nearer for the effort and rendered myself fitter
for joint service whenever the occasion arises.
Is there a drink shop near me? I must try to wean an erring
brother from going to the house of his own destruction. We began this
work gloriously in 1921. Our violence brought it to an inglorious
end. Individual effort in this matter is still possible even though the
atmosphere for wholesale mass action is for the moment wanting.
And last but not least, I must do my share of spinning, if I have
but faith in its capacity to serve the poorest, so graphically described
in Markham’s words reproduced1 in last week’s Young India. I must
hawk Khadi. If I have the power, I must induce my neighbour to spin
for the sake of Daridranarayana and if he or she wears foreign cloth,
I must induce him or her to discard it.
Shri Vallabhbhai has approached, during this National Week, the
Gujaratis living in Kathiawar, Gujarat and in foreign countries for
donations for the benefit of the suppressed classes in Gujarat. His
appeal is for one lakh of rupees to support the activities being carried
on at present for the uplift of the depressed classes in Gujarat. I would
like to enrol myself as Vallabhbhai’s volunteer and move from house
to house, begging bowl in hand, to plead with my dear friends to fill it,
and also persuade them to enrol themselves as volunteers for the
collection, and persuade also school-going girls and young women to
do likewise, with the permission of their parents, and help in swelling
the contents of Vallabhbhai’s purse.2
1
2

Under the title, “Whom Khadi Stands for”; vide Appendix ibid, 31-3-1927.
This paragraph is taken from Navajivan, 10-4-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

267

This is by no means an exhaustive list. I have simply given an
indication of the enormous possibilities of individual effort. Let each
one find out for himself or herself the best way of service during this
week of privilege. The seeker will be amazed to discover in the search
after individual action, the immense possibilities of silent, sustained
and fruitful common action. Let not the immensity of a common
programme daze or paralyse us. What is true of the individual will be
tomorrow true of the whole nation if individuals will but refuse to lose
heart and hope.
Young India, 7-4-1927

265. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
April 7, 1927
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your sweet letter. You will see that the tour is cancelled
for the time being. I assure you that I shall take no rash steps and try
my best to give the system rest. Pray do not worry on my account. Do
you, Hemaprabha Devi, the boy and Tarini get well?
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
Amboli till 18th instant and then Mysore
S JT. S ATIS C HANDRA DAS GUPTA
HOME VILLA
GIRIDIH
From a photostat: G.N. 1566

266. LETTER TO NANALAL KAVI
April 7, 1927
The poet says that Damayanti , though innocent, was charged
with stealing. It was her bad luck. Something like it has happened to
me. I took pains and fondly wrote out a harmless little letter praising
you, which you did not like. Every morning I ask forgiveness of God
even for any unconscious faults. Won’t you please pardon me this
1

1

Damayanti in the Mahabharata was accused of stealing because the fish
handed over to her for cooking would come to life the moment she touched them.

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

unintentional slip, for which I apologize to you? Unless you forgive
me I will not stop begging pardon.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

267. LETTER TO GOKALBHAI
April 7, 1927
I have your letter. You were certainly right in not reading out
my message.1 A message which the addressee does not like must not
be read out. It would have been better if you had not published it in
the other journals. You would have missed nothing by withholding it.
Moreover a poet’s anger, I think, makes him into a milch cow2 . I will
swallow all his displeasures but even from at a distance I will utilize his
talents. Please do not worry; pass on the enclosed letter3 to him.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

268. LETTER TO NANABHAI
April 8, 1927
I always had faith in pranayama, asanas and the like. But I
could not try any of them for want of a proper guru. Luckily now I
am on a sick-bed so I get something to read and ruminate. I am
further inclined towards asanas on reading Satavalekar’s articles on
the subject. Being a disciple of Nathuram Sharma, you have, I expect,
some experience in this subject. I knew him, but he did not impress
me. Some four or five members of our family came under his
influence. But being inconspicuous I could not learn asanas, etc.,
from him. Now I would like to know about your experience of the
same. Have you studied this? If you have, have you kept up the
practice? Please, if you don’t mind, tell me all you know about this.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai
1
2
3

On the occasion of poet Nanalal Kavi’s birthday
Whose kicks one may suffer with gratitude
Vide the preceding item.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

269

269. LETTER TO AMRITLAL
April 8, 1927
BHAISHRI AMRITLAL,

You must have seen my letter1 to Amritlal Bapa. I want you to
look into it. After all, his speech has been drafted by you. I want this
matter to be settled purely on the basis of principle. We must not let
my personal feelings interfere with it. And if it is a question of my
feelings I am all for what suits the atmosphere in Kathiawar and is
ultimately good for its people. I am for khadi because I see advantage
in it; but how could it prove beneficial if the climate is against it?
Oxygen is vital for our breathing but what is it to the trees? And you
all are the life of Kathiawar. If I cannot convince you all about a
thing, either I should not do it at all or do it in a different way.
I am aware of your ability. I very much appreciate some of the
things you do. I count you among those serving the motherland. You
have courage which you should exercise to encourage others and
contend with me, if you have to, without hesitation. Do what you want
to do, not what I want you to. That alone will be the right thing.
Surely we cannot shine in borrowed feathers.
At the moment I can take no interest in activities other than
khadi or similar constructive work. Being thus engaged, if I have any
more to live, it might some day occur to me to offer battle within the
limits of satyagraha and if the struggle does not come off in my own
lifetime it will be taken up by such of my successors as can do it.
Bloody revolutions just do not appeal to me. I never wish to kill
even a venomous snake, not to speak of a venomous man. I know the
world has gone in for bloody revolution too for winning freedom. I
wish to spend all my life trying to prove its futility. I take delight in
this only and so I never lose patience. All the ways that occur to me
are but ways of peace. That for me is the straight and therefore the
shortest path. You should lend me your support only if it appeals to
you and to those who look to you for guidance; otherwise, it is best to
leave me alone as it has been said: “One’s own dharma is superior
t o ” 2 , etc. Lying in a sick-bed, I get more time to think and therefore I
am trying to clarify our views and my own.
BAPU

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Dcsai
1
2

270

Vide “Letter to A. V. Thakkar”, 1-4-1927.
Bhagavad Gita, III. 35
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

270. LETTER TO HIRALAL AMRITLAL
April 8, 1927
Of course it was only to collect funds that I had been to Santa
Cruz. 1 We cannot expect to produce khadi there, it can only be sold
there. There may well be some difference of opinion in respect of
auctions. I see nothing wrong in auctions, the institution in itself is
certainly without blemish; nor is there anything bad in the purpose for
which it was held. Then why oppose it?
I would suggest that a serious student like you should not
draw hasty conclusions. And a pure activity like khadi deserves closer
study.
Visit the Ashram, look around for yourself, speak to Narandas,
Maganlal and Shankerlal, see what Lakshmidas has been doing and
then come out with your suggestions.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

271. LETTER TO SHAMBHULAL
April 8, 1927
I see that I can at the moment have my heart nowhere but in
khadi work. It may perhaps be a mistake on my part.
There is the illusion of silver in mother of pearl, and of moisture in the
sunbeams. This is absolutely unreal, yet none can avoid the error.2

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

1
2

Vide “Speech at Santa Cruz”, 23-3-1927.
Ramacharitamanasa I. 117

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

271

272. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Friday [April 8, 1927] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have not been writing to you at all, but I keep myself informed
all the time about your activities.
I had preserved one of your letters drawing my attention to the
expenditure on khadi work in Gujarat. I intended to discuss it with
Lakshmidas and you. But that could not be. Let us see if we can take
it up some time. I believe your contention is that in enabling the
spinners to earn Rs. 29,000 as wages we have spent more than an
equal amount and that this is too much. Does this amount also include
the expenditure incurred on our work amongst the Raniparaj
community? The answer to this question should be that at this stage
the work on khadi includes awakening and educating the masses. If
this is really so, it is part of our policy; and so long as this policy is
followed sincerely we should bear with it as an experiment. But this is
only my view. If you enlighten me on this point I shall discuss it with
Lakshmidas in case he meets me sooner or when all three of us meet.
2. At the present moment, at any rate, I am afraid, I have no
time or energy to raise separate funds for khadi work in Kathiawar. I,
therefore, think that we should entrust it to the Charkha Sangh and
carry on such work as can be done subject to its rules and regulations.
In this connection I have written to Bhai Fulchand. You may also
think over it. Perhaps it had better be merged with the work in
Gujarat. As it is, I only see this much, that it cannot be carried on as an
independent unit. You may, if you want to, discuss the matter with
Lakshmidas, in case he is there, and with Shankerlal. In the meanwhile
you may look after and promote the work in Kathiawar according to
facilities available in the Ashram and keep me informed. We should
be careful and see that whatever work has been or is being done is not
undone.
3. Of late you have not been publishing in Young India facts
and figures [about khadi]. Figures of production, at any rate, ought to
appear. You should also keep sending any interesting details about the
yarn you receive from the members.
1

272

Vide “Letter to Fulchand K. Shah”, 6-4-1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As I have now resumed working gradually, you need not spare
me. Do write to me and ask me whatever you want to.
I had a talk with Chi. Purushottam and we are in correspondence. I could not speak to you about this; but the boy seemed to
have a pure heart. Surely, God will look after him.
How is Kanu getting on?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9141. Courtesy: Jamnadas Gandhi

273. A LETTER
April 8, 1927
Certainly I do wish that we got out of narrow caste circles. The
significance of dharma does not lie in clinging to the caste system; it
is strictly confined to varnashrama. One never hears of hundreds of
varnas. But I do not insist on this point.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

273

274. LETTER TO DAMODAR LAKSHMIDAS
AMBOLI, via BELGAUM ,

Chaitra Sud 9 [April 10, 1927]
BHAI DAMODAR LAKSHMIDAS,

Bhai Kishorelal conveyed to me the news of Chi. Mamabai’s
demise. We cannot help grieving owing to the bonds of flesh. But
when looking at it from Mamabai’s standpoint, I realize that she has
been released from pain.
I am not well enough acquainted with you but I would, if I may,
advise you to cherish and remain faithful to her memory, abstaining
from another alliance.
You have the great responsibility of the children. Make
arrangements for them in consultation with pujya Gangabehn and do
what you can to advance their interests. Ask any help you want of me
and, needless to say, I shall do whatever I can.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
Frorn the Gujarati original: C.W. 2817. Courtesy: Purushottam D. Saraiya

274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

275. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
Sunday [April 10, 1927] 1
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I am not unhappy at Chi. Mama’s passing away. The poor girl
was in agony. And it was good that you were with her at the last hour.
I have written to [your] son-in-law. We are left with the problem of
what we should do about the children. The question now is whether or
not you should accept custody of the children if he leaves them in
your care and offers their maintenance. Please think over this. I am
sure you have not been upset.
I have been getting your letters. I may say I am keeping well.
During the last two days I have been walking a little.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8827. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

276. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
BOMBAY,

April 10, 1927
CHI. RAMDAS,

I received your letter of complaint only today on my arrival in
Bombay. A detailed letter may never get written because of my
procrastination, so I write a brief one right away. You still continue to
regret that you have no formal education. You must get over it. In my
programme of action it is of least importance. If you come, you can
be of help in innumerable ways. You can even work on a salary if you
so wish. I would make use of you in spinning and weaving and make
you independent. I would also use you for the service of the country.
But there are many other jobs apart from these. There is the work of
the press, of the school, of Hindi. Many people, big and small, are
helping me. I am sure that you too can join them. But I wish that you
should do only what gives you satisfaction.
Chi. Jamnadas has returned from England.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Motanan Man, p. 34
1

From the reference to Mama’s death, vide the preceding item.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

275

277. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 11, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter. Of course you were quite right in delivering
your whole soul to me. I quite agree with you that we have to evolve
an organization and that therefore there should be method about the
business. But in your affection for me perhaps there is a trace of
impatience with the people who organized the tours. However, all will
profit by the warning received. I am taking all the necessary rest amid
these very lovely surroundings and shall have more when I am taken
to Mysore. Rest is not to be taken at the Ashram. Dr. Mehta insisted
on a cool place 1 being selected. And I am to remain where I was to
tour during April.
You can see from the handwriting that I am getting stronger day
by day. I had quite a fair walk yesterday. So much for myself.
I like this idea of your riding. It should brace you and enable
you too, to go to the villages and see something of rural life. Have
they provided you with a proper saddle? You should try to follow all
the shades of village Hindi. I am not going to be satisfied till you have
mastered Hindi so well as to be able to follow and speak the villagers’
Hindi. Do not be frightened. It will come because of your love of
your work. I shall not be impatient. But, for your work a thorough
knowledge of Hindi is a necessity. You will therefore seek every
occasion for speaking and knowing it. Insist on understanding all that
goes on about you.
Here is a letter for you from Noorbanu whom you must
recognize, the fat, fair lady. She recently gave over to the Ashram
several thousand rupees worth of her jewellery. She and her husband
are just now living at Mahabaleshwar. They have just come in to see
me. Do write to her in reply. Their address is Mahabaleshwar College,
Mahabaleshwar. Mrs. Noorbanu Pyareali is her full name.
I am anxious to know how the new wheel is working. Have you
good wheels there?
1

Nandi Hills, near Bangalore; vide “Discussion with Dr. Jivaraj Mehta”,
3-4-1927.

276

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Do you get good fruit for yourself?
With love,
BAPU

[PS.]
Mahadev and Devdas have gone out to hawk khadi.
From the original: C.W. 5215. Courtesy: Mirabehn

278. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVALEKAR
AMBOLI,

Monday [April 11, 1927] 1
BHAI SATVALEKAR,

I have your two letters and the books; let me thank you for
it.
Please continue to send me the issues of Vaidika Dharma.
I have with me many young men as well as women. On my part
I have made great efforts to keep them in good health while they
observed brahmacharya. Only disciplines like asanas have yet to be
tried. Could you suggest to me some methods, as I am afraid, they
cannot very well be learnt merely with the help of books and
illustration. . . .2
Please send over to the Ashram two copies [each] of Suryabhedan Vyayam and Brahmasharya, which will be paid for by the
Ashram. If you agree to it I wish to bring out a Gujarati translation
after assimilating and revising the two works.
MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 12771

1
2

From the addressee’s reply to the letter
Page 2 is missing in the source. Only pages 1 and 3 are available.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

277

279. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
[April 11, 1927] 1
SISTERS,

You have absolved me [from writing to you]. But how can I take
advantage of it unless I have to? My health is not so bad now that I
cannot write to you. Yesterday I even walked a good distance. To
write to you is therefore not much of a strain.
Have any of you decided to supervise the common kitchen by
turns? Lakshmibehn2 had definitely expressed willingness to do so. If
no one else has done it so far at least she should do it. If there is any
defect in the common kitchen the fault will be that of all. Will it not ?
You may free yourselves from kitchen work when the men have
acquired as much skill as you have at present, but certainly not till
then.
Please find enclosed Mirabai’s letter. Give it to Chi. Maganlal. I
send it as it is worth reading.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3644

280. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 13, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I must write on this fasting day to acknowledge your letter
containing extracts from Beethoven.3 They are good spiritual food. I
don’t want you to forget your music or your taste for it. It would be
cruel to forget that to which you owe so much, and which has really
brought you to me. 4
1

From the reference to supervision of the common kitchen and to Gandhiji’s
“walking a good distance”. Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 11-4-1927.
2
Wife of Khare, the musician; she had experience in running a common
kitchen at the Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, Bombay.
3
“As far as I can remember, I quoted extracts from Romain Rolland’s Life of
Beethoven, and one thing I gave was, Beethoven’s motto, ‘Through Suffering, Joy’.”
(Mirabehn)
4
For an account of this, vide Appendix “From the Preface to Bapu’s Letters to
Mira ”, after 31-3-1927.

278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Please thank the Maharajji and all the friends for the[ir] kind
invitation. But for the present I must go to Nandi Hills in Mysore. I
know that I should be quite happy there if I could come.
We have kept the week 1 here in a royal style. One wheel has
been kept going 16 hours daily. The output has been more than 3,000
rounds of 4 ft. each daily. Almost all kept the fast on 6th and 13th.
I shall expect here still more letters from you.
Kaka 2 has sent a copy of your translation of Rolland’s letter.
The translation is very good indeed. The original could not be better.
I am glad you met the Commissioner, etc. You are getting your
deserts—those of one adopted by a scavenger. You must forget what
you have been. You have to realize what you are. These poor officials
really do not know where they are when they see you. They cannot
forget your antecedents and naturally get perplexed. You have to put
them at ease. When the present King—so tradition says-—was enlisted
as a sailor he was treated as such and had in common with the rest
black coffee and black bread for breakfast. This was the least part of
the affair. He was taken for a common sailor. So one day will you be
taken for a common village girl. That would be your pride and mine.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C W. 5216. Courtesy: Mirabehn

281. LETTER TO SURENDRA
Wednesday [April 13, 1927] 3
CHI. SURENDRA,

I have your letter. If you get leave thence do go to Nathji and to
Wardha. Undoubtedly the study of hygiene is most essential. This
would include asanas and breath-control which, I think, would need a
guide. I would like you to practise them. Nathji has some experience
in this field. He does not seem to have much faith in it. Having
discussed it with a few people I was led to believe that asanas, etc.,
1

National Week
Kalelkar
3
From the reference to sending the addressee to S. D. Satavalekar; vide “Letter
to S. D. Satavalekar”, 14-4-1927, where Gandhiji says: “I shall try and send you a
good student.”
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

279

were of no avail in curing the sick. I have not personally reached this
conclusion. If you want to learn them I would send you to Pandit
Satavalekar. There is a swami in Hardwar who also has promised to
train an ashramite if one goes to him. I have not met him though
Mahadev has. Nowhere have I found the purity that I would expect
but then we want to associate only to the extent of learning the
asanas, etc. Write to Nathji and obtain his opinion.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9414

282. FAITH v. REASON
An M.B.B.S. from Mandalay sends a string of questions of
which the first is:
You once expressed your opinion in the pages of Young India that faith begins
where reason ends. Then I expect you will call it faith, if a person believes in a thing
for which he can give no reasons. Is it not then clear that faith is believing
unreasonably? Do you think it is truth or justice if anybody believed in anything
unreasonable? I think it is folly to believc in that way. I do not know what your
barrister mind will call it. If you think like me I hope you will call faith as nothing
but folly.

If the worthy doctor will excuse my saying so, there is in his
question a clear failure to understand my meaning. That which is
beyond reason is surely not unreasonable. Unreasonable belief is
blind faith and is often superstition. To ask anybody to believe
without proof what is capable of proof would be unreasonable, as for
instance asking an intelligent person to believe without proof that the
sum of the angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles. But for an
experienced person to ask another to believe without being able to
prove that there is God is humbly to confess his limitations and to ask
another to accept in faith the statement of his experience. It is merely
a question of that person’s credibility. In ordinary matters of life we
accept in faith the word of persons on whom we choose to rely
although we are often cheated. Why may we not then in matters of life
and death accept the testimony of sages all the world over that there is
God and that He is to be seen by following Truth and Innocence
(non-violence)? It is at least as reasonable for me to ask my
correspondent to have that faith in this universal testimony as it would
280

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be for him to ask me to take his medicine in faith even though many a
medicine-man might have failed me. I make bold to say that without
faith this world would come to naught in a moment. True faith is
appropriation of the reasoned experience of people whom we believe
to have lived a life purified by prayer and penance. Belief therefore in
prophets or incarnations who have lived in remote ages is not an idle
superstition but a satisfaction of an inmost, spiritual want. The formula
therefore I have humbly suggested for guidance is rejection of every
demand for faith where a matter is capable of present proof
unquestioned acceptance on faith of that which is itself incapable of
proof except through personal experience.
The correspondent’s next question is:1
In Young India of December 9, 1926,2 there appeared a press-cutting that one
Doctor Harold Blazer, who chloroformed his daughter because he felt that his own end
was near and there was no one to care for her when he was gone, was fully acquitted.
Dr. Blazer’s counsel, Mr. Howry declared: “Blazer did a right and moral thing by
keeping the poor girl [for whom he had cared for thirty-two years] from becoming a
charge on others.” To this you expressed your opinion that Dr. Blazer was wrong in
taking the life of his daughter because it betrayed want of faith in the humanity of
those round him and that there was no warrant for him to suppose that the daughter
would not have been cared for by others.... I would request you to think over it again,
for I think this is not an ordinary matter. For it is evident that you have got no
scruples to put a useless burden on society simply because you have got enough faith
in the society to shoulder the burden. For God’s sake please excuse us from believing
in that useless, nay, extremely harmful, faith. Such a faith of yours, I sincerely
believe, is very harmful to the best interests of India.... If after many more years of
faithful service of India, you become . . . absolutely useless to society, will you like
the society to feed you because you have got still life left in you or because you served
so well? . . .

I do believe that whilst the jury was right in acquitting Dr.
Blazer, considered from the strictly moral point of view Dr. Blazer was
wrong. My correspondent in his utilitarian zeal has overlooked the
frightful consequences and implications of the doctrine he lays down.
Indeed his doctrine would belie his own profession. What would he
say if a young practitioner chloroformed to death a patient whom he,
the junior practitioner, considered to be incurable and therefore a
useless burden to society and whom another as a senior subsequently
found to be a case quite capable of cure ? Is it not the boast of
1
2

Only excerpts are reproduced here.
Vide “The Greatest Good of All”, 9-12-1926.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

281

medical science to treat no case as finally incurable? As for myself,
well, I do expect my countrymen to support me when I become a
useless and burdensome article, assuming of course that I shall still
want to live. What is more, I have full faith in my countrymen supporting me if that event comes to pass. I wonder whether my correspondent will have all the lepers, the blind, the deaf, one fine night to
be chloroformed to sweet, everlasting sleep. And yet Damien was a
leper and Milton was a blind poet. Man is not all body but he is
something infinitely higher.
The correspondent’s third question is:1
In the same article, i.e., “The Greatest Good of all”, you wrote that a votary of
ahimsa cannot subscribe to the utilitarian formula. He will strive for the greatest good
of all and die in the attempt to realize the ideal . . . . May I conclude then that you will
prefer to be bitten by a poisonous snake and die rather than kill the same in trying to
save yourself? If I am right in my conclusion, . . . that way you will be doing the
greatest possible harm to India by trying to save a harmful living creature and by
dying willingly in trying to realize the ideal of your so-called greatest good of all . . .
. You admit that you are an imperfect mortal. So it is impossible for you to benefit
the whole world. It is even impossible for you to benefit the whole of India in all
possible ways. Therefore it is quite reasonable to be contented with the greatest good
of the greatest number rather than pretend to do the greatest good to all without
exception the good and the wicked, the useful and the useless, man, animal, etc., etc.

This is a question I would fain avoid answering, not because of
want of faith but because of want of courage. But I must not conceal
my faith even though I may not have the courage to act up to it when
it is put on its trial. Here then is my answer. I do not want to live at the
cost of the life even of a snake. I should let him bite me to death
rather than kill him. But it is likely that if God puts me to that cruel
test and permits a snake to assault me, I may not have the courage to
die, but that the beast in me may assert itself and I may seek to kill the
snake in defending this perishable body. I admit that my belief has
not yet become so incarnate in me as to warrant my stating
emphatically that I have shed all fear of snakes so as to befriend them
as I would like to be able to. It is my implicit belief that snakes, tigers,
etc., are God’s answer to the poisonous, wicked, evil thoughts that we
harbour. Anna Kingsford saw in the streets of Paris tigers in men
already taking shape. I believe that all life is one. Thoughts take
definite forms. Tigers and snakes have kinship with us. They are a
1

282

Only excerpts are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

warning to us to avoid harbouring evil, wicked, lustful thoughts. If I
want to rid the earth of venomous beasts and reptiles, I must rid
myself of all venomous thoughts. I shall not do so if in my impatient
ignorance and in my desire to prolong the existence of the body I
seek to kill the so-called venomous beasts and reptiles. If in not
seeking to defend myself against such noxious animals I die, I should
die to rise again a better and a fuller man. With that faith in me how
should I seek to kill a fellow-being in a snake? But this is philosophy.
Let me pray and let my readers join in the prayer to God that He may
give me the strength to live up to that philosophy. For philosophy
without life corresponding is like a body without life.
I know that in this land of ours we have enouh phiosophy and
but little life. But I know also that the laws governing the conduct of
man have still to be explored and the condition of exploration is
imperative and unalterable. We shall explore them only by dying,
never by killing. We must become living embodiments of Truth and
Love, for God is Truth and Love.
Young India, 14-4-1927

283. CIVILIZATION AND CULTURE
Dr. Martin Hurlimann, a Sanskrit scholar of Zurich, sends the
following instructive translation of selections 1 from the writings of
Heinrich Pestalozzi who died just a century ago and was according to
Dr. Hurlimann “one of Europe’s greatest educationists as also one of
the greatest among fighters for Menschlichkeit and Menschenwurde,
i.e., humanity and dignity of man but not understood on the
Continent and almost unknown to the rest of the world”.
Young India, 14-4-1927

1

Not reproduced here

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

283

284. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
AMBOLI,

April 14, 1927
DEAR BROTHER,

Your letter has given me boundless joy. The news will cheer our
people and Andrews. And Europeans will be glad to have to do with
one whom they have come to know and respect. For me your letter is
a great relief. And for your health God will take care of it. Freedom
from the turmoil into which our country has landed itself will refresh
your tired nerves whilst at the same time you will be doing inestimable
service to the country. The present confusion does not admit of much
hurry and calculated interference. It will settle itself in due time.
Mrs. Sastri will be of great help to you in South Africa and her
presence will mean much to our dumb sisters there.
I expect to reach Nandi Hills on Wednesday next. You will
please come whenever you can and like.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
V. S. Srinivasa Sastri Papers (Correspondence No. 470). Courtesy: National
Archives of India

285. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVALEKAR
AMBOLI,

April 14, 1927
BHAI SATAVALEKAR,

I thank you for your prompt reply. I shall try and send you a
good student. From the consideration you have been showing me I
see that you are treating me as a fellow-seeker. I shall certainly try to
become one. I read your book on the Isopanishad and was extremely
pleased.
I shall write to Bhai Bapulal1 in connection with Brahmacharya
and Suryabhedan Vyayam. He must not suffer any financial loss.
1

Bapulal Kuberdas Patel of the Arya Samaj, Anand, Kheda District, publisher
of the addressee’s books

284

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am acquainted with Kuvalayanandji. I had sent a young boy to
him who being weak was not taught pranayama and other disciplines
but was instead treated with medicines. Despite the prevailing climate I
have not lost hope regarding the practice of brahmacharya, etc. There
will rise from our midst a true aspirant who will clear the prevailing
atmosphere. As yet I have come across no such aspirant. My own
tapascharya is hopelessly imperfect. I have been observing external,
physical brahmacharya for nearly 30 years. I have, however, not freed
myself from passion; I am trying to. I think complete control of all
the five sense-organs is essential for the observance of perfect
brahmacharya. It will not suffice to have control over the six-fold
passion 1 ; it has to be rooted out. I believe in every word of the verse:
“The yearning too departs when he beholds the Supreme.” 2 The
world is prone to hero-worship. The unhealthy climate prevailing
around will soon clear when such a person emerges. Let us work with
all our faith for the advent of such a person amidst us. And have not
you yourself said that if the message of the Upanishads, etc., is
eternally true—and so it is —even today we can come across Uma,
Hemavati and Yaksha and, God willing, we shall. I too have read about
rubbing in semen and consuming it. 3 I regard this as a demoniac
practice. There may be some truth in it but the experiment deserves
no consideration, because we want the brahmacharis to master their
senses. Preserving and retaining the vital fluid is a means to an end
and not an end in itself. Consuming semen does not bring about
freedom from passion; it might to some extent remove the debility
consequent upon ejaculation. This is what the Western method
achieves. ‘The root cause of seminal discharge lies in the rising of
passion, [And] we aim at annihilating all passion.
That is why I enquired about the asanas, etc, Now I understand
that asanas, etc., are a stage on the way [to brahmacharya] and it may
be deemed necessary for the aspirant to pass through them.
Have I made myself clear ?
I have understood what you say in your book about the asanas
for retaining semen. Your cautions put one on guard. Even for a
1

Desire, anger, avarice, delusion, pride, envy
Bhagavad Gita, II. 59
3
The addressee had referred to an ancient Sanskrit text which says that semen
from involuntary ejaculation should be rubbed between the breasts or the brows, or
consumed orally.
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

285

married man I see no harm in the siddha and other asanas. With the
help of siddhasana a married man’s semen may possibly be retained,
the secretion however does not stop. How many men can we come
across today who go to their wives purely for the sake of progeny? If
the term ‘calming down’ can be used of passion etc., a married man
may calm down his passion with the help of siddha and other asanas.
But then it is another thing if his aim is absolute eradication of desire.
I was relieved to find that you do not reject the Puranas. I was
afraid you would be disdainful of the ancient Puranas. Indeed I am
convinced that at a time when people were growing sceptical the
authors of the Puranas aroused in them a love for dharma with their
rich poetic appeal, Our Shastras need to be re-interpreted as you are
doing, in the light of modern knowledge and for the young people of
today.
When I am settled somewhere I would like to give you the
trouble of coming over to me so that we can compare notes.
I am now reading the Kenopanishad after which I shall take up
your Mahabharata Samalochana 1 .
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi: S.N. 12771

286. LETTER TO PRABHAVATI
NANDI HILLS, M YSORE, 2

Chaitra Sud 13 [April 14, 1927]
CHI. PRABHAVATI,

I do think of you very often. How are you getting along now?
When will you be going to the Ashram? How is Vidyavati? Whether or
not I write to you, you must write regularly to me. I think I am
slightly better now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 3329
1

A treatise, the first three parts of which had then been published
This address was given for the addressee’s reply. Gandhiji left Amboli for
Nandi Hills on April 18; vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 18-4-1927.
2

286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

287. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
Saturday [On or before April 16, 1927] 1
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

I know that no letter from you is in itself a letter. But there is no
reason at all to feel anxious. I am taking good care of my health. I
heed the advice of the doctors to the extent possible. I am taking rest
and will continue to do so. I shall not be in a hurry to plunge into
work. We have to start from here on the 18th and leave Belgaum on
the l9th. This is what Raja and Gangadharan have said. They both
have gone to Bangalore. I shall know in two or three days where I am
to go for rest. This place too is no doubt good.
You are having good experience. Continue writing to me as
before and send me the note about your travels so that I may know
where you will be on which day.
You and Lakshmidas will be taking care of yourselves. Convene
a meeting of the council after my programme is settled. In the
meantime do not allow any work to be postponed.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
There is a letter from Lakshmidas. I am not writing to him
separately. His suggestion has already been carried out.
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32713

288. LETTER TO HARI-ICHCHHA
NANDI HILLS, M YSORE, 2

Chaitra Purnima [April 16, 1927]
CHI. HARI-ICHCHHA,

I have the letter written by all of you, sisters. I am steadily
improving. I often think of you all. I on my part tried hard to bring
you all to the Ashram. You may go if you still wish to. You can all
1
Gandhiji arrived at Nandi Hills on Aprii 19, 1927. The Saturday preceding
that date was April 16.
2
This address was given for the addressee’s reply. Gandhiji left Amboli for
Nandi Hills on April 18; vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 18-4-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

287

live where you like, but spin a lot, study a lot and move about a lot.
The body and the mind ought to be fit, Write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
C HI . H ARI-ICHCHHA DESAI
C/ O S UNDERJI GOVINDJI DESAI
IN THE OLD HOUSE OF R ATILAL MANIAR
R AJKOT
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 4906. Courtesy: Hari-ichchhabehn Kamdar

289. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
Saturday [On or after April 16, 1927] 1
CHI. GANGABEHN,

Herewith a letter from Bhai Damodardas. It is a good one.
Think and decide about the children now.
I am keeping good health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8830. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya. Also
G.N. 11386

290. DISCUSSION WITH CHIEF OF SAVANTWADI, AMBOLI2
[April 17, 1927] 3
His Highness and the Rani came to see Gandhiji on the day before we left
Amboli. They were as usual very nice and asked if it was not too late to persuade
Gandhiji to stay a little longer at Amboli. Gandhiji said he wished very much he could
continue his stay in that scented spot surrounded by picturesque scenery, in fact, he
was distressed to leave it, but he could not help it as he wanted to combine rest with
work. And then Gandhiji proceeded to ask the questions I had not asked the other day.
GANDHIJI: Mahadev has been telling me all the good things he
has been hearing about you. One of these I should like to be verified
1
From the reference to the addressee’s daughter’s children. Mama the
addressee’s daughter, had passed away in the beginning of April, 1927; Vide “Letter
to Gangabehn Vaidya”, 10-4-1927. The Saturday after April 10 was April 16.
2
From Mahadev Desai’s article, “A Popular Prince”
3
Gandhiji left Amboli on the 18th; vide the succeeding item

288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

by you. Is it true that you draw Rs. 2,000 only from the public
revenue for your private purse?
H. H. OF SAVANTWADI : Not Rs. 2,000, but Rs. 2,500; but expenses incurred on
all State occasions are met from the State revenue.

That is all right. Now you will stay at Amboli during the
summer months. Will the expenses be borne by the State?
No, they will be borne by me.

And I hear you are keeping with you a number of orphans. You
find their expenses too out of your purse?
Yes, Gandhiji. But they are not all orphans. Some of them are. They come of
poor but respectable families. There are many more applications but I am sorry I
cannot afford to have more.

Well, yours is the only instance I know of a ruling prince
drawing a fixed allowance from the public revenue.
No, you might expect to see many more. The Mysore Maharaja draws a fixed
allowance.

Then it is lucky that after having stayed under your roof I am
going to enjoy the hospitality of one like you.
Yes, and Gwalior did not draw anything from the State Treasury.

That is to say?
He had his private income and lived on that.

But what is private income but earned from the State itself?
And now turning to the Rani, who, by the bye, is a princess of the Baroda
family, Gandhiji said:

Yes, I know one as simple as you, the Maharani Regent of
Travancore. I was fascinated by her simplicity,1 her dress could not be
simpler, and I looked in vain for an ornament on her person, except
the mangalamala. The furniture in her room was as severely simple as
could be. I was introduced to the young Maharaja whom it was
difficult to recognize as such. But there the comparison ends. They do
not live on paltry wages like you.
The Rani smiled thankfully, whilst Gandhiji continued:

And I was not surprised at the small quantity of khadi that you
purchased, knowing as I did that your means were limited and that
you must live within your income. And now that I know that like His
Highness you also mix very much among your people, may I suggest
that you will enhance your power of service by mastering the art of
1

Vide “All About Travancore”, 26-3-1925.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

289

spinning?
The spinning-wheel was all the while going on. The Rani nodded assent, and
the Chief said: “That’s not all the khadi we have. We purchased some at the last year’s
Khadi Exhibition, and we shall get more from you whenever we want.” All this while
His Highness dressed in a short coat and knickers was squatting on the floor.

Young India, 28-4-1927

291. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
April 18, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letters.
You must not put yourself under over-strain. If the teaching
overtaxes you, it must be reduced and so the learning. You may make
it clear to the people about you as to your physical capacity. On no
account must you lose your health. Do you get proper fruit and milk?
I am getting on famously. For the last two days I have been
taking walks both morning and evening without suffering any harm.,
As you know I have replaced one fruit with a vegetable and am taking
bhakhari.
We leave Amboli today and leave Belgaum tomorrow if all goes
well. Nandi Hills, Mysore, will be the address for the next two
months.
I shall not leave this place without much regret. The spot itself is
delightful. But what has attached me to this place is the exceptional
character of the Chief. From all the accounts received by me he
appears to be an ideal Chief. He draws a fixed sum from the State
revenue for his personal expenses. He mixes freely with his people.
He has visited every one of his 125 villages. He lives an abstemious
life and his wife is worthy of him. I have met him often and his frank
and easy manners have pleased me. Hence it is that I like this place so
much. But we can’t do always the things we like. We shall be leaving
inside of a few hours.
I expect a report of the new charkha.
They seem to have worked wonders at the Ashram. Keshu
having spun over 15,000 yards in 24 hours.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5217. Courtesy: Mirabehn

290

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

292. LETTER TO GANGABEHN VAIDYA
Silence Day, Chaitra Vad[1, April 18, 1927] 1
CHI. GANGABEHN,

I have your letter. May all your devout wishes be fulfilled and
may God grant you the strength to observe your vows.
Your attitude towards the children is correct. If Damodardas
entrusts custody of the children to you, you being in the Ashram, it
would be your duty to look after them. But it must suit the Ashram
too. Discuss the issue with Kaka. It is a different matter if your heart
refuses to do so. In such cases one does not know instantaneously
what one’s dharma is.
Today we leave this place for Nandi Hills. Now on you should
write to that address. I presume you will for the time being stay with
Kaka, so I send this to his address.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 8828. Courtesy: Gangabehn Vaidya

293. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Silence Day, Chaitra Wad 2 [April 19, 1927] 2
SISTERS,

I am sending this letter to your secretary in the absence of
Gangabehn. In Gangabehn’s absence you should appoint an acting
president. Your work should now be so perfectly regulated that it goes
on automatically as in other institutions. In order that this may
happen, a leader is absolutely necessary. A leader should have fewer
powers but greater responsibilities; she should always be thinking of
the good of the institution, and try to increase its capacity for service.
It appears that your observance of the National Week was quite
successful. It was good that you cleaned the latrines. As time passes
you should take up more and more responsibilities, provided always
1

The source has Chaitra Vad 2, which was April 19. But Gandhiji left for
Nandi Hills on April 18, which corresponded to the duplicate Chaitra Vad 1.
2
The year is determined from the reference to Gangabehn being the president
of Ashram women’s Mandal.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

291

that you have the strength.
Maintain your contact with women who do outside work. You
must also be in touch with Rajibehn and Champavatibehn. Write to
me, if you know, how Rajibehn is getting on with her work.
My health appears to have improved. To this end I am making a
simple experiment. If it proves successful, it will have many uses. But I
do not want to take your time now by telling you more about it. I will
perhaps tell you about it next week.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3645

294. LETTER TO KUVALAYANAND
NANDI HILLS, M YSORE,

April 19,1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter to Baba Saheb Soman offering to
come to Mysore at once if necessary and in any case after 26th if
required. I would like you to come to Nandi Hills as soon as possible
after 26th. If you will kindly send a wire, arrangements will be made
to bring you to Nandi Hills from the nearest station.
The growing self-abuse among the students has, as you know,
attracted me to the yogic asanas, as possible cure of the evil habit. In
the course of my reading I saw that asanas were recommended as a
remedy for the cure of many other ills. During my illness I read
Pandit Satavalekar’s writings. And I thought that I would experiment
with myself. Copious laudatory notices of shirshasana drew me to it.
And for the last five days I have been trying shirshasana for a few
seconds each time. I do it in the morning before the meal twice at
intervals of two minutes. The practice is preceded by neti, cleansing
the nostrils by means of strips of thin cloth. I remain absolutely
passive during the practice of the asana. Sjt. Gunaji assists to lift the
body and sustain it on the head. The same thing is repeated at 9 p.m.
before retiring. The last meal—milk and fruit is taken at 5 p.m. I have
noticed no ill effects. On the contrary, I feel fresher and stronger and
am able to take short walks. My appetite has improved. Now the
question is whether shirshasana thus passively practised is likely to
292

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ease the blood-pressure or to increase it. I take it that neti can do no
harm at all in any case. My blood-pressure is at present 180 by
auscultation. During the five days the pressure has not increased. Will
you advise me to continue the practice or discontinue pending your
arrival?
Please wire if you want me to discontinue. I do not want the
asanas to be blamed through any hasty action on my part.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 5045

295. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL G. BANKER
Silence Day, [After April 19, 1927] 1
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

I have your letter. It is all right that you did not come. I
hope you are looking after your health. Right now it is like one guilty
person blaming another. However, if you feel inclined, you may come
for the sake of having the combined benefit of the climate and work
so that all of us can be warned by my mistake. But do what you think
appropriate.
I would be very happy if Jamnalalji. . . .2
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : S. N. 32750

296. ALL-INDIA COW-PROTECTION ASSOCIATION
I had fully intended to report the proceedings of this business
Association, which is known by the few, whose origin was practically
accidental and which ever since its origin has been trying in the face
of odds to solve the very difficult problem of cow protection in terms
of religious economics. A meeting of the managing committee of the
Association as also its general meeting were held together at the
1
From the contents it is evident that the letter was written after Gandhiji
reached Nandi Hills on April 19, 1927; vide also “Letter to Shankerlal Banker”,
16-5-1927 and “Letter to Anasuyabehn Sarabhai”, after 5-6-1927.
2
Two sentences that follow are not legible in the source.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

293

Ashram on the 11th March last. But through my hurried departure
and subsequent illness, the proceedings have remained unreported.
The following resolution 1 was however passed unanimously at this
meeting:
Inasmuch as a resolution was passed at the last meeting of the managing
committee of the Association (at Wardha) to the effect that a sum not
exceeding one lakh rupees might be spent for conducting a model dairy and a
model tannery, it is hereby resolved that the said experiment be conducted by
and under the supervision of the managing committee of the Satyagraha
Ashram, Sabarmati, in accordance with the objects of the All-India Cow-protection Association, and to that end a sum not exceeding one lakh rupees,
earmarked for the purpose, be donated to the managing committee of the
Ashram out of the funds of the Association, with instructions to that committee to furnish an account of the progress of the experiment from time to time.

The following office-bearers of the managing committee of the
All-India Cow-protection Association were elected at the meeting:
Chairman—M. K. Gandhi
Treasurer—Sheth Revashanker Jagjivan Jhaveri
Members—Sjt. Baijnath Kedia; Sjt. Mahavir Poddar; Sheth
Jamnalal Bajaj; Sjt. Parameshwari Prasad Gazipuria; Sjt. Narayandas
Poddar; Dr. B. S. Moonje; Sjt. Balakrishna Martanda Chonde; Sjt.
Shankar Shrikrishna Dev; Sjt. Narayana Balakrishna Kelkar; Sjt.
Nagindas Amulakharai; Sjt. Manilal Vallabhji Kothari; Sjt. Maganlal
Khushalchand Gandhi
Secretary—Valji Govindji Desai
I had hoped during my tour to collect, from lovers of the cow,
funds for the Association. The resolution contemplates the expenditure of one lakh of rupees. But the Association has not more than
15,000 rupees in its possession. The resolution has been taken in the
hope that the Association will receive sufficient donations from the
public. Now that I must be confined to my rooms for some time to
come, I appeal to those who are interested in and approve of the
method adopted by the Association for the protection and preservation of India’s cattle, to send in their mite, without a personal appeal.
Everything received will be acknowledged in these columns. Readers
know that the terms of membership of the Association are Rs. 5 or
24,000 yards of well-twisted self-spun yarn per year. I expect, however, substantial donations from those who believe in the method and
1

294

Proposed by Jamnalal Bajaj
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

management of the Association.1
I hope that cow-protection workers will not let Jamnalalji bear
the burden of collecting this fund.
To look after the dairy, an experienced gentleman named Parnerkar has been appointed. An Indian tanner who has taken training in
America has been entrusted with the tannery work. I hope to publish
shortly an account of the work done by them. I suggest to cow-protection workers that they should visit the Ashram and see for themselves the work being done in both the fields.
Young India, 21-4-1927

297. TRUTH IS ONE
A Polish Professor writes:
I am reading with intense joy your fascinating articles in Young India and wish
to impress upon you the truth that they are the source of power not only for
your own country but for the world. And as you have such a wide spiritual
experience, may I ask you one question to be answered if possible in Young
India? It is a very important fundamental question to which an answer from
you would have a great value. Do you admit that there is in human thought
some absolute certainty, as for instance as to God and prayer, where we might
be said to have reached perfect unchangeable truth ? Do you also confess that
some particular experience led you to change your first opinion, for instance,
as to the right of killing certain dangerous animals? Now my fundamental
question is, on what particular points do you change your opinion? And what
guarantee can these changes leave as to the unshaken truth of what remains
certain ? How can we distinguish opportunistic change of opinion from the
permanence of an absolute certainty in essentials? Can you define in what
things we may change and what kind of things remain unchangeable? Is
independence of each country or people one of those absolute truths, or is
there some innate incapacity in some nations for self-government and in
others an innate capacity for governing such incapable nations, as the Germans profess to have a capacity for governing other nations and thus justify
their ruling ambition?

I have taken the liberty of altering a word here and there in this
letter for the purpose of making the writer’s meaning clearer than it
appears to be to me in the original. Without in any shape or form
endorsing the claim to the powers that the writer ascribes to me, I
1

What follows is from Navajivan, 24-4-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

295

would in all humility endeavour to answer his questions. My own
conscious claim is very simple and emphatic. I am a humble but very
earnest seeker after truth. And in my search, I take all fellow-seekers
in uttermost confidence so that I may know my mistakes and correct
them. I confess that I have often erred in my estimates and judgments.
As for instance, whereas I thought from insufficient data that the
people of Kheda were ready for civil disobedience, I suddenly
discovered that I had committed a Himalayan miscalculation and saw
that they could not offer civil disobedience inasmuch as they had not
known what it was to tender willing obedience to laws which might be
even considered irksome but not immoral. Immediately I made the
discovery, I retraced my steps. A similar error of judgment was
committed by me when I presented what has been described as the
Bardoli ultimatum.1 I had then believed that the country, that is the
people, had been awakened and touched by the movement, had
understood the utility of nonviolence. I discovered my error within
twenty-four hours of the delivery of the ultimatum and retraced my
steps. And inasmuch as in every case I retraced my steps, no
permanent harm was done. On the contrary, the fundamental truth of
non-violence has been made infinitely more manifest than it ever has
been, and the country has in no way been permanently injured.
But I am not aware of having changed my opinion about the
necessity of killing certain dangerous animals in certain circumstances
specifically mentioned in my articles2 . So far as I am aware of my own
opinions, I have ever held the opinion expressed by me in those
articles. That however does not mean that the opinion is unchangeable. I claim to have no infallible guidance or inspiration. So far as
my experience goes, the claim to infallibility on the part of a human
being would be untenable, seeing that inspiration too can come only
to one who is free from the action of pairs of opposites, and it will be
difficult to judge on a given occasion whether the claim to freedom
from pairs of opposites is justified. The claim to infallibility would
thus always be a most dangerous claim to make. This however does
not leave us without any guidance whatsoever. The sum total of the
experience of the sages of the world is available to us and would be
for all time to come. Moreover, there are not many fundamental
truths, but there is only one fundamental truth which is Truth itself,
1
2

296

Vide “Letter to Viceroy”, 1-2-1922.
Under the caption “Is This Humanity?”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

otherwise known as Non-violence. Finite human being shall never
know in its fulness Truth and Love which is in itself infinite. But we
do know enough for our guidance. We shall err, and sometimes
grievously, in our application. But man is a self-governing being, and
self-government necessarily includes the power as much to commit
errors as to set them right as often as they are made. I do not know
whether this will satisfy my correspondent. But whether it does or not,
I have no power in me to give him a more satisfactory answer. After
all each one must be a law unto himself, the invariable condition being
that he must then walk in the fear of God and therefore continually
keep on purifying his heart. A man to be a man must be twice-born as
Hindus would say, reborn as Christians would say.
The concluding questions of the correspondent are easily
answered. In fact, the answers can be inferred from the foregoing
remarks. I do think that independence of each country is a truth in the
same sense and to the same extent that independence of each man is.
There is, therefore, no inherent incapacity for self-government in any
country or nation and therefore no inherent capacity for governing
other nations. No doubt my correspondent honestly thinks that
Germans profess to have a God-given capacity for ruling over other
nations. But if there are German imperialists, there are also humble
German democrats, who are content if they can quietly govern themselves.
Young India, 21-4-1927

298. KHADI STORES
The following list1 of khadi stores in the four provinces of Tamil
Nadu, Kerala, Maharashtra and Bihar will be read with interest. I
propose to publish a list of similar stores in the other provinces as
soon as they are available. The list is a sign of the very substantial
progress made by khadi since 1920. Measured by what we seek to
achieve, the progress no doubt leaves much to be desired. 110 stores
in four provinces should, when khadi becomes current like grain or
ghee, read 110 stores in a city like Bombay alone and then they would
not be too many. And why should it be surprising or unthinkable to
have khadi as universal as grain or ghee? Or, if such universality for
1

Not reproduced here

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

297

khadi must be unthinkable, why should it be unthinkable to have, say
twenty years hence, as many shops for Australian butter and American
wheat as we have today for our own ghee and wheat? If it is patriotic
enough to buy foreign cloth because it is cheaper or more pleasant to
the eye, why will it not be patriotic enough, when that time comes, to
buy cheaper foreign butter and foreign wheat, even though our ghee
manufacturers and wheat-growers may become idle and starve for
want of other occupations to take the place of the lost ones? These are
reflections presented for the edification of wearers of foreign cloth.
But what is the lesson these stores teach us, khadi organisers? In
my opinion, by honest and able organization, we can create a
universal demand for khadi,
(a) if those who are engaged in khadi production will pay
attention to the manufacture of stronger and more even yarn equal at
least to the mill-spun yarn;
(b) if they will also study the tastes of the people and produce
sufficient variety of khadi;
(c) if by efficiency in other directions they bring down the
price of khadi;
(d) if those who are engaged in the distribution of khadi will
gain greater knowledge of the tastes of the people and will learn the
art of selling;
(e)
if both the producers and the sellers will realize that they
must give the maximum of efficiency with the minimum of wages and
that self-sacrifice is the one imperative condition of successful
organiza-tion of khadi on a universal basis.
I note that private depots assume names after their owners or
some other name. For greater convenience, I would suggest their
having one name—simple Khadi Bhandar or Vastralaya, with A.I.S.A.
or Congress or Private as the case may be in parenthesis. Where there
are more than one in the same place they may have consecutive
numbers. This is desirable so long as khadi has to be organized and
nursed and so long as the various depots are either directly owned by
the A.I.S.A. or are certified by and affiliated to it.
Young India, 21-4-1927

298

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

299. LETTER TO TARINI P. SINHA1
April 21, 1927
MY DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I shall use your Bureau if I find occasion
for it.
What is the use of putting me down on your correspondents’ list
if you don’t expect me to do any work at all? Personally I am averse
to ornamental list of anything. The sooner we get out of this habit the
better for us. After all your work if it is substantial and earnest is
bound to tell whether you have the prop of ornamental figures or not.
Since the whole burden of this Bureau will, I expect, fall upon your
shoulder, I thought that I should warn you against repeating the
vicious custom of having any fictitious list of correspondents or
members.
Yours, etc.,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 12486

300. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised

NANDI HILLS, M YSORE,

April 25, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your four letters of which three were received together
yesterday.
You must have got the wire of departure sent to you from
Belgaum on 19th.
One of your letters yesterday prompted me to send you a
peremptory wire asking you to come to Nandi. But I restrained
myself. The other two letters were less gloomy. But even so, if the
separation becomes unbearable, you must come without waiting for an
answer or any prompting from me. The love of the people round you
should really strengthen you and keep you there. Your letter
describing the affection of the people there is most touching and it
1

In reply to his letter of March 27 from London, where he had set up an Indian
Information Bureau
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

299

would be a matter for sorrow if you cannot be at peace with yourself
there. But no one can suddenly change one’s nature and if your
effort to compose yourself there becomes fruitless, you should tell the
friends there so plainly and come away here without the slightest
hesitation. On no account should there be a breakdown there. You
must not try your nerves to the breaking point.
This is the sixth day here. I am not yet acclimatized. I have not
retained the energy and the strength I felt at Amboli, but doctors
assure me that Nandi must in the end be more beneficial than Amboli.
They say that this is an ideal place for blood-pressure men. There is
no cause whatsoever for worry or anxiety.
Since you were so worried about the forgetfulness about the two
fasts, it was well that you fasted.1 There is no doubt that fasting is a
good thing even physically whenever there is a nervous strain. It
would certainly have been well, if I had fasted before the collapse
came. The strain of that day was terrific. But this is wisdom after the
event. We may profit by that stupid mistake of mine. I call it stupid
because I was aware of the strain and of the merit of fasting in such
circumstances. But the Devil is ever after us and catches us at our
weakest. He found me weak and wanting and trapped me. Your fast
therefore does not worry me. Only you will know when to take it and
how to take it.
You must develop iron nerves. It is necessary for our work.
God be with you.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5218. Courtesy: Mirabehn

301. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
NANDI HILLS, M YSORE,

April 25, 1927
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have not written to you for some time now. I have been having
your letters.
Please have no anxiety on my behalf. I am having all the
1

“I had forgotten to fast on the first and last days of the National Week which
begins on the 6th and ends on the 13th of April.” (Mirabehn)

300

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

attention and care that can possibly be given. I have the best medical
advice here. The weather is bracing and cool. I shall not plunge into
active work thoughtlessly or without medical advice. If your health
permits you to come, do please come. But you must not on any
account tax your system. The elevation here is over 4,800 feet. There
is an abrupt rise of 2,000 feet. It is an exceedingly dry place and
without vegetation around.
Your letters have been silent about Hemaprabha Devi. Is she all
right now? And how is your boy (I forget his name) and how is
Tarini?
With love to you all,
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1567

302. LETTER TO MURIEL LESTER
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI , 1

April 25, 1927
I have your letter of the 29th March. I must dictate this letter as
I must keep as much on my back as possible.
I see you want me to give you the name of an Indian friend who
could lay the foundation stone for your new hall. The only one I can
think of and thoroughly recommend and whom I know personally
very well is Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. His address is: Pandit Jawaharlal
Nehru, Clinique Stephani, Montanas Sierre, Switzerland. And you
must write to him. Use this letter and draw him. He will come if you
want him and you will be pleased to have him. He is one of the truest
men I know in India. I am writing to him.
I do not like your resolution at all. Here is the text that I would
recommend. I know it will be difficult for you to pilot my text. But
really that alone will answer if it is backed by corresponding action.
The resolution you have given is very vague and will be accepted by
the Government of India without any difficulty. For, they will say that
they do not thwart any action which the Indian people by their
accredited representatives may desire to carry through. They will say,
‘we have transferred this department to them. Let them adjust the
finances as they like.’ Do you see what I mean? Our case is that the
1

Permanent address

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

301

Government is not sincere, that the people have really no hand in the
matter, and that the transfer of excise revenue to the elected
representatives is itself proof of the Government’s insincerity. Education is a transferred subject and the financial assistance given to
them is from the excise revenue. The Government have thus created a
tie. If the accredited representatives shut up liquor shops, they must
starve education or impose fresh taxation upon a people who are in no
way able to bear the weight even of existing taxation. The remedy,
therefore, is, if the position stated above is correct, for the Government
to keep the excise department themselves and carry the prohibition
policy through and recoup themselves for the loss of revenue by
cutting down the military budget. They have as much right to raise
revenue through liquor as they would have to raise revenue through
legalized prostitution. If this is your position independently of me and
if you can support the position by your own study of facts, figures
and other literature, your resolution would run thus:
In the opinion of this meeting it is wrong for the people of
this country to be party to the maintenance of the liquor traffic
in India and that therefore it was wrong on the part of the
Government to have made the liquor revenue of India a
‘transferred’ (provincial) subject and consequently a principal
source of revenue on which the spending departments of
education and development have to depend, thereby rendering it
practically impossible for the Ministers responsible for these
departments to undertake a policy of prohibition. In the opinion
of this meeting the Government of India should have retained
the Liquor Revenue as a Central subject and carried out a policy
of complete prohibition, the loss of revenue thus sustained being
made up for, by retrenchment in the ever-growing and largely
unnecessary military expenditure. This meeting therefore calls
upon the Government to take the steps necessary to enforce the
wish expressed in this resolution.
You may lick the resolution into shape in any manner you like
so long as you retain the substance of it unimpaired. I fear that you
will find it difficult to carry through the resolution of this character.
But really it is the only thing worth having. And if you find that there
is no atmosphere yet in England for such a drastic resolution—and I
admit that it is drastic—merely put your case before the educated
public, and wait for the resolution. The resolution given to you by
302

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

your friends gives a wrong lead and you know how difficult it is to
undo the mischief done by a thing wrongly begun.
I am getting better though I must still take extra-ordinary care
to give myself as much rest as is possible both for body and mind.
Yours sincerely,

MISS MURIEL LESTER
C HILDREN ’S HOUSE
BOW
LONDON E. 3
From a photostat: S.N. 12475

303. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Silence Day [April 25, 1927] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have your letter.
I am relieved to learn that Purushottam is now improving.
I could not very well follow your telegram. I am however
sending a wire telling to contact Vallabhbhai.
The replies you have given to various people are all right. I shall
let you know if they have now anything to write to me and in case
they do so.
I shall write to Bhai Shankerlal about the suggestion from
Dastane.
I am not at all satisfied with the accounts of the dairy. There are
21 errors and we must not pass over them. Please revise the accounts
and let me have the figures. Go to Parnerkar and draw his attention to
these errors. If Maganlal has come there, have another discussion with
him. How could so many mistakes and such grave ones escape his
notice ? Even if they were not grave, their number is certainly
alarming. When you send me the revised figures, put the wrong ones
alongside. Pursue this matter to its end.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7710. Courtesy: Narandas Gandhi

1

Parnerkar joined the Ashram in March 1927 and the figures about the dairy
appeared in Navajivan dated 8-5-1927. Also vide “Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”,
27-4-1927.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

303

304. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
Sunday [After April 25, 1927] 1
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have your letter. I have already replied to you but the reply
may not have been clear.
My own reason refuses to work in this matter. You may therefore use your reason and come to a decision leaving the responsibility
to me. About Gariyadhar, do what you think best on the whole. As
regards the Panch Talavadi matter, if your reason does not approve of
either Maneklal or Chhaganlal, pay them their due salaries and ask
them to stand on their own feet. About Vajeram, do what you think
proper. Draw the money that you may need from the khadi account
in the Ashram. If the total amount exceeds Rs. 1,000, ask me.
I will continue to be concerned so long as you two brothers do
not give me a satisfactory explanation as regards the accounts of the
dairy. For, it is a question of adhering to truth. If you think it
necessary, I will correct what I have written in Navajivan about it.
Therefore, look carefully in the matter and let me know. Purshottam
must have fully recovered.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 33877

1
In his letter to the addressee dated April 25, 1927, Gandhiji says he was “not
at all satisfied with the accounts of the dairy”; vide “Letter to Narandas Gandhi”, 25-41927. The reference to the dairy accounts here clearly indicates that this was written
on a later date.

304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

305. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
NANDI DURG,

Silence Day, Chaitra Vad 9, April [26] 1 , 1927
CHI. MANI,

I have your letter. The last sentence in it is incomplete, and there
is no signature or date either. This shows undue haste. Sweet are the
fruits of patience, as our proverb says. Mango trees do not yield
overnight, says another. In English one would say haste makes waste.
It was very nice of you to have made a dhoti for Father from your
own sari. If you continue this practice and if Dahyabhai and Yashoda
too follow suit, how nice it would be.
There is no reason to think that the Karachi job will not be
offered to you. But if it is not, there are other places ready to receive
you. These can only be considered when I hear something definite
from Karachi.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, pp. 55-6

306. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Silence Day, Chaitra Vad 9 [April 26, 1927] 2
SISTERS,

It looks as though you gave me permission to stop writing to
you, because you yourselves did not wish to write to me. Or is it
because there is confusion in your Mandal for want of a new president, even as chaos may prevail in a country when there is no king?
Whatever it is, how can I possibly eat and drink and move about
and not think of you? None of you gives me any news about
Gangadevi. I take it, therefore, that she is now restored to normal
health. Do not fail to tell me if any of you fall ill.
There are at present men as well as women in the Ashram. But
1
2

The source has “25”.
Year inferred from the contents

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

305

suppose, some day, only women are left, and robbers attack the
Ashram. Have you ever thought about what you would do in such a
case? If you have not thought about it, please do so now and let me
know. Do not imagine that such an occasion will never arise. It does
arise many a time in our small villages. It happens often in South
Africa.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3646

307. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
Silence Day, Chaitra Vad 9 [April 26, 1927] 1
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

You should not at all hesitate to write detailed letters; you should
also put any question you want to.
Consult Jamnalalji about the expenditure and do whatever you
can. You may wind up anything that you cannot cope with.
After Kashi reads the enclosed letter you may pass it on, if you
like, to Nimu or to Mani; I am not writing separately to everyone.
Send Chi. Prabhudas to Ranavav soon. I am improving steadily.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Let Bhai Fulchandji have at your convenience what amounts he
asks for. Herewith his letter.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9125. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi

1

Year inferred from reference to the letter from Fulchand for reply to which,
vide “Letter to Fulchand K. Shah”, 27-4-1927.

306

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

308. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[April 26, 1927] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I have your letter. Do as you please about Bhuvarji. You must
have noticed that he does not get along with Sitla Sahai. I got the
notes from the Working Committee. I wish everything is settled
amicably. I am at the moment concerned about the safety of our
persons and property. I think it is not right for us to hire the services
of a watchman. I can understand having paid assistants from outside
the Ashram for other jobs. But just as we have to offer our own
prayers so we shall achieve our aim only when we are able to take care
of ourselves. Or we shall have to have recourse to the practice [of
employing watchmen], in which case our experiments with truth and
non-violence would suffer. We cannot have a watchman who commits
violence [against the intruders] nor can we let him suffer violence [at
their hands]. If there is to be violence we should inflict it ourselves
and also suffer it ourselves. Women and children too should acquire
this strength. Just see what an absurd result we get if we visualize a
magnified picture of the reports that have reached me. Let us decide,
on the basis of merit, our course of conduct since we have not yet lost
control of the situation. The East India Company built fortresses and
employed mercenaries simply because they had to submit to the
circumstances. Should we be swayed by circumstances or should we
have them under our sway ? I think we should train workers who
would keep an all-night vigil. They will have to think of some means
of winning over the thieves without having to act in a way contrary to
dharma. Let them stay awake at night and sleep for eight hours in the
day. Sailors do it without their health being affected by it. They may
take turns at this task. But then you may look upon this as a sick
man’s wonderings. Being at a distance, I am building castles in the air.
But you should all think over this individually and collectively and
find out a remedy to your liking. But do come to some final decision
in the matter. We ought to know who the intruders were this time. We
ought to be able to follow their trail since there were so many of them.
Those that were injured can be traced. I shall agree with you even if
1

From the reference to intruders into the Ashram; vide “Letter to Ashram
Women”, 26-4-1927.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

307

you all came to the conclusion that we should wind up all our
activities, because ultimately it is up to all of you there to run the
show. Now we must immediately have our accounts audited. You can
invite Nathji’s auditors or those of the Charkha Sangh or anyone else
you like, but it should no more be left pending consideration. Ask the
auditors to examine the accounts minutely and critically and to make
any suggestions they would like to. Chi. Narandas should sit with
them so that he can help them with information.
This letter is for all of you. I am improving though not very
fast. Yesterday I walked a lot so that I could take rest today.
Blessings from

BAPU

Supplement
PS.
After writing this, I read in the other letter from you about the
arrangements, etc. So according to our practice, the enclosed letter
should be addressed to Chhaganlal, shouldn’t it? It is all right if the
changes have all been introduced after due deliberations.
I have noted what you say about Sir Gangaram. The description
fails to make a favourable impression on me. It is all to the good that
you could learn something about agriculture. Ours is an absolutely
unique way. Our aim is to ensure that we follow our dharma till
the end.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PPS.]
How are Rukhi, Radha?
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7766. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

309. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Tuesday, April 26, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I must write as often as I can for the time being. I shall anxiously await your reply to yesterday’s letter. You must cheer up.
If there are carpenters there you should get the travelling wheel
mended. Where you can yourself do the mending you should do it
308

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

yourself. You may ask the friends there for the necessary tools or buy
some. They are always handy.
I am feeling stronger than yesterday. Subbiah is waiting for the
post.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5219. Courtesy: Mirabehn

310. LETTER TO KSHITISH CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
NANDI HILLS, M YSORE,

April 26, 1927
DEAR KSHITISH BABU,

Though I have not written to you during my illness, I have often
thought of you and the Pratishthan. I am getting on fairly well and
can do a moderate amount of letter-writing, etc. Do please tell me how
you are getting on and how the climate of Sodepur agrees with the
workers there.
I send you an extract from Mirabai’s letter about the travelling
charkha. I too have found the parts to be weak. It will be no
disadvantage if it is made stronger even though the weight increases a
bit. The axle bearings should be metallic and the uprights should
undoubtedly be strong. The spokes too should be more rigid than
they are. However, you will see what can be and should be done.
Mirabai is a most thoughtful worker. Her well meant criticism should
be taken for what it is worth.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 8032

311. LETTER TO R. B. GREGG
NANDI HILLS,

April 26, 1927
MY DEAR GOVIND,

Do not be alarmed. Though I reply to your letter so promptly, it
is not by way of courtesy, but for pleasure; for, I do not yield to you
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

309

in my zeal for dietetic reform. Only my lot having been during the
last 20 years cast in a rigid mould, I have not been able to wriggle out
of it in spite of my intense desire to prosecute dietetic research. But
now that nature had laid me low, the appetite which was never
eradicated, but was only under suppression, has become active and I
go for everything in this direction with avidity.
Now to the point. For the last two days I have made one important change prompted by a fellow crank. He suggested my taking the
juice of fresh neem leaves by mixing it with milk. He says my case is
not one of blood-pressure but of flatulence. Blood pressure there
certainly is; but I am inclined to agree with this friend, that
blood-pressure is a temporary effect of flatulence which is the root
cause, and he thinks I could deal with the latter by taking the juice of
neem leaves with my meals. These leaves are bitter. He says they
contain the necessary vitamins. I am watching their effect now. Your
letter was received yesterday and the change I have made today is to
take unboiled milk. This was suggested by some medical friends at
Amboli. But I was not responsive. But your letter has evoked the
necessary response. My hosts have brought some goats on to this hill
and they are milked under supervision. Milk was therefore brought
this morning fresh from the udders. It was mixed with neem leaves
juice and hot raisin water was added to the milk. This in accordance
with your letter gives me the vitamins from the milk and in accordance with that friend gives me the vitamins from the neem leaves. I
am therefore at the present moment omitting fresh vegetables because
I am not yet satisfied that these vegetables are necessary especially as I
am taking those bitter leaves and unboiled milk. At what point are
vitamins destroyed when you boil leafy vegetables ? What is the virtue
of vitamins? What is the quantity of leafy vegetables one should take
in order to get the required measure of vitamins? What quantity of
unboiled milk will give the vitamins required? Is it true that mere
heating the milk does not destroy vitamins? Or they are only destroyed when milk is brought to the boiling point?
I have tried the nuts in the manner you suggest. I had them
reduced to butter. The pulp was as fine as butter. I had almonds
turned into milk. But I could not cope with it, no matter how far you
pulverized the nuts. They must, it appears, pass through the double
process of digestion like all non-flesh foods. It is only animal food
which does not tax the large intestines. Before nuts, therefore, can
310

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

attain the digestibility of milk, the first process of digestion must be
gone through outside the human system. I was told when I was in
London, that melted nuts had that effect. I do not know how far this is
true. I want to succeed in non-milk experiment because I am
convinced that milk, apart from mother’s milk, is not human food,
nor is cooking essential. A perfect food therefore for human needs
has yet to be found. From the spiritual stand-point, I have a horror of
animal milk, and that it is goat’s milk I am taking does not lessen the
horror. It merely enables me to respect the letter of my vow, though I
know that the spirit of it is hardly kept if not already broken. I have
reconciled myself to goat’s milk under the delusive belief that I must
have for my work on the earth in this body and so I cling to it at the
expense of my innermost conviction. He, therefore, who can wean me
from milk, will be in a way a deliverer. There are spiritual experiences
which I know have been interrupted because of my taking milk. When
I was living rigidly on sun-baked fruits and sun-baked nuts without
using fire and this was for several years—the animal passion was not
merely under conscious subjection and control, but it was, so far as
my memory serves me, thoroughly absent and I believe that I had
almost entirely conquered it. All that has been changed since my
return to milk diet. I can no longer claim that immunity. I can only
say in all humility that though I am conscious of that passion, I can
keep it under subjection and appear before the world a respectable
human being from whose lust no woman need fear. But it cost me all
my strength to keep the brute in me under disciplined subjection and
control. I am positive that a full-grown man does not need all that
effort to keep his passions under check. On the contrary, the energy
that set free when the passions are kept under control can, if he wishes,
be transferred into unconquerable power for the good of mankind.
But somehow or other, I fancy that I shall never attain that freedom,
that personal swaraj, so long as I have to struggle against the effect of
the highly exciting unnatural food; whereas, nuts are fine muscle
builders without being stimulants in the sense in which I have used
them. Now you can understand why I reply to your letter so
promptly.
It is a great pity that you have not yet got rid of your piles. No
mere dietetic change will give you relief. Medicine will be only a
palliative. I am making explorations into which I must not enter now,
because, I am merely on the threshold of them. I am collecting round
me friends who have experimented. I shall give you a report if I see
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

311

any signs of real success. It hurts me however to think that you did
not have an operation for want of means. Dr. Ansari is a first-class
surgeon. I could send a note to him if you don’t know him. He will, I
am sure, gladly perform the operation and put you either in his own
house or in some place where you will have to pay nothing. You
could also have the operation performed by one of the cleverest of
surgeons in India, that is, Dr. Dalal in Bombay. There are not one but
more than one hospitals that I know will admit you with greatest
pleasure. You may not know that Dr. Dalal operated on me, Devdas,
Mrs. Jamnalalji and, last but not the least, Andrews. You have only to
let me know what arrangements you would like and they shall be
made. Do not hesitate please to write to me of your discoveries about
the spinning-wheel and machinery. Of course I am interested in your
scholastic researches, and, as a matter of fact, this enforced rest gives
me just the time to read letters and to reflect upon topics in which
both you and I are interested. From the length of the dictated letter
you can infer that I am not badly off though I need to lie on my back
as much as possible. There is no difficulty about dictating letters and
even sitting up for a time to write as I did yesterday, it being my
silence day.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
R. B. GREGG, E SQ.
C ARE OF S.E. S TOKES, E SQ.
KOTGARH , S IMLA HILLS
From a photostat: S.N. 12571

312. LETTER T0 MAGANLAL GANDHI
[After April 26, 1927] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

This time the thieves in the Ashram seem to have been more
bold. We have to decide how to deal with them—whether we would
like to shift to the nearby villages, or, we would like to fight the
1

The contents of this letter closely match those of the letter to the addressee
dated April 26, 1927; vide “Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”, 26-4-1927. The nature of
reference to the auditing of accounts suggests that this was written on a later date.

312

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

thieves, or, would do both. We will never seek the help from the
Government. If we wish to deal with it ourselves, we will have to make
arrangement for lights. In that case, we have no option but to have the
electricity. It is the cheapest source and is our . . .1 We have to use the
engine for water and perhaps the same may be used for electric lights.
For the protection of the guards, we will have to make special
arrangement. The situation remains the same even if we ourselves do
the work of guards. We have taken up so many activities here that we
cannot do without taking steps for their protection or we will have to
wind up all the activites....2 We have to see how long we can adhere to
ahimsa in spite of our activities....3
I am not able to take any decision on behalf of everyone. One
man alone cannot do that. Whatever decision you all take jointly will
be the best. I will only say that it is necessary for us to take a prompt
decision in the matter.
I am reminding you again about the auditor. Inspect the sales
depot. There is a risk here. We have to take into consideration that
too.
Nurbanu has come here. It is more than a month since she
decided to sell off her ornaments. She says that there is no change in
it. So they are to be sold off if there are any buyers.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32916

313. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
NANDI DURG,

Chaitra Vad [11, April 27, 1927] 4
BHAISHRI FULCHAND,

I have your letter. Cholera has broken out in an epidemic form
in Porbandar and Bhai Amritlal Thakkar is afraid we cannot hold the
convention in June. Is it true? He has another reason, viz., my
1,
2
3
4

A few words are illegible at each of these places.
ibid.
ibid.
The source has Chaitra Vad 10, which however was a kshaya (skipped)

date.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

313

indifferent health and I too agree with him. Please let me know the
various aspects of the situation.
I have forwarded to Chi. Chhaganlal the letter about funds for
the school, asking him to send the amount as and when possible. 1 I
also understand from your letter that you have no intention of coming
under the Vidyapith and that, if your present requirements are met
with, you will later on manage yourself somehow.
I have been writing to Narandas about the khadi work.
Now about the Satyagraha Dal.
There will never be too many satyagrahis; my blessings
therefore even to those who would try to become one. But are we
likely to gain any special advantage by forming a Dal? There could
be recruiting for an immediate task on hand. Will the Dal be useful as
a stand-by when an occasion comes up? Or if we have such an organization, it should, I am convinced by experience, be engaged in some
constructive activity. In the event of a struggle, we can draw from it
the required number of workers and the rest can come and join of
their own accord. What will these 18 persons do as long as there is no
occasion to launch a struggle? Of course they do carry on their
spinning; when I speak of constructive activity I mean that which
would keep them occupied all the time. All these 18 persons have
their own business to attend to. At the moment they have no social
activity to take up collectively.
Who will build up faultless character? How is it defined? You for
one know well that the Satyagraha Ashram exists just for it. And even
there, who could certify faultless character?
Satyagraha and the satyagrahis are like the sun and its rays, you
cannot hide them under a bushel, they cannot be unmade by your
refusing to recognize them.
Everywhere today I see occasions for satyagraha; but where are
those who would offer it? Those that would are ever ready. They are
preparing themselves and when they have the confidence they will
never wait for my permission or anyone else’s.
In spite of all this cautioning, I would ask you to let all that you
have done stand as it is. It would not have mattered had you not
worked it up, but where the intention is noble there is no room for
disappointment or for undoing what has been done.
1

314

Vide “Letter to Chhaganlal Gandhi”, 26-4-1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Think of something that would strengthen the bond among the
workers. As for my criticism in the first instance you should think it
over yourself and then make such additions and alterations as you
think right.
When we meet we shall again discuss it further.
This Dal is certainly not in response to those who are pressing us
to take up political activity. Their point of view too deserves to be
understood. It is a different thing that you and I are not interested in
it. They maintain that even today we should carry on a movement, as
far as we can, over all the issues that are believed to have a political
aspect. Satyagraha may or may not come off, but let us at least present
a petition regarding our present miseries. If nothing more, let us come
together for discussions since we are allowed to. If nothing else, let us
at any rate exchange views and so on.
This line of thought cannot certainly be dismissed; we too had
been thinking this way in the past. Your Dal does not answer this
expectation. You should find out some simple way for them, or help
them find it. One of the ways to do this is to willingly leave the
organization of the Political Conference to them and help them with it
as much as you can.
As I write, more comes to my pen. But if I set out to “print” all
of it I would tire my hand and my doctor will warn me that my
blood-pressure may rise.
You should therefore strike the ‘t’s and dot the ‘i’s in what I
have written today. And if you cannot, you should get me to do it on
some other occasion.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 2866. Courtesy: Sharadabehn Shah

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

315

314. LETTER TO V. L. PHADKE
NANDI HILLS, M YSORE,

Tuesday, Chaitra Vad 11 [April 27, 1927] 1
BHAISHRI MAMA,

I have your letter. It appears the Godhra Ashram has at present a
good number of students. But then you also could be said to have
done good work. You must have noticed however that the Ashram
children did more spinning in that way. Did you read Ramachandran’s report of Jamia Millia?
It may be said the boys there did absolutely no spinning for six
years. Just a knowledgeable, affectionate teacher who had faith in it
has changed the entire atmosphere of the Ashram. Many such stories
come to me. I do not write all this as criticism of you but only to
strengthen your faith if I may.
But I do not want to tell you things, I want to hear what you
have to say. How do you feel about Ramanandji’s work? What about
that of the Punjab? Did you cope with that task?
Everyone believes I should be all right. The doctors here say
that I have no illness as such, but that I must have long rest. The
weather here is fine. The view cannot compare with the one at Chinchpokli.
If it were your responsibility, what would you do about the
nuisance of prowlers round the Ashram? Think long before you
answer.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3847

1

316

The source has Chaitra Vad 10, which however was a kshaya date.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

315. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised April 27, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your cheerful letter. If you can realize every word of
what you have written, all your trouble is over and also my anxiety.
We really live through and in our work. We perish through our
perishable bodies, if instead of using them as temporary instruments,
we identify ourselves with them. The more I observe and study things,
the more convinced I become that sorrow over separation and death is
perhaps the greatest delusion. To realize that it is a delusion is to
become free. There is no death, no separation of the substance. And
yet the tragedy of it is that though we love friends for the substance
we recognize in them, we deplore the destruction of the insubstantial
that covers the substance for the time being. Whereas real friendship
should be used to reach the whole through the fragment. You seem to
have got the truth for the moment. Let it abide for ever.1
I do not know how Krishnanandji came to think that I was
coming there in June. What I did say—I think in letter was that I
would like to come as early as I could. I note your warning. There is
little chance of my being able to leave the place before June, if then.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5220. Courtesy: Mirabehn

316. LETTER TO JAMNABEHN
April 27, 1927
An illness comes on with a steed’s speed and goes away at a
snail’s pace. If only you girls had allowed me to starve on that day
instead of getting fruits and other things ready for me, I would not
have fallen ill. You should show your affection not by feasting me but
by making me fast. Even if I come asking for food after doing a lot
of work, I must be told, ‘Now be patient, rest for a while. We will let
1

“I had grasped the truth with my intellect, but the heart lagged behind for
still many years after this.” (Mirabehn)
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

317

you have a little milk and maybe an orange.’ You can say this to me
nicely. Don’t you know I often deal with Rasik and Manu in this way
? Who would call me cruel on this account? Why must I be my sole
guardian? Why can’t you girls be to me what I am to Manu? Now
when you return, be kind to me in this way.
Blessings to all the sisters from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

317. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
Wednesdays [April 27, 1927] 1
I have your letter. Herewith find the letters from Ganesh and
Ramachandra. Answers to these are also enclosed. Let me know if
From the Gujarati original: C. W. 8701. Courtesy: Radhabehn
Chaudhri ut what Ramachandra writes.
The statistics about cows and buffaloes will prove useful.
Blessings from

BAPU

318. UNTOUCHABILITY AND UNREASON
A correspondent from Mahad writes:
It gives me much sorrow to let you know that there was a riot on the
20th of March last between touchables and untouchables at Mahad. There was
held a conference of the Colaba District depressed classes on the 19th and 20th
ultimo. The meeting was quite successful. But whilst the crowd was dispersing,
Mr. A. V. Chitre of the Social Service League of Bombay told the people as
they were thirsty and as the sun was very hot that they could go to the public
tank and drink water. There were some who tried to dissuade the men from
going to the tank. But Dr. Ambedkar the president decided to march the men to
the tank. Even the police inspector could not feel the gravity of the situation,
and instead of stopping the crowd from proceeding to the tank, went with
them. The tank is situated in the midst of the Brahmin locality. As however no
1

From the reference to the statistics about cows and buffaloes printed in
Navajivan, 8-5-1927

318

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

one was aware that the untouchables were going to the tank there was no
disturbance, and hundreds of them quenched their thirst at the tank with cries of
“Hara Hara Mahadev”. Meanwhile the touchables came to the scene and they
watched the incident with rage. The crowd of untouchables then went back to
the pandal for their meals. Within an hour of this the Mahad public was
suddenly awakened by the wild cry Gurava and they were told that the
untouchables were thinking of entering the temple of Vireshwar.
It was a false cry; but in no time the temple was filled by an infuriated
mob of touchables who had sticks in their hands. The poor untouchables had
no intention whatsoever of going to the temple. But the touchables finding no
untouchable attempting to enter the temple practically ran amuck, went to the
bazaar and began to beat any untouchable they came across in the street. All
the while this beating was going on on the part of the touchables, not one
untouchable offered any resistance. A few touchables who sympathized with
the untouchables tried to protect them; but the furious mob would not be
checked. They even rushed into the huts of shoe-makers and such others and
beat them severely. The helpless untouchables ran wildly for help; but none
was offered by the shopkeepers. The untouchables who were in the pandal were
derided by the touchables for not coming out in the open to fight. There were
nearly 1,500 of the former in the pandal and if they had offered to fight there
would have been a great calamity and Hinduism would have been disgraced. Dr.
Ambedkar justified the advice that he had given on the strength of the
resolution that was passed in the Bombay Legislative Council and on the
opinion expressed by the Mahad Municipality that the untouchables were
lawfully entitled to take water from public tanks and wells.

I have omitted from the correspondent’s letter several passages
giving further details. But the letter appears to me to be genuine and
does not in any way appear to be an over-estimate. Assuming then
that the incident is correctly reported there can be no question about
the unprovoked lawlessness on the part of the so-called higher classes.
For, it should be remembered that it was not the drinking of water at
the tank which had brought together the “touchables” to the temple
but the false report that the untouchables were wanting to enter the
temple. But one can hardly expect sanity to exist side by side with
unreason. Untouchability itself has no reason behind it. It is an
inhuman institution. It is tottering and it is sought to be supported by
the so-called orthodox party by sheer brute force.
The so-called untouchables have brought the question a step
nearer solution by their exemplary self-restraint under most provoVOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

319

king circumstances. Had they retaliated it would have been perhaps
difficult to distribute the blame. As it is, the blame is all on the side of
the “touchables”. Brute force will not sustain untouch-ability. It will
bring about a revulsion of feeling in favour of the suppressed classes.
It is a sign of the times that there were at least some “touchables”
who tried to defend the poor untouchables. One could wish that there
were many more in Mahad. Silent sympathy on such occasions is not
of much use. Every Hindu, who considers the removal of untouchability to be of paramount importance, should on such occasions
prove his sympathy by publicly defending the suppressed classes and
having his own head broken in defending the helpless and the downtrodden.
I cannot help thinking that Dr. Ambedkar was fully justified in
putting to test the resolutions of the Bombay Legislative Council and
the Mahad Municipality by advising the so-called untouchables to go
to the tank to quench their thirst. No incident of this character should
pass by unnoticed on the part of associations like the Hindu Mahasabha interested in this reform. Let them investigate the statements
made by my correspondent and if they can be substantiated, let them
condemn the action of the “touchables”. There is nothing like the
growth of enlightened public opinion for eradicating everything evil,
which untouchability undoubtedly is.
Young India, 28-4-1927

319. SASTRI AS FIRST AMBASSADOR
Very considerable relief will be felt by the Indian settlers in
South Africa over the announcement that the Right Hon’ble V. S.
Srinivasa Sastri has consented to become India’s first Agent-general
in that sub-continent, if the post is finally offered to him by the
Government of India. It is a great sacrifice that Sastri and the Servants
of India Society have made. It is an open secret that left to himself he
was not inclined to undertake the responsibility and to leave his work
in India. But he has yielded to the pressure of friends, especially when
it was urged upon him that he alone could successfully inaugurate the
working of the Agreement in bringing about which he played not an
inconsiderable part. We know from the cables that were sent from time
to time from South Africa that the Europeans were anxious that he
should accept the honour. Sjt. Srinivasa Sastri had by his eloquence,
320

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

transparent sincerity, sweet reasonableness, and extreme earnestness
won the esteem and respect of the Union Government and the
Europeans in South Africa during the short time that he was there as a
member of the Habibullah Deputation. I know how nervously anxious
our countrymen in South Africa were that he should become the first
Agent. It was impossible for Sjt. Srinivasa Sastri whom God has
endowed with a generous nature not to respond to such a unanimous
call from South Africa. It is almost a foregone conclusion that the
appointment will be duly made and very shortly announced.
The first Agent-general will have his work cut out for him. Both
the Union Government and our countrymen have no doubt high
expectations of India’s first ambassador. The Union Government no
doubt think that being an Indian and a person of great distinction he
will make their path smooth with the Indian community in connection
with any measures that they may take. In other words, they will expect
him to be their sympathetic interpreter both to the Indian community
and to the Government of India. Our countrymen equally surely
expect him to insist upon an honourable and even a liberal interpretation and fulfilment of the Agreement. It is any time a delicate
task to please rival claimants, more so now in South Africa where the
clash of conflicting interests is simply bewildering. But I know that if
anybody can hold the scales absolutely even and thus give satisfaction
to all parties concerned, Sjt. Srinivas Sastri is certainly the one to be
able to do so. I feel certain that the Union Ministers do not expect the
new Agent to surrender an inch of what is justly due to the Indian
community. All he can be expected to do is to persuade the Indian
settlers not to go behind and travel beyond the Settlement 1 of 1914,
for some time to come at any rate, until they have proved themselves
entitled, by exemplary self-restraint and behaviour, to an enlargement
of the position attained by the Agreement of 1914. Our countrymen
in South Africa, if they intend to make the Agent’s position fairly
easy and their own position secure, will not expect him to work
wonders. It will be wrong to look forward to a complete transformation of the old position, because an honourable Agreement has
been arrived at and because a great countryman is going to South
Africa to see to the fulfilment of that Agreement. They must remember that the Rt. Hon. Srinivasa Sastri is not going there as their counsel
briefed to attend to every individual grievance. To smother him with
1

Vide “The Indians’ Relief Act, 1914”, after 5-6-1914.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

321

detailed individual grievances would be to kill the goose that lays the
golden eggs. He goes there as a trustee for India’s honour. He goes
there to safeguard the rights and liberty of the general body of Indian
settlers. He will be there to see that no fresh restrictive legislation is
embarked upon by the Union Government and that the existing
restrictive laws are administered liberally and with due regard to the
vested rights. Any individual grievance therefore that he might be
called upon to tackle will have to be in terms of the position I have set
forth, that is to say, it will have to be illustrative of some general
principle of wide application. Unless therefore the Indian community
exercises prudential restraint upon themselves in approaching him for
redress of their individual grievances, they will make the Agent’s
position intolerable and even useless for the high purpose for which it
is intended. Indeed such an ambasador’s usefulness lies not so much
in work appertaining to his official capacity as to the indirect service
he can render by his sociableness, and by his character, which leaves
its impress upon anything and anybody that it comes in contact with
officially or otherwise. And if our countrymen desire to make use of
the great qualities of head and heart that Sjt. Sastri posseses, they will
bear in mind the limitations I have endeavoured to set forth.
I understand that if Sjt. Sastri goes, Mrs. Sastri too will accompany him. This will be a great gain to the settlers. Let the Indian sisters
in South Africa gather round Mrs. Sastri and surround her with every
affection. They will find in her an invaluable instrument of social
service. She will act as a leaven in their midst to raise the general tone
among the many thousand Indian sisters who are scattered throughout
South Africa.
Young India, 28-4-1927

320. A TERRIBLE CONTRAST
A friend having for the first time seen New Delhi and the
Assembly Hall in March last writes:1
I was the other day for the first time in the Assembly Hall and it was for
the first time then that I saw New Delhi also. I could see how millions must
have been poured into the construction of New Delhi to make it so imposing.
The Assembly Hall too presents an equally imposing appearance. But as I
1

322

Only extracts are reproduced here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

came out of the Assembly Hall, I saw dilapidated huts which turned out to be
the labour camp where I thought must be living the coolies working at the
construction of New Delhi....
The contrast between the palaces built in New Delhi for wealthy people
and the miserable huts allotted to the people whose labour was responsible for
the palaces was too terrible for contemplation....
How, I thought to myself, could the members of the Assembly day after
day miss the horrible contrast which I could see even during the few moments
that I was in New Delhi? . . .
I have said nothing to any of the members. But could you not do
anything in this matter? I have said nothing because I could influence no one;
but you may think it worth while doing something. You are a friend of the
poor and might be able to secure some relief. Anyway I could not help
disburdening myself to you.

I have summarized the main contents of the letter which my fair
correspondent has written in Hindi. The criminal disparity that exists
between the condition of labour and that of capital is no new thing in
modern times. The discovery made by the friend reminds one of the
discovery said to have been made centuries ago by Gautama Buddha.
It was no new thing he saw. But the shock received by the sight of old
age, disease and other miseries of life transformed his life and
materially affected the fortunes of the world. It is well that this lady
has received her first shock. If she and the other cultured women of
India, who have received their education at the expense of the very
poor people of whom the correspondent writes so pathetically, will
dive deeper and make some slight return to these poor people by
making common cause with them, some alleviation in their distressful
condition will not be long in coming. Every palace that one sees in
India is a demonstration not of her riches but of the insolence of
power that riches give to the few, who owe them to the miserably
requitted labours of the millions of the paupers of India. We have a
Government which is based upon and which only exists by the
exploitation of the toiling millions.
A friend sent me the other day a cutting from an English
newspaper which considered Rs. 1,500 for an Englishman to be not
enough for his wants in India, and it warned Englishmen from
venturing out to India if they could get not more than Rs. 1,500 per
month. There is no need to quarrel with that standard. From the
writer’s own standpoint, Rs. 1,500 per month is demonstrably
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

323

inadequate because he regards club life, a motor-car, migration to a
hill-station during the hot months, education of children in England
to be the necessary minimum. All one can say and one must say about
this standard is, that if it is the indispensable minimum, it is a standard
too expensive for India to afford; and however beneficial in the
abstract may the services of English officials be demonstrated to be, if
the toiling millions are to live, they must get along without these
beneficial services for the simple reason that the benefit is beyond the
reach of their pockets. I suppose it is possible to demonstrate that if
the millions of India could be translated to some bracing Himalayan
plateau, they would be able to double the length of their days on
earth. But it is a proposition which they will laugh out of court as
beyond their reach.
What the lady observed in New Delhi is but a tiny symptom of
an ever-growing and deep-seated disease which is daily destroying the
lives of thousands of people. It is quite possible to imagine that if an
energetic member of the Assembly moved a resolution calling upon
the Government to provide better housing accommodation for the
labourers, the resolution would be carried, that it would not be vetoed
and that the Government would gladly give effect to it at the expense
of millions poorer still than these labourers. I am sure that this is not
what the fair friend really desires. What she desires in common with
every Indian who knows anything of the country is a radical change
in the system of government which is top-heavy and which under its
intolerable weight is crushing day after day the poor inhabitants of
this country who are groaning at the bottom. I have pointed the way
out of this difficult situation times without number. I do not know
another.
Young India, 28-4-1927

321. NOTES
KHADDAR AND P REM MAHAVIDYALAYA

Acharya Gidwani has been slowly but surely revolutionizing the
mentality of the boys learning in Prem Mahavidyalaya at Brindaban.
In the course of a letter he says:
I do not boast of my khaddar work in this Mahavidyalaya; but I can
safely assure you that you will not be disappointed when you see it. Beginning
with gentle pressure I have arrived at a stage when every teacher and student

324

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

wears khaddar without grudging and everyone spins on takli for 45 minutes
daily. Carding is done by turns and weaving is taught to select students.
Dyeing has been started. About Rs. 2,000 worth of khaddar has been sold
through the Prem Mahavidyalaya during the session, and everyone in Muttra
and the neighbourhood looks upon the Prem Mahavidyalaya as a stronghold of
shuddha khaddar. Two tailors have been busy sewing exclusively khaddar for
months in the Mahavidyalaya and will continue doing so.

I congratulate Acharya Gidwani and his staff and students. His
performance reminds me of a similar performance reported in these
columns with reference to the Jamia Millia of Delhi. These two
instances and more can be quoted to show that where there are
earnestness and faith there is no difficulty about response from
students. I have said repeatedly that it is the easiest thing to popularize
khaddar and hand-spinning in schools if the teachers have faith
combined with knowledge and perseverance. I know of no school
where these three conditions being fulfilled there has been failure.
Young India, 28-4-1927

322. LETTER TO DR. M. A. ANSARI
NANDI HILLS,

April 28, 1927
DEAR DR. ANSARI,

It was a treat to receive your letter. But you will remember that
you owe me a medical visit—can’t call it professional because a
professional visit will carry with it Rs. 1,000 per day if not more, now
that you have been twice to Europe since the promise of a visit. And,
is not each European visit supposed to add to the capacity of doctors
and lawyers and therefore also their daily fees? Meanwhile, I shall
bear your instructions in my mind. My chief difficulty is how to
control the mind and not to let it think, unless I develop dementia. If
you say I may not reduce my thoughts to writing or not even give
utterance by speech even in the shape of conversation, I can somewhat
understand; but I do not know how I can prevent the doings of
Hindus and Mussalmans from making me think furiously. Nor do I
know how to prevent the growing starvation of millions acting upon
my mind. I do not need to read papers and get information to make
me continuously think of these things. The ony way to prevent me
from thinking of these things is for Hindus and Mussalmans to behave
like human beings rather than sub-human animals and for all of us
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

325

who get more than our share of our daily bread to think of the vast
majority of the teeming millions and for their sakes to discard foreign
cloth and for their encouragement to spin during every idle moment.
If it is really a fact that high blood-pressure is due to an overwrought brain, I seriously contend that the only way to remove this
tension would be to prescribe a starvation cure. Deep down in me I do
feel that a prolonged fast is the only radical cure because during the
21 days fast1 , I could see that after 10 days I has ceased even to think
of the outside world. The starvation had created that temporary mental
adjustment. Whilst I am eating even if it was possible the mind refuses
not to think. But under starvation the mind will co-operate in ceasing
to think and worry. And, if in spite of the care that I am myself taking
and in spite of the army of medical friends who see me and examine
me, in spite of the quacks whose opinion I voluntarily seek and in
spite of the undivided attention of devoted nurses, blood-pressure
refuses to yield and weakness persists, I shall certainly risk causing
temporary pain to many friends and impose a fast upon myself either
to end or to mend this vegetating and vexing state. But there is no
cause for any alarm. It seems that the pressure will go down. For the
last two days I am feeling stronger than when I came to Nandi. The
highest pressure during last week was 188. On Tuesday last it was
found to be 180. This was the first decline yet noticed after the
collapse.
This hill is 4,850 feet, therefore, not so high as Ooty nor so cold;
but it is cool enough and Doctor Mehta considers that I should not
[go] to a higher altitude. Others again say that higher the altitude the
better it is for . . .2 When doctors differ what is a poor patient to do?
Some day when you are free I shall certainly expect you when we
shall talk not merely of my health but about several other things of
infinitely greater importance.
Please give my love to all who think of me and accept it for
yourself.
Yours sincerely,
From the photostat: S.N. 14119 & 12949

1
2

326

From September 17 to October 8, 1924.
The source is blank here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

323. LETTER TO SHANKARAN
NANDI HILLS,

April 28, 1927
MY DEAR SHANKARAN,

Your letter is a tonic for me. You are realizing all my expectations. I am delighted that the kitchen is in a perfect state now. Who is
your right-hand man? How is Giriraj doing? Are you keeping perfect
health? Your kitchen must become a treasure store of health of mind,
body and spirit. There must be all about it and for all times a sweetness, restfulness and peacefulness which should be capable of being
detected by any passer-by. Everything in its place, everything clean,
no foreign smells of a multiplicity of condiments, only the natural
smell of simple edibles and workers working harmoniously, contentedly and smilingly in their own persons showing perfect health. Do
you know that the rishis of old were poets, philosophers, cooks, scavengers all rolled into one? Nalaraja was a wise ruler, an ideal husband
and a finished cook. Every occupation may become disgraced by bad
associations and every occupation can become a stepping-stone to
salvation when it is undertaken by a wise man.
Yours,
From a photostat: S.N. 14120

324. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised April 28/29, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

Your latest letter is still more cheerful. I hope this mood will last.
I very nearly sent you a card in Hindi today. But it was too late. This
[is] written after the receipt of the post, but also after its departure
which precedes the receipt
I have made a slight change in the food here which is approved
by a distinguished doctor who is living nearby. I am now taking raw
milk and adding now and then juice of a few neem leaves and have
omitted chapatis and vegetables for the time being. I may revert to the
latter two if it becomes necessary. There is now noticed a decline in
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

327

the blood-pressure for the first time since the collapse. I am feeling
altogether better.
The rest through Mahadev.
With love,
BAPU

29th Morning
You should certainly translate Rolland’s book. But if you are at
peace with yourself now your permanent attainment of internal peace
is far more important than anything else. You like the people there.
You can therefore give them much and take also. I would like you if
you can to grow to your full height there before you leave. My
suggestion then is that you should set apart religiously an hour daily
for translation and make such progress as you can. Meanwhile, God
might open the way for me to stay there for the necessary time and
the facts may be revised in consultation with Mahadev. Or when you
feel that your work there is finished you can come wherever I am if I
do not come there soon enough. But you shall decide what to do. I
have told you you are free to come here whenever you like. Only do
not please regard the translation work more important than what you
are doing there. If a man is to be judged by his deeds and not by
whatever the sanest man of the age may from a distant study of him
say of him then the lives of co-workers will be the best judgement on
me. You understand what I mean, do you not?
I fancy I have forgotten to answer a question you asked in one
of your letters. Undoubtedly the interpretation of your vow is that
your last meal should be finished before 7 p.m. or dusk whichever the
vow is. You are therefore right in your interpretation. The rule
regarding vows is when in doubt interpret against yourself, i.e., in
favour of greater restriction.
BAPU

[PS.]
Please tell Lady Slade1 I am thankful for her concern about me.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5221. Courtesy: Mirabehn

1

328

Addressee's mother
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

325. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
Friday [April 29] 1 1927
CHI. MANI,

I have your letters. It would be very good indeed for you to take
your meals at the Ashram mess. Read my letter2 to Shankaran on the
subject. You have done well to take charge of Champa3 .
How is your health now?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, p. 55

326. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
Chaitra Vad 13 [April 29, 1927] 4
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

Read this letter and then send it immediately to Nimu.
Let me know what you and Kashi feel. Ramdas is getting good
training. At present, he is very much interested in it. Let us see what
happens later on.
I am not at all inclined to send Prabhudas to Almora. I am
trying to bring him here. He will get everything here.
I even feel like sending him to Mathuradas in Panchagani. It is
better not to do anything in haste. These days, it is neither hot nor
cold, so he could go for a couple of days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original 32858

1

Vide “Letter to Shankaran”, 28-4-1927.
ibid.
3
Dr. Pranjivandas Jagjivan Mehta’s daughter-in-law
4
From Mathuradas’s presence at Panchagani where he went in the year 1927.
Chaitra Vad 13 in 1927 corresponded to April 29.
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

329

327. LETTER TO JAGJIVANDAS NARAYANDAS MEHTA
NANDI HILLS,

April 30, 1927
Do a fine job of what you take up as a trust. You should give
up the work at Lathi if you are doubtful about it or cannot cope
with it.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 69

328. LETTER TO SUMANT MEHTA
April 30, 1927
SUJNA BHAISHRI,

I have your letter. Indeed you have presented an abstract
discussion. Well, I like that too, but at the moment you are in the land
of Narasinh Mehta; so I am reminded of his morning hymn.
For the present let us vie with each other in getting well quick.
Please convey my congratulations to Bhai Raichura on the privilege of
serving you. Vandemataram to Sharadabehn.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

329. LETTER TO NIMU
April 30, 1927
CHI. NIMU,

Next year you will be married, and begin a new life. I want you
and Ramdas to get ready and prepare yourselves for it. I write this to
you after I have written to Ramdas. I have long since been
corresponding with Ramdas. Go through the enclosed extract from
Ramdas’s letter.
I wish both of you would devote your lives to service; Ramdas
does wish to. You should earn your livelihood too from it, as
Maganlal does and many others too. I wish you two could become an
ideal couple, for which you should begin your efforts from now on.
330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Whatever time you can spare from your household duties you may
devote to khadi work, for which you too would be paid. I have been
doing it in two cases; one of Chi. [Kishorelal] and Gomatibehn and
the other of Thakkar and his wife. But you can surpass them both.
The job that you are required to do will be easy but you will get the
satisfaction that you can earn on your own, and one should always try
to prove that one can. You can run your home along with this
occupation, and, I think, you can also look after your children when
you have them. Thousands of husbands and wives from poor families
earn their living in this way. You know yourself the cases of Dudabhai
and Danibehn, of Ramjibhai and Gangabehn. We shall also remain
poor alongside of them. Only then shall we be fit to realize God.
For accomplishing this you ought to improve your ginning,
carding and spinning. Side by side, you must improve your knowledge of Gujarati and pick up some book-keeping. You can find time
for all this. You must improve your health too. Sanskrit and so on are
of course to be there.
*

*

*1

Consider all this and write to me frankly what you think about
it. Write to me as a daughter would speak to her mother without
reserve, or like two friends opening their hearts to each other. Write to
me what you want to do without bothering about my likes. Tell me
frankly about anything in my letter that you do not approve. Nothing
can be accomplished by force; something will be by what you
willingly undertake to do.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

330. LETTER TO SITARAM PURUSHOTTAM
PATWARDHAN2
April 30, 1927
In my article about buffaloes I have said nothing about
destroying them; on the contrary an attempt should be made to raise
their breed. Where the need for a thing is real it will surely be
3

1
2
3

As in the source
Alias Appal
Vide “Conditions of Cow-protection”, pp. 197-9.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

331

protected. What I mean is that cow-protection alone can be part of
dharma. It includes compassion for other animals. But these are not
being destroyed. There is no need to take up the stupendous task of
stopping their destruction. And if we are able to protect the cow, all
else that needs to be done will be accomplished automatically. It is not
the purport of my writing to ignore the buffalo. I only indicate the
limit of our ability. Even the villages ought to have something in the
nature of a tannery, a dairy. In other words, the tanning process in the
villages needs to be improved. There is need for some sophistication
in the manner of skinning. There should be some expert experimenting with regard to the cow; there has to be knowledge of the
methods of increasing their yield. It is our misfortune that today we
can only carry this knowledge from the town to the country. At the
moment we are not even aware of this science. I mean, we shall be able
to do nothing before those who have learnt it in the West evolve it
anew with an appreciation of the local environment and in an
assimilable form. So, for the time being, we shall only be experimenting, the point being that an industry which is today handled
mainly by ignorant men for earning a livelihood should be taken up
by the educated class, keeping in view our country’s welfare, as is
being done in the case of spinning and weaving. Efforts in the direction have now been initiated in the Ashram.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

331. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
[April 30, 1927] 1
CHI. RAMDAS,

I have your letter. It is very good that you have started.
The letter from Khushalbhai is nice; please let me know what
you wrote in reply to him. Service does include one’s interest. One
who serves with a pure heart is always provided for by God. It
certainly is an inexhaustible source of learning. No sincere worker has
1

The concluding paragraph of the letter appears in the manuscript of Mahadev
Desai’s Diary under this date.

332

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ever starved. Maganlal and others have lost nothing, on the contrary
they have ennobled their lives and attained their goal.
If you feel that you lack aptitude for doing a thing, this
shortcoming can certainly be removed by trying hard. Experience will
bring all the knowledge one needs. There will be no difficulty whatever in raising a grand edifice on the foundations of noble character.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 6856

332. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
Chaitra Vad 14 [April 30, 1927] 1
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

We all deliberated a lot this morning about Prabhudas. Along
with other places you are thinking of, keep in mind Nandi too.
However, Rajaji and others are of the opinion that it would be better if
no sick person is sent there. I do not put Prabhudas in the category of
such persons. For him, it is better if we take a decision soon. Why
cannot he go to Doctor in Dholwad? Gangabehn will look after him
also. And at Panchgani, there is the facility of Mathuradas’s room and
he could stay with him. Instead of my asking Mathuradas, it is better if
you ask him. He will be a little confused if I ask him. Or, instead of
going there, he should come here. Gangadharrao says that he can go
to Hubli. It is at a height of 3000 ft. Prabhudas has seen the place.
Pundalik is there. So he would not need any other companion. Out of
all these places, choose one. I find it somewhat difficult to accept
Almora. Jamnadas himself needs looking after. What is the good of
putting two sick persons together. An added reason for my preference
for Panchgani is the possibility of Pyarelal being there. Write to me
whatever decision you take or send me a telegram.
Mathuradas’s address is: Panchgani Castle
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32872
1

The contents of the letter indicate that Gandhiji wrote the letter from Nandi
Hills where he was convalescing in 1927. Reference to Mathuradas Trikumji’s
presence at Panchgani also confirms the year as 1927; vide “Letter to Mathuradas
Trikumji”, 17-6-1926 and vide “Letter to Mathuradas Trikumji”, before 17-9-1927,
Chaitra Vad 14 in 1927 corresponded to April 30.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

333

333. LETTER TO LAJPAT RAI1
NANDI HILLS,

April 30, 1927
DEAR LALAJI,

I got your letter and the Trust papers. Let me congratulate you
on your decision. This amount, I am afraid, will not be sufficient; we
will require yet more funds, for which we must wait.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI

[From Hindi]
Lala Lajpat Rai —Ek Jeevani, p. 468

334. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Saturday [April 30, 1927] 2
CHI. MIRA,

Well, I have nothing to say today. I only write so that you may
know that nowadays I am rather worried about you. God will take care
of you. Do you understand what I say?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 5222. Courtesy: Mirabehn

1

The English original is not traceable; vide also “Letter to Lajpat Rai”,
1-5-1927.
2
From the postmark

334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

335. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
Wednesday [After April 30, 1927] 1
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I have your letter. I have got your point for not coming to
Nandi. My objection to your going to Almora was . . . 2 for want of a
man. Now Jethalal is coming and if he keeps good health, you can go
without any compunction.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32973

336. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
[April-May 1927] 3
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

I have your wire.
You still should not overlook the precautions which are
necessary. We must ensure our safety. Women should have no fear of
any kind. Do not give up till you find out who the thieves are. Do not
even entertain the idea that you would look for them when they strike
again. We can be said to have served dharma as we know it, to the best
of our ability only when we learn to solve our problems ourselves.
Herewith a letter from Kediyaji about cow-protection. Acknowledge it. If you feel it is necessary to deposit it with Revashankerbhai,
do so and take from him whatever money you need or, keep the letter
as it is and send a credit note to Revashankerbhai.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32882

1

From the contents, the letter appears to have been written after the one to
Chhaganlal Gandhi, addressee’s father, dated April 30, 1927; vide the preceding item.
2
A few words here are illegible in the source.
3
From the reference to thefts in the Ashram and precautions suggested; vide
“Letter to Maganlal Gandhi”, 26-4-1927.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

335

337. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
Thursday [April-May 1927] 1
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

It is time for the post so I would not write more. My advice is
that you get the attached letter printed. Form yourselves into batches,
go to all the suspected villages, organise meetings and read out the
letter there.
Those women who are scared should be assured of their safety
immediately.
No one can go on leave at present. Those who are already on
leave should come back. It is your duty to pursue this work, to the
exclusion of all other activities.
Take Vallabhbhai’s advice. We will not lodge a complaint. However, we can take advice from those who are known to the police. Can
not we make an arrangement with the police that they do not arrest the
culprits but keep an eye on them?
I am writing whatever occurs to me. Do whatever you feel
should be done. Send me all the details. I am better.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : S.N. 32881

338. LETTER TO LAJPAT RAI2
May 1, 1927
DEAR LALAJI,

The afore-mentioned letter3 was written last night. I did not fully
reveal my feelings. My congratulations were not without a tinge of
criticism. Let me now say it out.
The idea is laudable but your method of implementing it has its
own flaws. Your wife and children should not become the trustees.
1

From the reference to thefts in the Ashram; vide 1st footnote to the preceding

2

The English original is not traceable.
Vide “Letter to Lajpat Rai”, 30-4-1927.

item.
3

336

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Your trustees should be those who entirely agree with your thoughts
and are prepared to suffer the severest hardships to see them
materialize. If your wife, daughter and son have these qualities they
can be the trustees, though they are related to you.
Now I have told you the whole truth and thank God He gave me
the strength to do so. Without it I would not have been able to do my
duty which, as a friend, I ought to do.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI

[From Hindi]
Lala Lajpat Rai —Ek Jeevani, p. 468

339. TELEGRAM TO MIRABEHN
May 2, 1927
YOUR
WIRE.
NANDI
HAS
SUITED
BEYOND
EXPECTATION.
YESTERDAY’S
EXAMINATION
SHOWED
NORMAL
BLOOD-PRESSURE.
TAKING
TWO
LONG
WALKS
DAILY
GROWING
STRONGER
AND
WRITING.
LOVE.

BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 5223. Courtesy: Mirabehn

340. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised NANDI HILLS,
May 2, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I wrote to you a postcard 1 in Hindi just to tell you that I was
thinking constantly of you and to see whether you could read and
understand my Hindi. Do not be alarmed. I do not propose to write to
you always in Hindi. But if you can follow my Hindi, I do want now
and then to write my extra letters in Hindi, i.e., if you like the idea, not
otherwise.
Now for your disturbing wire. I wonder what in my letters has
prompted it. You can have no notion of the energy I have already
regained. I have written for Navajivan four articles this week. For
Young India I wrote three last week. I am really doing almost the
1

Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 30-4-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

337

normal work for the papers now. And I do a fair amount of love
letters.
But all this is nothing compared to the result of medical
examination yesterday. The pressure dropped from 188 to 155, and
155 to 160 is the normal for my age. I have been walking for the last
three days over one mile per day in two periods each extending to 30
minutes. This is more than Amboli. So there is now no anxiety about
my health. There can be no question now of leaving Nandi. It would
be foolish to think of leaving it till my previous strength is attained, if
it can be at all or till the season for Nandi ends which it does about
July.
I observe from your wire that in spite of your previous letter of
attainment of peace, the pendulum has swung back and that you are
again perturbed. This does not surprise me. If our lucid moments
were lasting, nothing further will remain to be done. Unfortunately or
fortunately, we have to pass through many an ebb and flow before we
settle down to real peace.
I have therefore left you free to do as you please. Better
certainly if you can keep your peace and stay. Equally certainly come
away if you cannot keep your peace. Only, in any decision you come
to, please eliminate the question of my health. For if you come, you
would find little difference between me as you saw me in Kangri and
me as I am now. Dive deep into yourself then and find out if you can
where you are and act accordingly irrespective of what I would like
you to do. Or put it another way. I would like you to do what your
inner spirit tells you to do.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5224. Courtesy: Mirabehn

338

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

341. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
NANDI DURG,

Silence Day, May 2, 1927
CHI. MANI,

Father writes to say that you look pulled down. How is it? Our
body must be strong and radiant. An ideal virgin is expected to be at
the top in every respect.
If you have not to go to Karachi, I would like to send you
instead of Champavati to Delhi. There are many girls there and lots of
work. And the climate of Delhi is excellent. I expect a wire from
Karachi soon.
Let me know if any of the women in the Ashram are afraid of
thieves.
Was Radha badly hurt? Did she have a fright?1 I don’t have the
time now to write to her separately.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro: Manibehn Patelne, p. 56

342. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Silence Day, Vaishakha Sud 2 [May 3, 1927] 2
SISTERS,

I have now received plenty of hand-made paper. Even though
the size of the paper is a little smaller than what you ask for, I believe
you will prefer hand-made paper. Our chief duty today, of course, lies
in regard to cloth; because from it our starving masses obtain their
bread. There are not many who make this paper. Yet as long as we
find something that is made in our country, and it is good, we must
procure and use it.
It is very good that you have set apart some money for postage.
It does not matter if the amount is small; but keep regular accounts so
1
2

When the thieves came to her house
Year is determined from the reference to the menace of thieves at the Ashram.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

339

that those of you who can, may learn thereby how to keep accounts.
I find your progress in another direction also praiseworthy. Last
week I raised the problem of protecting yourselves against thieves. 1
Do not lightly brush it aside. I wish you to falsify the epithets ‘weak’,
‘timid’ and so on that are specially used about women. They do not
apply to all women of course. Who would say the women of
Raniparaj are ‘timid’? How can you call them weak? The women of
the West, of course, take part these days in everything. I do not mean
to say that they should be imitated; but at least they have been
falsifying many of the assumptions of men. The Negro women of
Africa are not at all ‘timid’. Perhaps there is no such epithet in their
language to be applied to them. In Burma, it is the men who appear
timid and as it were the weaker sex. Women themselves carry on
business of all kinds.
I raised the problem of thieves, not to frighten you, but to make
you think calmly about it. In the Ashram we all wish to realize that we
have a ‘soul’. Now the soul is neither male nor female; neither young
nor old. The scriptures as well as our own experience tell us that these
are the attributes only of the body. The same soul pervades you and
me. How then can I protect you ? Is it not by learning the art of how
to protect oneself? Only then can I teach you.
There is enough for you to think over here. If I feel inclined, I
will take up the subject once again.
If any of you wish to write to me, do so without hesitation. I
learn that Valjibhai has frightened all of you. Do not get frightened.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3647

1

340

Vide “Letter to Ashram Women”, 26-4-1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

343. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakha Sud 3, May 4, 1927
CHI. MANI,

Tell Gangadevi that she should follow the doctor’s instructions
and take moong water if she likes. I cannot suggest any treatment
unless I see her. Who is this new physician? Since when has he been
visiting the Ashram?
Which of the sisters have volunteered for night patrol duty?
My health is improving. Write to me regularly. How do you do?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Ask Vasumatibehn to write to me.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro: Manibehn Patelne, p. 57

344. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
Thursday [May 4, 1927] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have been wanting to write to you for a good many days, but
can do so only now. Hardly a day passes when I do not talk about you
or think of you.
You had asked Pyarelal to find out about Nandi. In my opinion
Nandi will not suit you. It is not a place where you can stay throughout the year. The weather changes greatly within 24 hours. And the
variations are too great in winter and summer. All provisions have to
be secured from the plains. The season is over by June. So I think
only Panchgani would suit you.
It is another question how long we should occupy the bungalow
at Panchgani. This season is already past. So it is all right to spend the
monsoon there. Then perhaps it will be better for you to go to
Mahabaleshwar. From October onwards the weather there is said to be
1

From Bapuni Prasadi

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

341

very good. If we have to undergo the same sort of thing next year also
we have time enough to decide what to do.
Revashankarbhai lives in Solan. I have asked him to let me know
how things are there.
My health is gradually improving. Hence there is nothing to
write on that score.
I can see that Taramati will not write unless she is provoked. Tell
her in my opinion she is lazy. I want her fully to benefit physically,
mentally and spiritually by her stay at Panchgani. Dilip appears to be
deriving the fullest benefit from staying there.
This morning Pyarelal started out on his way to join you. I now
have your wire, and so I have sent a telegram to Pyarelal at Bangalore
to stop him.
From your letter it appears that I alone was responsible for
detaining Pyarelal. I wanted to keep him with me for a few days. After
your telegram yesterday he asked my permission to leave and I gave
the permission.
Now I will wait for your letter. And I will do whatever is proper.
You had wished that I should stay at Panchgani. But that was not
possible. Work demanded that 1 should be in this province. Once my
health is normal I shall certainly finish the work. True, it will be done
in a somewhat novel manner.
Are you reading anything?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

345. MAN’S INHUMANITY TO MAN
In another column will be seen an extract from Navajivan of a
most disgraceful case of calculated inhumanity of a medical man
towards the dying wife of a member of the suppressed class in
Kathiawar village. Sjt. Amritlal Thakkar who is responsible for giving
the details of the case has withheld the names of the place and parties
for fear of the poor suppressed class schoolmaster being further
molested by the medical man. I wish, however, that the names will be
disclosed. Time must come when the suppressed class people will have
342

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to be encouraged by us to dare to suffer further hardships and
tyranny. Their sufferings are already too great for any further
sufferings to be really felt. Public opinion cannot be roused over
grievances that cannot be verified and traced to their sources. I do not
know the rules of the Medical Council in Bombay. I know that in
other places a medical practitioner, who refused to attend before his
fees were paid, would be answerable to the Council and would be
liable to have his name removed from the Council’s list and be
otherwise subject to disciplinary action. Fees are no doubt exactable;
but proper attendance upon patients is the first duty of a medical
practitioner. The real inhumanity, however, if the facts stated are true,
consists in the practitioner refusing to enter the untouchable’s
quarters, refusing himself to see the patient, and refusing himself to
apply the thermometer. And if the doctrine of untouchability can ever
be applied in any circumstances, it is certainly applicable to this
member of the profession which he has disgraced. But I am hoping
that there is some exaggeration in the statement made by Sjt.
Thakkar’s correspondent and, if there is none, that the medical
practitioner will himself come forth and make ample amends to the
society which he has so outraged by his inhuman conduct.
Young India, 5-5-1927

346. KHADI FOR UTKAL
Three months ago Sjt. Shankerlal Banker and Lakshmidas
Purushottam travelled in Orissa examining the khadi work going on in
that land of paupers. And now Sheth Jamnalal Bajaj has also been
touring in that province. Lakshmidas’s notes have been published in
Navajivan. Jamnalalji has sent the summary1 of his impressions which
I commend to the workers in Utkal and all khadi lovers.
Young India, 5-5-1927

1
Not reproduced here. It described the “semi-starved” condition of the people
and recommended hand-spinning and hand-weaving to raise their economic, social
and spiritual standards.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

343

347. TELEGRAM TO G. D. BIRLA
NANDI,

May 5, 1927
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
BIRLA HOUSE
GIRGAUM
BOMBAY
WISH

YOU

GETTING
NO

SUCCESS
STRONG.

CAUSE

ANXIETY.

TERMS

MY

BLOOD-PRESSURE
GOD

BLESS

LAST

LETTER.

NORMAL

AM

SINCE

DAILY
SUNDAY.

YOU.

GANDHI
From the original: C.W. 7876. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

348. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
[May 5, 1927] 1
MY DEAR SATIS BABU,

I may be said to be out of the wood now, blood-pressure having
become normal. I am taking fair walks morning and evening and
doing a moderate amount of writing and reading.
But I see you are not yet free and Nikhil seems to be causing
anxiety. May God bless the boy.
I am going to take all the rest that may be thought necessary.
With love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1569

1

From the reference to Gandhiji’s “blood-pressure having become normal”;
vide the preceding item.

344

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

349. TELEGRAM TO SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM
May 5, 1927
S ATYAGRAHA ASHRAM
S ABARMATI
IN
VIEW
FREQUENT
RAIDS
ADVISE
CANCELLATION
VACATION
LEAVE. ALL WHO CAN SHOULD REMAIN ASHRAM. IF NECESSARY
WOMEN SHOULD BE ACCOMMODATED NIGHT
CHHATRALAYA.
SEND
ME DAILY REPORTS. AM PERFECTLY
WELL.

BAPU
From a microfilm: S.N. 11786

350. LETTER TO DEVCHAND PAREKH
NANDI HILLS, M YSORE,

May 5, 1927
BHAISHRI DEVCHANDBHAI,

Yes, I am still bed-ridden, but now I can work more or less. I am
of course thinking about [the work] there.
It seems advisable to have a committee appointed for khadi
work in Kathiawar, constituted as below:
Devchandbhai—President
Harakhchand, Jaisukhlal—Secretaries
Fulchand, Manilal Kothari, Jivarambhai Kutchwada, Narandas
and Ramdas.
I have acted on behalf of Narandasbhai without consulting
anyone else. If you agree to this please dispose of the matter soon.
You are short of funds. But I have already written1 asking for an
amount to be sent to Fulchand if it can be arranged at the Ashram.
But today I have a letter saying there are no more funds at the Ashram
and so they can send you nothing. You may, if you can, have a loan
from Vallabhbhai payable to holder, but only if you can return the
1

Vide “Letter to Chhaganlal Gandhi”, 26-4-1927 and “Letter to Fulchand
K. Shah”, 27-4-1927.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

345

amount. I might have managed it, if I were there. But now I am
helpless.
Vandemataram from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5720

351. LETTER TO TARINI P. SINHA
NANDI HILLS,

May 6, 1927
MY DEAR TARINI,

I was delighted to have your letter. Yours has been a protracted
illness. I hope, however, that you will soon regain your original
vigour. You will not overtax yourself with your resumed studies.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1568

352. LETTER TO HONORARY SECRETARY, AYURVEDIC
CONFERENCE1
[Before May 7, 1927]
DEAR FRIEND,

Owing to my sudden illness, I have not been able to reply earlier
to your letter of the 17th ultimo. The remarks quoted by you and
ascribed to me in the Minority Report 2 , which of course I have not
seen, are substantially correct but they have been torn from their
context. In the speech, the report of which I have not read, from which
I suppose the remarks quoted by you have been taken, I was drawing
a distinction between Ayurveda and Ayurvedic physicians of today
and I do hold the opinion that they do not do justice to the profession
they seek to represent. But these remarks should not be used in
support of any proposition designed to prevent Government’s
assistance being given for Ayurveda research. I believe that Ayurveda
is a field for much research work. For want of research scholars,
unlike Western medicine, it has practically come to a standstill.
1
2

346

In Ceylon
Of the Commission on Ayurvedic medicine
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Therefore, I should not discountenance aid being given to Ayurveda
research under given circumstances and to honest and industrious
men who love research work and who have the necessary qualifications. I should add that the remarks attributed to me were made at
the ceremony of laying the foundation of an Ayurvedic College. Had
I been averse to any aid being given to Ayurvedic work, I should
certainly have declined to lay the foundation of an Ayurvedic College
at Calcutta, to open the Tibbia College in Delhi and very recently, to
open an Ayurvedic Hospital at Ahmednagar.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 7-5-1927

353. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
May 7, 1927
MY DEAR BROTHER,

Thank God the tension is over.1 It is a pleasure to write to you.
You are going under the best of auspices. May your way be
uniformly smooth and may God give you all the strength and wisdom
you will need.
Here is Andrews’s latest letter. If you care, I would like you to
cable you will soon join him. Or on receiving a line from you, I would
cable if you like.
The Viceroy’s letter is very good indeed.
If you at all find the time, please ascend the hill once more.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
V. S. Srinivasa Sastri Papers (Correspondence No. 477). Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

The reference is to Sastri’s decision on going to South Africa.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

347

354. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 7, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I had your sweet wire and your letter. Fall it was.1 But I was not
ruffled. I knew that you fell but to rise. When moments of exaltation
become a permanent part of our lives, we need little further. Therefore
I was not unprepared for the fall in the barometer. You will come
when you must. Only you will do nothing without fullest deliberation.
I now walk almost my usual pace. The round I took four days
ago has now been doubled. Progress is steady. You do not expect me
each time now to say I am getting on. You will know when there is an
interruption.
Pray never rely upon the newspapers. You get your information
first hand.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5225. Courtesy: Mirabehn

355. LETTER TO HEMAPRABHA DEVI DAS GUPTA
NANDI HILLS,

Saturday [May 7, 1927] 2
DEAR SISTER,

I have both your letters. I can understand your grief at the death
of Anil. But you should add to your spiritual strength as a result of
this. Continuous grief wears out one’s strength. One can add to one’s
strength by putting one’s sorrows to good use, and it is best utilized
by intensifying our desire to serve. It is therefore my constant prayer
that one should devote every moment of one’s life to service. One can
practise it in two ways: first, by reading good books and meditating on
them; secondly, by constantly engaging oneself in altruistic activities.
1
“In spite of the intellectual realization the heart had already failed me.”
(Mirabehn)
2
From the reference to Nikhil’s health; Vide “Letter to Satis Chandra Das
Gupta”, 5-5-1927.

348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As for asceticism, it is this that weakens our attachment to worldly
objects and strengthens our love of things spiritual. One attains
asceticism by reasoning, while one succeeds in practising it by persistent effort. For this very reason one may describe practice as sustained
effort.
Nikhil still seems to have a weak heart; what, in the opinion of
the doctors, is the reason for this?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1649

356. COW v. BUFFALO OR COW-CUM-BUFFALO?1
A worker in the cause of cow-protection writes from Konkan:
In your recent article2 giving the conditions of cow-protection you said
that the question of the protection of the cow should not be mixed up with that
of the protection of the buffalo. At the back of this suggestion seems to be the
fact that the buffalo bull is not useful for agricultural purposes. But in Konkan
he is fairly useful. It is the buffalo bull which draws the municipal refuse carts,
which works water pumps and even draws the plough, especially when there is
a heavy downpour disabling the bullock and most of the agriculture in Konkan
is being done under monsoon conditions. The buffalo bull has therefore his
place in Konkan.
The Konkan cow does not yield more than one pound of milk, whereas
the buffalo yields 5 to 10 lb. It may be possible, after systematic breeding, to
make the cow yield more and richer milk, but the buffalo needs no special
culture at all. Does not therefore the buffalo in Konkan at any rate need as
much protection as the cow? Please correct me if I am wrong.
The buffalo, I admit, has no place on the ghats where the temperature is
higher, fields are bigger and water scarce. He needs much water both to drink
and bathe in. Konkan is the place for him.
Your tannery and dairy are for cities. For the villages you must suggest
some more practical ways and means. Let every village possess a studbull,
maintain him partly from the common fund and partly from contributions from
those who make use of him. This can be done everywhere and it will improve
the stock. Could you not suggest similar other remedies?
1

The original Gujarati was published in Navajivan, 8-5-1927. This is a
translation by Mahadev Desai.
2
Vide “Conditions of Cow-protection”, pp. 197-9.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

349

These are appropriate questions. My article was not intended to
throw the buffalo by the board, it suggested the stopping of
buffalo-breeding in her own interest. In other words it meant freedom
of the buffalo from its bondage. We have domesticated the cow for
our own uses and therefore it has become part of our religion to
protect her. It was my object to show that in trying to breed the
buffalo, as we do the cow, we might lose both.
The Konkan example does not affect my proposition. We must,
of course, make use of the existing stock of buffaloes, and let it be
done in parts like Konkan. But our duty is clear. We must not increase
our responsibility by breeding the buffalo where we can do with the
cow alone. We must therefore content ourselves with the use of cow’s
milk only. It should not be necessary in a city like Bombay to use
buffalo’s milk in preference to cow’s milk. An endeavour should be
organized on a large scale to cheapen the supply of pure cow’s milk,
and to improve the milk yield of the cow. It is possible too to make
cow’s milk richer. All these things have been developed into a science
in Europe, especially in Denmark. Cows in those countries yield richer
and more milk than our buffaloes. I have heard from vaidyas that
buffalo’s milk lacks and can never be made to have the hygenic and
health-giving properties that cow’s milk possesses. Pious people have
told me that cow’s milk is sattvic (possessing finer qualities) whereas
buffalo’s milk is tamasic (gross). I do not know how far this is true. I
am trying to ascertain the truth through the proper channel. But it
does seem to me, that all that the buffalo can give and even more, the
cow also can or can be made to give. If this is true, why should man,
having regard to his own needs, make himself responsible for
breeding the buffalo ? And having regard to the need of the buffalo,
why should we needlessly keep her in bondage ? Or to put it more
simply, why should we press her into our service?
The fact that some people make a pecuniary gain out of
buffalo-breeding can have no place in this religious discussion in
which we have in view the good of all. In thinking solely of the
narrow interest of the self or of the moment, we have ruined ourselves,
i.e., our country and our religion. We can be a nation, only when we
try to think in terms of the wider interests of the country. If we cannot
even think in those terms, it is no use talking of religion. From the
national point of view, the good of the country is the supreme
consideration. From the religious point of view the good of all living
350

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

beings from the cow down to the ant is the supreme consideration.1
Let the reader now turn to the table given elsewhere in this issue.
The table relates to the income from and expenditure on the cattle
maintained at the Satyagraha Ashram. The names are those of
different cows. The manager in his covering letter says:
It is by no means the rule that the buffalo yields more than the cow.
Some of the cows in the table yield a net profit, some just pay their way and
some are boarders. These last we shall prevent from breeding and propose to
take light work from them. A sterile cow has already been trained to do some
work. The buffalo calves sell cheap, whereas some calves of the cow are worth
Rs. 100 each. Two or three have taken the place of the horse with the result
that we have dispensed with our horse-carriage.

The Ashram has decided to have no more buffaloes. We may
not draw large deductions from the table, but it is certainly obvious
that if the cow is fed properly she compares favourably with the
buffalo in her yield, she does not cost more, and her calves are much
more useful.
I propose to publish in Navajivan the results of the further
experiments that are being conducted in the Ashram.
The Konkan friend is not right when he says that the dairy and
the tannery are useful only in and for the city, and have no place in
the villages. The cow has become a costly proposition even in the
villages. It is as essential to keep proper accounts of her yield and to
improve her stock and her milk in villages as in cities. And the
skinning of dead cattle and the prompt and skilled treatment of the
hides is more essential in villages than in cities, and that is the work to
be done in tanneries. It is a painful fact that in our present condition
we have to cultivate the science of tanning in the cities and then take it
to the villages. For one thing it is impossible to conduct big
experiments in the villages, and cattle that are slaughtered in the cities
come from the villages. If we can therefore conduct experiments in
dairying and tanning from the religious and national point of view in
the cities, we can easily give the benefit of them to the villages, and the
cattle wealth of India which is at the present day being destroyed
because of our ignorance will be saved, and man and animal will both
be less unhappy than now.
Young India, 19-5-1927

1

Vide also “Letter to Sitaram Parushottam Patwardhan”, 30-4-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

351

357. WHAT CAN PERSEVERANCE NOT ACHIEVE?
In the West we sometimes see a man performing club-swinging
continuously for twenty-four hours. These shows are held to demonstrate how far a man’s endurance can go. Thousands of spectators give
money and fill the theatres to see that. I have my own doubts whether
these kinds of shows are of any use.
But readers will recall that something like this, though with a
different, i. e., religious motive was organized in the Ashram during
the National Week. Some youths insisted on plying the charkha
continuously for twenty-four hours, forgoing their usual sleep. The
letter written by the one who spun the largest quantity of yarn is
interesting and, therefore, I give it below:1
Those who welcome any manifestation of enthusiasm by the
young or have faith in the charkha yajna will feel happy to read this
letter. Those students who happen to read this letter should learn a
lesson from it. It is good to have interest in games, but it is better still
to have the same interest in philanthropic work. They should also
observe that such uninterrupted work is quite within the capacity of
those who safeguard their health and observe brahmacharya. It is an
abuse of one’s education to use it for earning money. Education
proves its worth when used for the service of others. Moreover, a
student needs to have faith also. Reason will certainly help a little to
understand that India’s poverty can be banished through a simple
thing like the charkha. But, in the end, it is only faith which will
sustain the student’s love of it. I realize every moment, from what I
see of students, that without faith education is of little use.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 8-5-1927

1

352

Not translated here
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

358. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised Sunday

[May 8, 1927] 1

CHI. MIRA,

I hope you are getting all the letters I have been writing to you
of late. Probably one letter every other day on an average.
I have your further letter. But I see it2 will be some time before
you regain your balance. I do not mind the ups and downs so long as
you retain the elasticity. My own opinion is this: it will be perfectly
natural for you to come to me wherever I am after finishing your
allotted task, whenever that happens. An ordinary person may not give
up a self-imposed programme. But if you become highly emotional
and your nerves remain under tension, you should come even though
your course may not be finished.
Naturally I am anxious for you to finish your course. I should
not like to have to think that it was beyond you. But your health is
more precious to me than your studies or any other preparation .
You must not think of coming to me for my health. For it is
good and I cannot be looked after better even if you came. If I
needed your nursing, I should wire for you. But such an event will not
happen, if only because I have got into the habit of taking nursing
from anybody and I train new nurses to my requirements. There are
more nurses than I need here. So if you come in the hope of doing
some personal service, you would feel idle and yawning.
Now for the necessity of personal touch. My own opinion is that
it is necessary in the preliminary stages. And then the touch comes
through joint work. You come in daily touch with me by doing my
work as if it was your own. And this can, must and will outlast the
existence of this physical body of mine. You are and will be in touch
whether I am alive or dead. And that is what I want you to be. You
have come to me not for me but for my ideals in so far as I live them.
You now know how far I live the ideals I set forth. It is now for you to
work out those ideals and practise them to greater perfection than has
been given to me to do. He or she who does that will be my first heir
1
2

From Bapu’s Letters to Mira
The source has “you”.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

353

and representative. I want you to be the first if only because you
studied me from a distance and made your choice. And when in the
course of the work, God brings us physically together, it is well, but it
is well also when he keeps us apart in pursuance of the common
object.
But this is counsel of perfection. Having listened to it and
understood it, you are free to do as you choose. If you cannot contain
yourself, you must come and not feel that I shall be displeased. I
should be displeased if you did violence to yourself and became
prostrate.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5226. Courtesy: Mirabehn

359. LETTER TO GANGARAM
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE S TATE ),

May 8, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I got your letter too late to enable me to write to you so as to
reach you. It was impossible for me to travel to Bombay because
medical orders are peremptory—as peremptory as your own —and
seeing that the medical orders were prior in point of time, they had to
be obeyed.
I have really begun now to despair of your ever teaching me.
You promised to turn my Ashram ground into a paradise if I sent you
a map and all the details of past successes and failures. Well, I have
given you all the information, I sent you my best man and the Ashram
ground still awaits the magic touch. All the information about the
poverty of the masses that you can give me can never be first hand
because all you can tell me is stories of witnesses. You have not tasted
the sweets of poverty. And, what is a millionaire, a successful engineer
and a business man to teach one who knows the sweet, as well as the
bitter, of poverty and who has come in direct touch with the masses
about the latter’s poverty? Thirdly—but I must not say anything
about the third thing at the present moment.
Your connecting my bad health with a breach of promise which
I never made to you or to anybody is in keeping with your lavishness
354

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in promising a poor man like me all kinds of El Dorado. I am not
aware of having made you any promise that I shall never take part in
politics and what is more, I have not taken part in politics as yet. But I
do promise that if favourable opportunity occurs, I should not hesitate
to plunge into them. For the present I am content to sit at the wheel
and sing the praises of God in that He gives me strength enough to
perform that little bit of service to the masses of India in whose
exploitation you are taking such a prominent part be it ever so
unconsciously.
I do not expect any reply to this letter whilst you are in the West.
When you do come to India I shall be glad to receive a further
instalment of your promises with the certain knowledge that you will
continue to break them as heretofore and like the wolf that swore at
the lamb turn against me and accuse me of breaking promises never
made by me. I shall take all such rebuke in good grace as in spite of
your arrogation of universal knowledge, I have great regard for the
qualities of your heart.
Yours sincerely,

S IR GANGARAM , K T. C.I.E., M.V.C.
C ARE S IR P URUSHOTTAMDAS THAKURDAS
BOMBAY
From a photostat: S.N. 12577

360. LETTER TO REV. JOHN HAYNES HOLMES
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI , 1

May 8, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter of the 4th April last.
When the interim volume is published, I shall see that no efforts
are made to obtain orders outside of India.
I am unable to tell you when the autobiography will be finished.
I have to write from day to day. I have mapped out no fixed plan. I
write every week as the past events develop in my mind on the day
allotted for writing the weekly chapter. I am now dealing with events
of 1903-4 and I have to cover the stormy period in South Africa
extending to the middle of 1914 and the equally stormy 12 years of
1

Permanent address

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

355

India. If therefore there is really any demand for these chapters in
America or Europe, it will be advisable to publish them in volumes as
they are being published here. If the MacMillan Company do not
propose to publish the autobiography in instalments, it will be
impossible to prevent sales outside India assuming of course that there
is a natural as distinguished from stimulated desire in the West for
reading these chapters.
Yours sincerely,

R EV . J OHN HAYNES HOLMES
12, PARK AVENUE AND 34TH S TREET
NEW YORK C ITY (U.S.A.)
From a photostat: S.N. 13971

361. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
Sunday [May 8, 1927] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

Pyarelal is on his way to join you. You will receive this letter the
day offer his arrival. I could not send the letter with him. I have sent
Pyarelal because he felt that he had got to go back there for accounts,
etc. Your decision to carry on without him is fine if it does not mean
any harm to your health. We must be grateful that your health has
improved to that extent. But do not hesitate to write to me any time
you feel the need for help. I think it would be good to spend the
present monsoon there. Panchgani is definitely better than Deolali. It
is said to be particularly good in the rainy season. It would be all right
spending the winter near Bombay after you have fully recovered. But
the doctors would know better.
You must have received my previous letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

356

From Bapuni Prasadi
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

362. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Monday [May 9, 1927] 1
CHI. MIRA,

I had two letters again. How is it that letters bearing different
dates are received the same day in different packets ?
I have nothing more to say today. I am glad you have
completely regained your balance.
My idea about the translation is that you should make it at first
without reference to any other translation and then for your difficulties turn to the English version. It is right for you to be diffident but I
have no misgivings and I do not want you to lose your originality by
concurrent reference to any aid save that of a dictionary. Mark the
passages you may not understand and refer to the other translations
subsequently as I am doing with the Gita.
What has brought Valunjker and Gangubai? Remember me to
them. I am glad for your sake that they are there. With love,
Yours

BAPU
From the Original: C.W. 5227. Courtesy: Mirabehn

1

From Bapu’s Letters to Mira

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

357

363. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
[Before May 10, 1927] 1
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

I have your letter. Stop worrying about me. I am improving in
health. I shall stay in Nandi Durg as long as the doctors consider it
necessary. Afterwards I shall go to Bangalore because in June Nandi is
quite cold, while Bangalore is moderately so. Left to myself I do not
want to travel. But when it cools down a little and when I have
improved my health, I should like to stay quietly in two or three
places in Madras and Karnataka in order to collect funds. No one sees
any harm in short comfortable journeys in which I do not have to
address people. I have consulted many doctors but no one imposes
restrictions such as those you suggest. And if I may not speak, may
not think and may not do anything at all, then for what purpose do
you intend to save my life? I have not so far developped such powers
that I can lie in bed and serve by sheer silent thought. Asking me to
care for my health much more than the others generally do amounts
to misusing me. Dr. Mehta has not forbidden me from writing for
Young India and Navajivan. The only thing that everyone says is that
I should not work at the same tempo as before. And I cannot do that.
Certainly, I must do as much as I comfortably can. What is more, Dr.
Mehta believes that if I do not work as much as I can, I shall be
completely bed-ridden.
It is because of this I wish that none of you should worry too
much about me. I shall write to Panditji about Saklatwala. What is his
address in England?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32795

1

From the last paragraph of the letter, inquiring the address of Saklatwala to
whom Gandhiji wrote on May 10 (vide “Letter to Shapurji Saklatvala”, 10-5-1927),
this letter appears to have been written before that date.

358

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

364. LETTER TO A. RANGASWAMY AIYENGAR
NANDI HILLS,

May 10, 1927
DEAR RANGASWAMI AIYENGAR,

In accordance with the instructions of the Working Committee, I
am sending herewith draft rules in connection with Article VII (iv) b1 .
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

Encl. 1.
S RIJUT A. RANGASWAMI AIYENGAR
GENERAL S ECRETARY, A.I.C.C.
DESHABANDHU BUILDINGS
MOUNT R OAD , M ADRAS
[ENCLOSURE]
DRAFT R ULES

1. Every person choosing under Article VII of the Constitution to send the subscription in yarn shall send 2,000 yards of
evenly spun yarn of his or her own spinning to the All India
Spinners’ Association office, Sabarmati, to reach on or before the
28th February every year in advance for the full year.
2. Members joining in the middle of the year shall send the
full quota for the year at the time of application for admission. No
one who has failed to send his yarn subscription on or before the 28th
February, or in case of members joining in the middle of the year, no
one who has not paid in the full quota of 2,000 yards shall be entitled
to exercise any of the privileges of membership referred to in Sec. (iv)
of Art. VII.
3. The yarn shall be hanked in 4 ft. circumference and sent
up at the member’s cost to the A.I.S.A. office, Sabarmati with such
parti-culars filled in as may be prescribed in the forms issued from
that office.
1

Of the Congress constitution; vide 1st footnote to “Speech at Congress
Session, Gauhati”, 27-12-1926 and “Khadi Franchise”, 9-6-1927.
Presumably this was sent for the A.I.C.C. meeting scheduled to be held in
Bombay on May 15 and 16, 1927; vide “Letter to Chhaganlal Gandhi”, 19-5-1927.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

359

4. On any member being found to the satisfaction of the
President of a Provincial Congress Committee to be infringing the rule
of habitual wear of khaddar, he may at his discretion report him to the
President of the Congress; and he shall thereupon forfeit for the rest
of the year the right to vote or be elected at the election of representatives or delegates or any committee or sub-committee of any Congress organization whatsoever or to take part in any meeting of the
Congress or Congress organization or any committee or
sub-committee thereof.
5. Subject to the above rule, if at any meeting a question is
raised that any member is not entitled to vote or to be elected or to
take part in any proceedings thereof, on the ground that he does not
habitually wear khaddar, the statement of the member himself shall,
except where it is manifestly untrue to the knowledge of the
Chairman, be accepted without further proof in regard to the question
so far as that meeting is concerned.
From a copy: A.I.C.C. File No. 194, 1927. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

365. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
[May 9,1927] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL

If we are not financially strong enough to provide money to
Fulchand for the conference, write to him frankly to that effect. Tell
Vallabhbhai to give him a loan if it is possible and make sure that he
accepts the loan only if he is capable of repaying it.
The documents are to be given to Ramachandra as they are.
They are to be given to him only to fulfil his requirements. I believe it
is necessary to pay off the debts due to West. We have to write to him
that the debts will be paid off gradually as the goods are sold. How
can Ramachandra himself pay? The right over the patent is ours. I
have understood the dealing to be his way that we have to deal with
the situation if West claims money from Ramachandra. I have
accordingly convinced Ramachandra. If you want me to write to him
to this effect, I will do so
I have a letter from Shankerlal about handing over the charge to
1

As suggested in the source. References in “Ramachandra Lift”, 3-3-1927,
also indicates that the letter may have been written on this date.

360

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Jamnalal. I will take action on it immediately. Do not hesitate in the
least to write to me or ask me anything. My health is no doubt good.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32911

366. LETTER TO SHAPURJI SAKLATVALA
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE S TATE ),

May 10, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

Shrimati Anasuyabai has sent me your letter herself and your
joint letter to her, Gulzarilal1 and Desai. I have read them both
carefully. I had your own letter also. I could not reply to you earlier
for want of your address.
As soon as I heard from Anasuyabai, I put myself in Communication with Motilalji. I am daily expecting his reply. You shall know it
as soon as I receive it. I thank you for the confidence you repose in
me and it will be a joy to me if I can render any personal service to
you; but I am afraid my longing and ability to render service have to
stop there.
So far as our ideals are concerned, we stand apart.2 Whilst
Anasuyabai and Banker as also Gulzarilal and Desai are absolutely
free agents, they have exercised their choice of accepting my guidance in framing their labour policy and administration. I must therefore shoulder my share of the responsibility for what is happening
about labour in Ahmedabad. I have certainly advised them to keep
Ahmedabad labour aloof from the other labour movements in India
so long as Ahmedabad labour chooses to remain under their guidance. My reason is exceedingly simple. Labour in India is still extremely unorganized. The labourers have no mind of their own, when it
comes to matters of national policy or even the general welfare of
labour itself. Labourers in various parts of India have no social
contact and no other mutual ties. It is provincial and even in the same
city it is highly communal. It is not everywhere wisely guided. In
1

Gulzarilal Nanda, sometime Home Minister, Government of India
The addressee was of the opinion that the energies of all leaders should be
harnessed towards an early inauguration of labour and industrial organizations all
over the country.
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

361

many places it is under selfish and highly unscrupulous guidance.
There is no absolute cohesion amongst provincial labour leaders, and
there is little discipline among sub-leaders. The latter do not uniformly tender obedience to their provincial chiefs. Leaders in different
provinces have no single policy to follow. In these circumstances, an
all India union can only exist on paper. I hold it to be suicidal
therefore for Ahmedabad to think of belonging to it. My own
conviction is that Ahmedabad is rendering a service to labour all over
India by its abstention, or as I call it self-restraint. If it can succeed in
perfecting its own organization, it is bound to serve as a model to the
rest of India and its success is bound to prove highly infectious. But I
am free to confess that there is as yet no assurance of success in the
near future. The energy of the workers is sorely tried in combating
disruptive forces that ever continue to crop up. There is the HinduMuslim tension; there is the question of touchables and untouchables
in Hinduism, etc. Add to this extreme ignorance and selfishness
among the labourers themselves. It is a marvel to me that labour in
Ahmedabad has made the progress it has during the last 12 years of
its corporate existence. If then Ahmedabad remains isolated it does so
not selfishly, but for the sake of labour as a whole.
One word as to the policy. It is not anti-capitalistic. The idea is
to take from capital labour's due share and no more, and this not by
paralysing capital but by reform among labourers from within and by
their own self-consciousness; not again through the cleverness and
manoeuvring of non-labour leaders, but by educating labour to evolve
its own leadership and its own self-reliant, self-existing organization.
Its direct aim is not in the least degree political. Its direct aim is
internal reform and evolution of internal strength. The indirect result
of this evolution, when, if ever it becomes complete, will naturally be
tremendously political. I have not therefore the remotest idea of
exploiting labour or organizing it for any direct political end. It will
be of itself a political power of first-class importance when it becomes
a self-existing unit. Labour, in my opinion, must not become a pawn
in the hands of the politicians on the political chess-board. It must by
its sheer strength dominate the chessboard. And that can only happen
if I can retain the intelligent and voluntary co-operation of the
workers in Ahmedabad and if our joint effort ultimately succeeds.
This is my dream. I hug it because it gives me all the consolation I
362

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

need; and the policy I have outlined, you will recognize, is a direct
outcome of my implicit belief in and acceptance of non-violence. It
may be all a delusion; but it is as much a reality with me as life itself
so long as I do not see it as delusion but see it as the only life-giving
force. You will now see why I cannot, even if I had the power, respond
to your appeal for dividing the funds collected by me in accordance
with your suggestion. But I may tell you that I have not even the
power. The funds have been collected purely for khadi work and it
would be criminal misappropriation on may part to divert them to any
other use.
This letter may not please you. I shall be sorry if it does not.
But I regard you as a fellow-seeker after Truth and if my reading of
you is correct, there is no reason why my having told you the whole
truth and nothing but the truth should not please you immensely. It is
not given to all of us to agree with one another on all our opinions;
but it is given to every one of us to tender the same respect for the
opinions and actions of our fellows as we expect for our own.
Yours sincerely

M. K. GANDHI
S AKLATVALA, E SQ.
From a photostat: S.N. 12491

367. LETTER TO ISABEL BAMLET
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI , 1

May 10, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you.
For me the problem of life is not quite so simple as it appears to
you. I am sure you do not want me to enter into the reason for my
conclusions. You believe in God’s guidance and so do I. Let me walk
as He may seem to me to guide me.
I may without using your name make the main contents of your
1

Permanent address

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

363

letter as a text for an article1 in the pages of Young India edited by
me. I suppose you will have no objection.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
I. BAMLET , E SQ.
C/ O IMPERIAL BANK OF INDIA
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat: C.W. 4443. Courtesy: Mrs. Carlisle Bamlet

368. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
NANDI DURG,

Silence Day, Vaishakha Sud 9 [May 10, 1927] 2
SISTERS,

What you say about thieves is correct. For the present, it is
enough if you try to forget that you are “weak”. You should on no
account make the mistake of taking me to mean that men should give
up their duty of protecting [women] . Because woman tries to come
into her own, man should not think that she has already become
capable of protecting herself; a man, who by thinking so, fails to
protect women, is nothing but a shameless coward. He may be
regarded as less than a man. Man has kept woman in subordination
and in a state of dependence; so it is his duty to protect her. We are
trying in the Ashram to make both men and women vigilant and
self-reliant. But our goal is still far off. Till then my trying to awaken
and put courage into your heart is one thing and men’s duty towards
you is another thing. So as long as there is one man alive in the
Ashram, you should regard yourselves as fully protected.
There is no news of Surajbehn in your letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3648

1
2

364

Vide “Notes”, 12-5-1927, sub-title, “Most Economical”.
Year is fixed from the reference to thieves.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

369. LETTER TO MANILAL AND SUSHILA GANDHI
NANDI HILLS, M YSORE,

Vaishakha Sud 10 [May 11, 1927] 1
CHI. MANILAL AND CHI. SUSHILA,

Your letter has not reached me but I have seen the one you
wrote to Ramdas who perhaps forgot to send over the one to me.
I am glad that both of you are getting along well. I always wish
you will help each other in your progress.
I am improving steadily. I have already written to you that I had
a wire sent to you as you wished but your steamer had by then sailed.
Verses from the Gita are being regularly sent to you. Please meditate
on them as often as you can.
Sjt. Srinivasa Sastri will arrive there soon. Try to keep in touch
with him as much as you can and render him any help he may want.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
It appears I shall have to be in these parts for two or three
months more. If you propose to address a letter direct to me, send it to
Bangalore. We will have to come down from these hills in the month
of June.
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1132. Courtesy: Sushilabehn Gandhi

1

Year inferred from contents

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

365

370. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
Wednesday, May 11, 1927
I have your letter. It is not satyagraha in the true sense of the
word if people outside the State of Gondal agitate against the ban on
entry of newspapers into the State. People not belonging to the
Gondal State can offer satyagraha there only when the cause of
Gondal subjects is common to all the States and if success in the
Gondal case would mean an improvement in all the other States.
Moreover offering satyagraha against a ban on entry of journals is
like killing a buffalo for the sake of a thong or like citing scriptures
for eating carrots while swallowing whole camels. Even if the
satyagraha in Gondal is to be offered by the State subjects they ought
to have a stronger reason.
The Wadhwan well case is slightly stronger no doubt, but before
you take it up you should be prepared to bear the loss of the school.
You should try some preliminary remedies, e.g., you should carry on
negotiations, bring in the good offices of intermediaries, give the
matter sufficient publicity. You ought to prove that the ban is due
solely to ill will. In short, a satyagrahi’s case has to be self-proven. If
there is any scope for doubt, if the other party has anything to say, a
satyagrahi should hold his patience for the nonce. If you look at all
the occasions when I had offered satyagraha you will be able to see
this condition as well as others.
You have rightly laid down the limit that satyagraha cannot be
offered without my permission. Observe this limit steadfastly, and
obtain my written approval before starting anything. This will be good
for you and the principle of satyagraha will not be compromised by
your action.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

366

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

371. NOTES
EVILS OF MACHINE -MILLING

Mr. Andrews, who is working himself almost to death in the
interest of the Indian settlers of South Africa, cannot forget things that
he has at heart in India itself. Having read Mahadev Desai’s account
of the Bihar tour, he cabled some time ago:
Tell Mahadev delighted accounts Bihar tour. Give love Rajendraprasad. Suggest your emphasizing hand-milling. Have witnessed evils rice mills, including destruction of vitamins. Warn public against unauthorized cables from
South Africa.

The reader can see that the foregoing cablegram was sent in
order that I may warn the public against accepting everything that
comes from South Africa, unless it bears Andrews’s own hallmark.
But I hardly think that the caution is required. Naturally the public
here will discount anything sensational that may come from South
Africa, unless it is duly countersigned. But let us hope that the Rt.
Hon’ble Srinivasa Sastri will soon be on his way to South Africa, when
all cause for alarm or anxiety will be set at rest. Without, therefore,
dilating upon the South African part of the cable, I return to the rice
mills, whose evils have distressed him so much as to prompt the
cabling of his opinion. The reader will appreciate Andrews’s anxiety
when I inform him that he has to live whilst in India in the midst of
rice mills. For whereas when he first went to Shantiniketan near
Bolepur, there was no rice mill in Bolepur, at the present moment
several such mills are working in that once quiet place. He often spoke
to me about the din, the dust and the smoke and the fraudulent
trafficking that has been going on in Bolepur since the advent of rice
mills, and spoke also of the deprivation of a useful cottage industry by
reason of the installation of these mills. There can be no doubt that
hand-husked rice is infinitely superior to mill-husked rice. Medical
men can, however, speak on the evil with greater authority than I can.
The moral evil of those mills stares one in the face, as soon as one
goes to places where these mills have found a place. In spite, however,
of my knowledge of the evil of this growing destruction of cottage
industries, had I not been bed-ridden, I should not have undertaken
the task that Andrews out of his good nature and out of the
abundance of love that he has for India suggests that I should do. For
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

367

I regard myself as an economical worker, fully cognizant of my own
limitations. In trying to revive hand-spinning I feel that I am touching
the root of the evil, that it is enough to occupy all my energy, and that
if that movement becomes successful, as I am daily becoming more
and more convinced that it will, the undulated evils of rice mills, to
which Andrews draws attention, and others which can be named will
automatically disappear. Let us not make the mistake of thinking that
what has happened in India about the spinning-wheel, and what is now
happening about other cottage industries, such as hand-milling of rice,
need cause no harm to national life, because such things have
happened in the West without the West having come to grief. In the
first place it is yet too early to say positively that the destruction of
village life in the West has been either a benefit to it, or to mankind in
general. In the second place, and this is more pertinent, assuming that
the new life that has come into being in the West is calculated to
benefit mankind, let us understand that whereas in the West the
villagers whose industry was destroyed readily found another
occupation, and were, therefore, somehow provided, with us only an
infinitesimal portion of those whom the erection of these mills
deprives of their occupation is otherwise provided, and that the vast
majority are left idle and penniless. Let not the reader also rush to the
conclusion that the hand-spinning movement is an indiscriminate
onslaught upon machinery. This movement is intended to displace
only such machinery worked by power as is harmful to the moral and
material welfare of the starving millions. The fact is that we are too
much obsessed by the glamour of the West, and the ready-made
literature that is poured down upon us from week to week. We forget
that what may be perfectly good for certain conditions in the West is
not necessarily good for certain other, and often diametrically
opposite, conditions in the East. Free Trade which may have been
good enough for England would certainly have ruined Germany.
Germany prospered, only because her thinkers, instead of slavishly
following England, took note of the special conditions of their own
land, and devised economics suited to them. And both England and
Germany will have to revise their policy in economics immediatelythe
nations that are now being exploited by them come to their own, and
refuse to be exploited. The civilization of both is based upon the
exploitation of other lands. Let us remember that even if we have
desire, we have not the power to exploit any single nation on earth.

368

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Hence if we are to live as an independent nation, we must evolve
economics and conditions suited to our growth.
MOST ECONOMICAL

A friend, who fell ill about the same time as I became incapacitated, writing out of sympathy, and herself in search of it, says in her
letter:
I had time to philosophize and there was one thought I was working at ever
since I lost my voice. And I have discovered that there is no necessity for
living, and that Fate in giving us death early is most economical. For thereby
she economizes the power that abides in us whereas we waste it by living when
living becomes manifestly unnecessary. I spun the thought out until I felt
exhausted, and I said to myself, “After all what is the good? The call somehow
or other has not come. And so I must be wasted till there is nothing more left
to be wasted.’’1

What a comforting thought it is to think of death, whenever it
comes, as a wise plan in the economy of Nature? If we could realize
this law of our being and be prepared for death as a welcome friend
and deliverer, we should cease to engage in the frantic struggle for
life. We shall cease to want to live at the cost of other lives and in
contempt of all considerations of humanity. But to philosophize, as
this friend has done, is one thing; to realize at the required moment
the truth of the philosophy is totally another. Such realization is
impossible without a due conception of the definite and grave
limitations of the body and an abiding faith in God and His
unchangeable Law of Karma.
Young India, 12-5-1927

372. YOUNG AT 75
An English friend writes:
I want just to tell you of a letter and photographs I have had from a dear
old Swiss peasant woman of over 70, who spins and weaves away up in the
mountains above Villeneuve. She writes in answer to letters that she has had
of mine, and then she says (in French dialect),
“We are commencing the winter and the snows are coming down to
keep us company for many months. I shall have plenty of time to occupy
myself with my loom. And I have now got an order for two pieces at 59 metres,
1

For Gandhiji’s reply; vide “Letter to Isabel Bamlet”, 10-5-1927

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

369

so I shall need the time, as I get tired easily in these days” (at 75 years old!).
Her life is a perfect example of the full, yet peaceful and contented existence,
which should be the lot of all peasantry. In the summer she works in the fields,
with just a few odd hours of spinning and weaving put in here and there when
the days are wet, and in the winter when the land is under snow, she works
away at her wheel and her loom all day. Take this hand industry away from her,
and she would be lost in complete misery. As it is, she is the happiest and
sweetest-natured person on the mountainside. Why? Because she alone, of all
the peasants in that place, has retained the old industry, and she alone has a
full and true life. I enclose you one of the little photographs which shows her
sitting on a log of wood caressing one of her goats, which may give you some
slight idea of her dear old face. The younger woman is her daughter-in-law.

I have the beautiful photograph which I am unable to reproduce
in Young India, but the imaginative reader will have no difficulty in
filling in the picture. The point of the letter however is that even in
that machine-ridden country, there are people who find their true
peace in this, at one time universal, home industry of the wheel and
the loom. And if this old woman, who for her industry is young at 75,
finds her solace, not her livelihood, in the wheel and the loom, how
much greater is their need in this land where very few women reach
the age of 75, where the majority needlessly are old at 50, and where
millions of women need not merely the solace of an innocent cottage
industry to occupy their idle hours but who need it even more to keep
the wolf from the door?
‘If that is so, why do not the millions take to the home industry,
even as the dear old Swiss sister does, and find from it their solace and
their food? What is there to prevent them from doing so?,’ asks the
ignorant scoffer. But somewhat similar was the question put by a
burly, rough-looking Englishman to Surendranath Bannerjea in 1889
or 1890 when he was haranguing an English audience. This worthy
member of the firm of John Bull and Company asked the then
uncrowned king of Bengal, if what the latter said was true that India
desired freedom, what prevented her from taking it, how was it that
they, members of this numerous and powerful firm, never heard of
breaking of window-panes, let alone heads, as they the members were
wont to do when they could not get what they wanted? So far as my
memory serves me right, the papers recorded no answer from the
orator. There was only a ‘hear, hear’ from the audience. But what the
honest Englishman said to Surendranath may be safely repeated even
today, and we know that such a question will be no answer to the cry
370

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for freedom. We may not know how to win it. Knowing the way we
may not have the power or the will to adopt it. Nevertheless the cry for
freedom is both just and natural. Be it ever so ineffective, it is the first
step to freedom.
In the instance of the starving millions the scoffers forget in
their ignorance that the millions have not even the wish to cry out for
work or bread. Hence we join the English historian in calling them
“dumb millions”. We (including the scoffers) have to be their voice.
We have to teach the dumb millions the first lesson. We, not they, are
responsible for their awful poverty and ignorance. They don’t know
what they want or need. They are living corpses.
Who shall dare say to the untouchables that if they want their
freedom, who prevents them from taking it? God is long-suffering
and patient. He lets the tyrant dig his own grave, only issuing grave
warnings at stated intervals.
We would say, and justly, that though the taunt of the Englishman could be theoretically justified, it would ill become Englishmen
to beg the question in that manner, when anyone of us, though feeling
helpless, is yet expressing the natural desire for freedom. So will it ill
become us, middle-class men and women, to hurl the taunt put by me
in the mouth of the imaginary scoffer in answer to the crying need of
the millions—a need which they may not even feel but which a few of
us feel for them. The way to answer the need is to multiply the
number of such representatives who would not only be the
mouth-piece of the dumb millions but would adopt corresponding
measures by themselves taking up the wheel, by throwing away
foreign fineries, by wearing khadi and by not resting till every idle
hour of the nation is usefully occupied. Then, but not till then, shall
India’s women be young, happy and godfearing at 75, even as the
Swiss sister of 75 is represented to be.
Young India, 12-5-1927

373. FOR SUBSCRIBERS, SOUTH INDIA FLOOD RELIEF
The following letter1 was received by me last year, and has been
lying with me ever since. One of the signatories Diwan Bahadur M. O.
Parthasarathi Aiyengar unfortunately died sometime after signing the
1

Not reproduced here

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

371

letter. The contents of the letter and the distinguished names1 attached
to it speak for themselves. I heartily endorse the appeal2 . But before I
can formally give effect to it, it is necessary to ascertain the wishes of
the donors. In answer to the appeal issued in these columns and
Navajivan, some sent their donations to the Satyagraha Ashram, some
to the Navajivan, office, and some to the office of the Gujarat
Provincial Congress Committee. The funds were sent from time to
time to Sjt. Rajagopalachari upon requisition. Audited accounts were
published by him in the papers. The catastrophe was so sudden that it
appealed to the imagination of the philanthropic public and a liberal
response was made to the various appeals that were issued. The result
was that practically everywhere there was a surplus. The agencies
created were unable to spend the full amount with due regard to the
proper discharge of their duties. As the signatories to the following
letter inform me, the other agencies have disposed of the surplus in
some beneficial manner or other. I have not been in a hurry to use up
the surplus of the amounts received in answer to the appeal made in
these columns. It is deposited in banks and is bearing interest. India is
unfortunately a land of almost perpetual famines, and the chief
activity of the All-India Spinners’ Association at the present moment
is directly to deal with such causes of famine as are within the power
of man to control. Man cannot control and regulate floods beyond a
certain limit. They will take their toll in spite of the exercise of all the
ingenuity that man may be capable of. But floods always leave a
legacy behind, which man can and is bound to deal with. In a similar
manner man cannot bring water beyond a certain point when the rains
fail. But man can produce conditions whereby people who are willing
to work can find work enough to buy food with, when Nature leaves
enough scope for transferring grain from one place to another. It is
exactly these causes that the All-India Spinners’ Association is
endeavouring in a humble manner to deal with through its growing
army of workers. The method adopted is to establish spinning centres
in places where there is the greatest need for work during off-seasons.
The largest amount of such work is being done, as is now well known,
in South India. And the letter I have reproduced is a recommendation
1

S. Srinivasa Iyengar; S. Ramanathan, Secretary, A.I.S.A., Tamilnad and
Kerala; C. Rajagopalachari; K. Kelappan; M. O. Parthasarathi Aiyengar; M. Krishna
Nair, M.L.C., Ex-Diwan of Travancore and T. Rangachariar
2
To give the unspent balance of South India Flood Relief Fund for khadi work
in South India through A.I.S.A.

372

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

for the use of this surplus of the Flood Relief Fund through this
agency. When I made an appeal for directing the funds for use in
Orissa, no subscriber objected and several wrote to me approving of
the suggestion. I now invite the subscribers, if they wish, to signify
their own opinion. In the absence of any opinion to the contrary from
them within a fortnight of the publication of this note, I propose to
utilize the surplus in the manner suggested by the distinguished signatories. Needless to say I have consulted all my co-workers, and they
approve of the suggestion.
Young India, 12-5-1927

374. THE SKELETONS OF ORISSA
According to my theory, if khadi work cannot be made a
success in Utkal, it cannot be made a success anywhere. Yet, strange
though it may appear, nowhere have the khadi workers experienced a
greater difficulty in organizing hand-spinning than there. The eyes of
the living skeletons of Utkal are unlit by a single ray of hope. What
interest can the means of livelihood have for one who has despaired of
life itself? Those who have taken to spinning in Utkal are men who
still retain some hope of life, The khadi worker there has not yet been
able to touch the vast majority who have lost all hope. The people are
dying under our very eyes. We could see it clearly if only we had the
eyes to see. We would then take up spinning for sacrifice and give
away all our hoarded money for khadi work, or in case we had none,
we would cut down our luxuries and superfluous expense and devote
the savings to the same end.
It is only if we ourselves spin that we will be able to create the
spinning atmosphere necessary to quicken these skeletons to life. But
a spinning atmosphere by itself cannot do more than merely touch the
fringe of the problem. Progress depends upon funds. No yajna can be
complete without dakshina1 . And it is clear to me as daylight that
spinning is the one true yajna today and to contribute funds for its
advancement is the only dakshina. For those who have not yet
1

Offering

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

373

realized this simple truth, the following letter 1 will serve as an eyeopener.
Young India, 12-5-1927

375. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 12, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

Again I have your two letters delivered the same day. I am so
glad you seem to have settled down. But whenever you feel unsettled,
you will not hesitate to tell me about it, as you now know from
experience that I shall be patient. I am most anxious that you should
not appear to be what you are not. I must take you as you are and
help you to be what you should be. That I can only do if I give you
no cause to fear me. That is why I told you once I wanted to be not
merely in the place of father but mother also to you.
You will not leave the D.C. alone so long as he entertains your
letter. Answer politely all his doubts and queries. Tell him if you
know the difference between the Persian wheel which we have and the
Ramachandra lift as also why spinning is not merely one of the
industries but is the key industry of the nation.
There seems to be still some misunderstanding about my
coming there. I am anxious to be there for two reasons. I want to see
the place about which I have heard so much and I want to be with
you. But the time I do not know. I am not likely to leave the South yet
for four months, I fear. But it is no use forecasting events. I[t] should
be enough for me to be able to say that I long to be there just as much
as I long to be at Sabarmati. Please gently tell Krishnanandji this
thing.2
Let Valunjker write to me. You should get hold of the correct
spelling of his name. Let him write it [in] the Hindi character. Are
they making a long stay there?
1

Not reproduced here. Written by Laxmidas Purushottam, it was a similar
appeal as that of Shankerlal Banker; vide “Khadi for Utkal”, 5-5-1927.
2
Vide also “Letter to Mirabehn”, 27-4-1927.

374

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am well.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5228. Courtesy: Mirabehn

376. LETTER TO H. KALLENBACH
NANDI HILLS (NEAR BANGALORE),

May 13, 1927
LOWER HOUSE,

As I lie in bed and look up old undisposed of correspondence
and revive old and sacred memories, I chance upon your letter of 27th
February sent with Andrews’s letter from your home at Inanda, and I
revive so many pleasant and sacred memories. Every letter that you
have written during the last two years—and you have not written
many—has been a despondent letter, distrustful of yourself; but as
long as I live I am not going to lose faith in you. I am hoping that
some day as before you will have a fatigue of the exciting things that
give you momentary pleasure and that you will at least come to India
to meet an old friend and renew many old acquaintances. You have
made a provisional promise to do so next September or October. Do
come if you can and then stay as long as you like or as little as you
like.
I am glad you are having short spells of Andrews’s company. I
have not come across a humbler or more godfearing man throughout
my varied experience.
You don’t want me to say anything about my illness; because I
see you do get Young India and read it. I am at the present moment
taking my cure in a little hill in the State of Mysore where an army of
devoted volunteers and many of my closest co-workers are looking
after me. Mrs. Gandhi and Devdas are with me. The names of others
would mean nothing to you. So I do not give them. But when you do
come, you will see them all and recognize them as having been with
me on this hill.
This loss of strength came in the twinkling of an eye. Latterly I
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

375

had put such terrific strain upon the brain that I was afraid of a crisis
and it came just when I was arranging to have a lighter programme.
But God seemed to say, ‘I shall demolish your pride before you
recognize your mad method and show you that you were utterly
wrong in rushing as you have been doing, thinking that it was all well
because it was for a good cause. You fool, you thought that you
would work wonders. Have your lesson now and learn whilst there is
yet time that God alone is to wonder-work and He uses whom He
pleases as His instrument.’ I am taking the chastisement I hope in due
humility and if He raises me from this sick-bed, I am making Him
promises that I shall reform my ways and shall seek still more
strenuously to know His will and do it.
I hope you are keeping in touch with Manilal. He has got a girl
with a strong character as his wife. She is the best girl I could possibly
have found for him. Chance put her my way. She belongs to a godly
family. Remember you are one of the trustees for Phœnix and I look
to you to discharge your trust.
Sastri will be in South Africa probably within a month of your
receipt of this. I have had long chats with him about you and your
associations with Gokhale. Do try to be close to him and bring all our
old companions in touch with him.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 12350

376

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

377. LETTER TO P.J.. REDDY
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI , 1

May 13, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. I did receive the cablegram from the Chinese Students’ Association and whilst I was touring
in Bihar. So far as I recollect, I sent them a letter also acknowledging
the cablegram. What is however more to the purpose, I took immediate action by writing in Young India. And there was agitation
against the despatch of Indian troops but as you are aware, we have no
power.
I am now writing to the Association to the address sent by you.
Yours sincerely,

P. J. R EDDY , E SQ.
HON . S ECRETARY
HINDUSTHAN ASSOCIATION OF C ENTRAL EUROPE
KNESEBECKSTER 8-9
C HARLOTTENBURG 2
BERLIN
From a photostat: S.N. 12489

378. LETTER TO CHINESE STUDENTS’ ASSOCIATION
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI , 2

May 13, 1927
DEAR FRIENDS,

I understand from Sjt. Reddy that you did not know whether I
received your cablegram sent by you some time ago, and whether I
took any action upon it. You had given no address so far as I recollect
in your cablegram; but I have a recollection that I sent you an
acknowledgement to the place from which your cable was sent. What
is more to the purpose, I took immediate action and wrote strongly in
Young India which I had taken for granted you regularly read. There
1
2

Permanent address
ibid

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

377

was persistent agitation against the dispatch of Indian troops from
almost all the Indian public bodies. But I am sorry to have to confess
that Indian public opinion is not powerful enough to carry in such
matters weight with the Government. It has to be recognized that we
are after all a fallen nation struggling to rise and therefore beyond
wishing nations like you all success in their endeavour to attain full
freedom, we can do very little indeed to help.
Yours sincerely,

C HINESE S TUDENTS ' A SSOCIATION
BERLIN
From a photostat: S.N. 12498

379. LETTER TO H. CLAYTON
NANDI HILLS,

May 13, 1927
DEAR MR. CLAYTON,

Mr. A. V. Thakkar of the Servants of India Society has sent me
a cutting from The Times of India of the 4th instant containing the
report of a debate in the Corporation in which you are reported to
have said in reference to Mr. Thakkar’s investigation as follows:
Proceeding, the Commissioner said he was not going into the question of
general administration. Mr. Horniman had referred to the investigations of
Mr. Thakkar. Now, he (the speaker) had great admiration for Mr. Thakkar.
During the last ten years every opportunity was given to that gentleman to
make inquiries and once in conjunction with Mr. Gandhi. The result was that
Mr. Gandhi reported that the class of witnesses was so unreliable that he could
not believe one single allegation made by them !

I shall be glad if you will kindly tell me whether you are
reported correctly, and I shall thank you if you will kindly let me have
a copy of the report which I am said to have made. I do remember an
interview or interviews with the late Mr. Turner in connection with the
complaints of Bhangis. But I have no recollection of my having made
either in conjunction with Mr. Thakkar or otherwise any enquiry of
the type suggested in the paragraphs quoted above.
I must thank you for the kind enquiries that you made about me
378

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

when Dr. Mehta visited me at Amboli. As you know I am now taking
my rest at the above hill which is a higher elevation than Amboli,
therefore cooler.
Yours sincerely,

H. CLAYTON, E SQ.
C OMMISSIONER
MUNICIPAL C ORPORATION
BOMBAY
From a microfilm: S.N. 12909

380. LETTER TO R. B. GREGG
NANDI HILLS,

May 13, 1927
MY DEAR GOVIND,

I have your typed letter. Though typewritten letters are
undoubtedly easier to read, I have still a weakness for hand written
letters. This however does not mean that I want you to write to me in
your own hand. Your typewritten letters are quite as welcome as the
handwritten ones and for the time being I have myself mostly to rely
upon shorthand and the typewriter.
I have not yet got the book on vitamins. If you had given me
the name of the book and the author, I would have tried to procure it
in Bangalore which I am sure has very good bookshops.
I shall look forward to your manuscript on khadi. I won’t
discuss now the theory you have sketched in your letter.
Almonds I treated in two ways. I had them roasted and pounded
through a nutmill into pulp and took this in the shape of butter. I had
them also soaked overnight in water, the skin was removed and then it
was pounded very fine, mixed with water and turned into milk. This
milk was warmed and raised to boiling point and then eaten. Even this
I could not digest. This was however now nearly eight or nine years
ago—after the attack of dysentery. I have not dared to try the
experiment again and after taking to goat’s milk. But I should gladly
make the experiment on my own responsibility if I had no other
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

379

undertakings and should try it in spite of the other undertakings
under skilled supervision.
With love to you all,
Yours sincerely,

R. B. GREGG
KOTGARH
From a photostat: S.N. 14122

381. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakha Sud 12, May [13] 1 , 1927
CHI. MANI,

I have your letter. You both did well to volunteer your services
for patrolling the Ashram at night. I wish you did it to the full extent
of your physical capacity (even if as assistants to some other person).
Fear is a mere figment of our imagination; there is nothing real about
it. It vanishes as a result of facing it often enough and by the grace of
God. When the thieves realize that even our paid watchman will not
beat them up but would suffer beating at their hands and that the
volunteers belong to a different class altogether and are ordinary
householders, they will cease to trouble the Ashram folk. I am sure
that someone of you will employ soul-force some day and win them
over by love. But there is no doubt that this is like placing one’s hand
in a pit occupied by a snake. Someone will be beaten up or even
killed. What man is there who is not afflicted by disease? Men, women
and children, all fall a victim to it. How often was Radha knocked
down? What happened to Rukhi? How many girls were taken to the
Hospital at Juhu? If we can stand it, why should we not also take a
beating from thieves and others, with courage? This idea may be
strange for those who expect to be protected by the police but not for
us at the Ashram.
I received the slivers prepared by you just as I was spinning and
tried them at once. The thread did not break even once, and today I
have found out a way to determine the strength just by myself and no
sliver has yet given me a thread comparable to that from you. I have
come across no sliver better than yours. Equally good slivers might
have come my way only once or twice before. But I do not think
1

380

The source has “12”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

anybody can make better slivers than yours. Indeed after once having
tried my hand at yours, it may be difficult to spin with any other. I
wish and hope that you will be first in the first class in writing a good
hand and in spinning as well as carding.
I had a letter from Karachi yesterday. Your appointment
appears to have been delayed on account of Narandas’s absence. So
they have asked for a month’s time. I wrote that if they really wanted
you, I would wait for a month longer, but they should do nothing just
by way of courtesy or just to get you there, i.e., merely to oblige us. I
also asked for a reply by wire. I would like you to go only to a place
where you are really wanted; only this would be seemly. We are in no
hurry. Meanwhile you have to become perfect in every department of
your studies.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne. pp. 60-1

382. LETTER TO JETHALAL
NANDI DURG, M YSORE,

Vaishakha Sud 12 [May 13, 1927] 1
BHAISHRI JETHALAL,

I have your letter. If you persevere, you will succeed in your
efforts. In this age such efforts do not bear quick fruit, but hereafter
you must observe this one rule. Whatever the vow, once you take it,
you must keep it. You may pile up all the barricades you need for
safeguarding [your vow] and for protecting yourself [against breach];
one of the essential and fundamental safeguards is this. During the
period of your vow, the two of you should live absolutely apart from
each other and under no circumstances allow yourself any privacy. If
you have neither the inclination nor the strength to keep a vow, you
may not take it, but having taken once you must-abide by the
necessary conditions. You should go through Pandit Satavalekar’s
book on brahmacharya. His address is Oundh (District Satara). A
copy of the book has already come to the Ashram, from where you
1

Year inferred from the contents

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

381

can borrow it for reading.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1356

383. LETTER T0 MOTILAL NEHRU
NANDI HILLS,

May 14, 1927
DEAR MOTILALJI,

I must dictate. Writing regularly with my own hand causes too
much strain and it is not possible to sit up long. This, however, does
not mean that I am not getting stronger, but the strength comes very
slowly. And I do not want to be in arrears with such correspondence
as I would like to attend to.
I prize your first letter as a gift. It shows you in all your greatness and goodness.
You are living for your children. I envy them. But Krishna’s 1
wedding must not be after Jawahar’s type. It must be as humble as
Sarup’s 2 . Otherwise I must apply for a warrant of attachment. Or, if I
feel I must enter into collusion with Krishna.
I read the public printed report from beginning to end. And I
have now read the confidential report3 . Both are worthy of Jawaharlal.
I appreciate the view he presents about foreign propaganda. But
somehow or other I still feel that our way lies differently. I feel that we
will not get the support of Europe beyond a certain point, because
after all most of the European States are partners in our exploitation,
and if my proposition is correct, namely, that we must resist this
exploitation in every shape and form, we shall not retain European
sympathy during the final heat of the struggle. However, for the
moment my view is merely academic. And you will vote Congress
funds as you please.
1
2
3

382

Krishna (Mrs. Hutheesing)
Vijayalakshmi (Mrs. Pandit)
About the doings of the “Oppressed Nations’ Conference”
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The idea of Jawaharlal presiding has an irresistible appeal for
me. But I wonder whether it would be proper in the present
atmosphere to saddle the responsibility upon him. It seems to me to
be a thankless task. All discipline has vanished. Communalism is at its
height. Intrigue is triumphant everywhere. Good and true men are
finding it difficult to hold on to their position in the Congress.
Jawahar’s time will be simply taken away in keeping the Congress
house tolerably pure and he will simply sicken. Till your letter came, I
had no thought of interfering this year in the choice of the President.
My instinct still goes that way. But, being out of touch, I may be
taking too gloomy a view of the situation. You know better. And
seeing that you are taking your head, and I suppose heart also, to
Bombay, you will know the situation at first hand and guide me.
There will be still time enough to move.
I return Krishna’s copy of Jawahar’s confidential report as also
the first page of his letter. I have only just received papers regarding
Saklatvala which I shall go through in due time.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 12576

384. LETTER TO DR. B. S. MOONJE
NANDI HILLS,

May 14, 1927
DEAR DR. MOONJE,

I was looking forward to a copy of your address. I have now
received the same with your covering letter for both of which I thank
you.
Acharya Gidwani wrote to me preparing me for the receipt of
your address. I had not read it but he told me that you had imputed to
me a view of untouchability which I have never held or expressed.
And, when he told me so, I wrote to him saying that if you had done
any such thing, it would not surprise me as your philosophy admitted
of any means for beating an opponent with. I have now read your
address and I see that it confirms Acharya Gidwani’s opinion. I
suppose it is unnecessary to tell you that the view you ascribe to me is
not mine. For, it is conceivable to me that you did not know my
repeated declarations that I do not regard untouchability as is now
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

383

practised as a part of Hindu religion, and that if I could persuade
myself that it was, I should disown Hinduism. But this very palpable
misrepresentation of my view does not affect our friendship. For,
mistaken though I regard your philosophy to be, love of the country
is good enough bond between you and me. Some day of course I
expect to convert you [to] my view that it is a good policy even to
treat an opponent fairly and justly. And my conversion of you will be
my contribution to the shuddhi movement.
Of course you want to know my opinion about your address. I
congratulate you upon your frankness and fearlessness; but the
substance of your address makes no appeal to me. Your address is a
powerful and eloquent plea on behalf of Islam not as its best
exponents know it, but as you know it, and if I do not know better my
own Hinduism, I do not know what I should do. You have also put
yourself to immense pain in demonstrating that untouchability is an
integral part of Hinduism, a view which I repudiate and have always
repudiated in toto. Happily for me, my Hinduism does not bind me to
every verse because it is written in Sanskrit, because it is supposed to
be a part of some of our scriptures. If your portraiture of events is
true and if your view of Hinduism is also true, the outlook is only
gloomy both for Hinduism and for the country. But let me tell you
with all deference that in spite of your literal knowledge of the Shastras, yours is a distorted view of Hinduism. I claim in all humility to
have lived Hinduism all my life. But I can’t convert you by argument.
And I know you will sweep me off my feet with a mere gesture if I
endeavour to convert you by means of lathi blows. I shall therefore be
content with what I know to be the Hindu way and wait patiently for
my opportunity.
Yours sincerely,

DR. B. S. M OONJE
NAGPUR
From a photostat: S.N. 14613

384

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

385. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
NANDI,

Vaishakh Sud 13 [May 14, 1927] 1
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. Writing to persons like you is no strain.
Lately I have changed my way of working. Instead of writing myself,
I dictate letters lying down. That way I am able to attend to more
letters. Write to Pattani Saheb regarding the bungalow and give him
your last date. If you wish, I shall write to him. It is better to spend
November- December only there. If all is well you may come down in
January. If you really wish to write about tuberculosis in Gujarati, go
to a medical college when you are ready and study the subject without
any desire for a degree. Do you know that that is what Dr. Anna
Kingsford did? She also had tuberculosis. While studying the subject,
she discovered something altogether new. She cured her disease by
taking to vegetarian diet. It is another matter that the cause of her
disease was different. You can also discover something.
Now for Pyarelal. If you send away Pyarelal in a hurry, you will
earn a severe rebuke. I had decided for Pyarelal the programme that
he should be with you and do his work. Pyarelal is learned, yet is
reticent. Because of his undue timidity, he is not able to give of his
best. That is why I had given him the responsibility of writing
regularly while he stayed with you. In one of your letters you had
mentioned that Pyarelal was feeling bored. That is not true. As soon as
he came here, Pyarelal sought my permission to go back. But I
detained him because I wanted to have a leisurely talk with him and to
cure his mental troubles. Do not send back Pyarelal because you want
to make the experiment of carrying on without help. Discuss the
matter further with Pyarelal and then write to me as you consider fit.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

From Bapuni Prasadi

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

385

386. LETTER TO CHINAI
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakha Sud 13 [May 14, 1927] 3
BHAISHRI CHINAI,

I have your letter. Even before this I got the news from Bhai
Kalyanji and Pragjibhai. Your letter however throws more light. I
congratulate you on the fortitude you displayed in receiving the blows
without either returning them or running away. I have no doubt that
your action will bring benefit to you as well as to the people. We
should entertain no doubt about it just because we cannot ourselves
see its good results.
I shall now answer your questions. It cannot be stated
categorically whether or not one may participate in the activities of the
Hindu [Maha]sabha. Those who are capable of having their own
ideals implemented may surely do it, or those who are in agreement
with the ideology of their local leaders will join them anyway. I find
nothing wrong with the Hindu [Maha]sabha’s aims and ideals. There
can be nothing wrong in organizing a community. Abolition of
untouchability is everyone’s dharma.
Shuddhi is a very wide term. A part of what it connotes may be
acceptable to us, some of it may be rejected. I think their manifesto
gives no rigid definition of shuddhi. People therefore have to make
their own individual choice after considering the activities carried on
in their respective province or city. As a matter of fact you have
therefore to act as directed by your own inner self in view of the local
situation. There is no absolute dharma that you must attend all the
meetings convened by the Mahasabha, nor are you bound by dharma
to take active part in any meeting which you happen to attend.
Dharma consists in undertaking an act only if it is likely to advance
what one regards as one’s dharma. I would have no objection to
taking part in a procession launched by the Hindu [Maha]sabha if it is
done with a pure motive and not expressly with the intention to create
trouble. If we get news of a riot we should certainly exercise our
strength, such as it is, in bringing about peace. It is everyone’s dharma
to make every pious effort to stop riots breaking out. I employ the
adjective “pious” with a purpose because in this age of cowardice
men are presumed to be observing their dharma of peace by remai386

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

ning indifferent merely with a view to saving their own skin. Thus by
pious efforts, I mean, no one is required to check the riots at the cost
of his dharma. If there is an attack on my temple coming up and I just
disappear or if I am advised to run away, neither I nor the person who
counsels flight can be said to have been trying to stop the riot.
Social boycott can be justified in principle. I have however
never seen a clear reason for a social boycott of Muslims; nor is a
general social boycott possible, as far as I can see.
Please do write to me if you need further elucidation. I hope
your pain has subsided; that Raiji too must be all right by now. One of
your doubts remains to be cleared. There is absolutely no reason to
believe that the Government has a hand in the functioning of the
Hindu [Maha]sabha. The Government, nonetheless, is wont to make
use of every sabha or samiti with a view to consolidating their own
position, as it does with the Hindu [Maha]sabha, the Muslim League
and even the Congress.
Let Bhai Kalyanji and Bhai Pragji too read this letter so that I
need not write to them separately.
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2684

387. LETTER TO GANGABEHN JHAVERI
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakha Sud 13 [May 14, 1927]
CHI. GANGABEHN,

A long-awaited letter from you after many days. It is good that
you visited the Kanya Gurukul. When you write to Champavatibehn,
please ask her to keep me informed about the institution. I am pleased
that none of your girls is scared of the thieves. I wish that we while at
the Ashram do not live in fear.
If Surajbehn invites you to have a look at the Shravikashram at
Palitana, do go and visit it when you get the time. I think, however,
that you were absolutely correct in expressing your unwillingness to
stay there. I would wish you to gain self-confidence and be better
trained, and your convictions to be more firm before you decide to
serve individually.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

387

Surendraji’s candour can never fail to have a good effect. Those
of the girls who come to know him have improved, and I wish you to
utilize his presence more. I regard Surendra as an unblemished
brahmachari.
It is very good that you have taken Ramanama into your heart.
This name alone averts all ills.
I am steadily improving. For the present I propose to make it a
practice to dictate my letters instead of writing them myself because of
the temptation to deal with too many letters and also to conserve my
energy.
Ba sends her blessings.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3135

388. CABLE TO LOUISE DIEL 1
[On or after May 14, 1927]
TRUE
ART
SELF-RESTRAINT.

CONSISTS
MASSES
LEARNING
SELF-PURIFICATION
MAY
GERMAN
MASSES COPY THIS ART OF LIFE.

GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 12500

389. APPEAL TO SOUTH AFRICAN INDIANS2
The Rt. Hon. Srinivasa Sastri has yielded to the pressure of
friends in accepting the office of the first Ambassador for India in
South Africa, at the sacrifice of his cherished wishes, solely with the
object of serving you. It rests with you to make the best use of his
services and his presence amongst you. You cannot do so unless you
fulfil the following conditions:
1. You will not expect too much.
2. You will not try to seek relief in purely individual cases
through him.
1

In reply to Louise Diel’s cable received on May 14, 1927, which read: “We
celebrate 60th birthday of Kaete Kollwritz, great German artist of masses. Please
cable message to address.”
2
The Gujarati original, from which this was translated, was published in
Navajivan, 15-5-1927.

388

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

3. You will not swerve from truth in your dealings with him.
To be false to him would be to be false to yourselves.
4. You will remain completely united.
5. You will put your own house in order and purify
yourselves.
You will not assume that all your grievances will disappear with
the coming of the Rt. Hon. Sastri as first Agent. He will have done
enough if he succeeds in seeing that no new restrictive legislation is
passed against you, that the operation of the old restrictive enactments
is not made unnecessarily harsh and that the spirit of the new Agreement is carried out by the Union Government.
The Rt. Hon. Sastri is going there as the representative, not of
individuals, but of India as a whole. He is going there to uphold the
prestige of India. Therefore you will not run to him for relief in every
individual case. If you do, you will make the mistake of expending a
pound for the matter of a penny.
Our strength depends solely on truth. No matter how you
behave in your business dealings, you will never in the interests of the
community think of swerving from the path of truth in your dealings
with the Rt. Hon. Sastri. In attempting to deceive him you will be
working your own ruin.
We here constantly receive reports of dissensions amongst you.
If you go on creating different and conflicting interests, e.g., the
rights of the rich as distinguished from those of the poor, the rights of
the North Indians as distinguished from those of the South Indians, of
the Colonial-born as distinguished from those of the merchants, of the
latter from those of the indentured, of the Transvaal Indians as
distinguished from those of the Cape Indians and Natal Indians, you
will lose the little that you have gained. If you want to better the
position of the whole community, you will always stand united.
We are ultimately to win by our own endeavour which does not
mean sharp practice, but self-purification, which again means reform
from within and purging ourselves of evil customs and superstitions,
educating our children, and contributing money for education as well
as other measures of social reform. In this work of self-purification,
the Rt. Hon. Sastri’s profound experience as an educationist and
reformer should be very helpful, and the presence of Mrs. Sastri
should be an inspiration to our women.
You will never get such another opportunity in the near future
of ameliorating your condition. In my opinion it was impossible to
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

389

find a worthier, abler and more impartial representative than the Rt.
Hon. Sastri. Let us believe that the Hand of God has brought about
this happy consummation. It rests with you entirely to benefit or not
by the chance which God has in his mercy given you. May He show
you the right path.
Young India, 19-5-192

390. NOTE
R AMACHANDRA LIFT

The lift has now been in use in several parts of Gujarat since the
management of it was taken over by the Satyagraha Ashram. With
reference to one that was recently put up in Palanpur, Sheth Amritlal
Raychand Jhaveri writes:1
I print the substance of the Gujarati letter received by me as
preliminary evidence of the successful working of the lift, and in
order to invite the opinion of others who have already got the
Ramachandra lifts. I should not have concerned myself about it but
for its very great humanitarian aspect. However, I am anxious to move
cautiously. I have heard some criticism about the lift and I invite all
the testimony for and against the lift. Up to now all the criticism that I
have received has made no appeal to me; but if there is any criticism
worth noticing I shall not hesitate to take the reader into confidence. I
need not repeat that the spirit of this enterprise is not commercial in
any sense of the term. Mr. Ramachandra Iyer has sold his patent
rights for a royalty of Rs. 25 per lift up to 1,000. This was due to him
as he has incurred considerable debts and as he must live. But beyond
that, nothing but actual expenses are added in counting the cost....
Those who desire to see the lift at work may visit the Ashram for the
purpose.2
Where the only object is absolute religious activity and pursuit
of truth, there is no reason to hide anything. The object of the
appreciation printed above is thus clear. If the lift has the merits
described above then all must take advantage of it. We started with
only one lift in the Satyagraha Ashram and have now provided four
lifts. Out of these three are in working condition; but I do not
1
2

390

The letter is not reproduced here.
What follows is from Navajivan, 15-5-1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

consider this to be sufficient proof. If those who have bought the
equipment are satisfied, and if they feel that because of this there is
some saving of cattle as well as money, then nothing can be said
against it. It can be said that experience gained so far is in favour of
the Ramachandra lift.
Young India, 26-5-1927; also Navajivan, 15-5-1927

391. TELEGRAM TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
NANDI,

May 15, 1927
MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
P ANCHGANI C ASTLE
P ANCHGANI
DETAIN
TODAY.1

PYARELAL

PENDING

RECEIPT

LETTER

POSTED

BAPU
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

392. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
NANDI HILLS,

May 15, 1927
DEAR BROTHER,

I must dictate this letter. I forgot to mention one thing to you. I
think I gave you the name of Umar Hajee Ahmed Jhaveri, one of the
most truthful men I have met in my life. If he has thought ill of a
person, I have known him to tell him so and apologize. He is the
brother of the very first Indian merchant who went to South Africa,
the late Abubakar Ahmed. Umar Hajee Ahmed has considerable
property in Durban and has a plot of land with handsome buildings in
a central place in Church Street, Pretoria. This property was the only
property registered in the name of an Indian in the Transvaal. It
became a point of honour with us to insist upon that property remain1

Presumably the reference is to the preceding item, which might have been
posted late.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

391

ing in the ownership of Indians. Mr. Jhaveri was telling me that there
was some dispute about it. I don’t remember the exact circumstances
in which the matter stands at present, though of course the past history
I know well. This is a matter that might come before you. You will
then recall the fact that I mentioned it to you. This is no individual
matter but one of national concern. There is correspon-dence about
this between General Smuts and myself. You will see all the papers if
the case ever comes before you.
I saw Dr. Malan’s cable. It was splendid. I am glad you are
going so early as 8th June. Poor Andrews is being torn to pieces, and
you will not reach South Africa a moment too soon.
The Natal Provincial Council’s vote is indeed a bad beginning.
But in the Cape Parliament the Natal vote counts for little. I have no
doubt that you will have no difficulty with the Natal members some of
whom are good, and all of them, unlike as in the Transvaal, the
Orange and even the Cape, are proud of the British connection. But,
probably, you already know all such things.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 12351

393. LETTER TO C. NARAYANA RAO
NANDI HILLS,

May 15, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

Owing to my illness your letter has remained unanswered all this
long time. Do you still desire to leave the Excise Department? And are
you prepared to go to the Ashram and submit to its discipline without
any pay? Though you do not know cooking, it will be necessary for
you to take part in the kitchen work. What you do not know will be
taught to you. If you are admitted you will be expected to learn
Hindi. You will be expected to get up at 4 o’clock in the morning and
from 4 o’clock till 7-30 in the evening you will be expected to take
some part in the joint work at the Ashram. Of course necessary leisure
for ablutions, etc., is provided. Thus you will see that before 8 o’clock
in the evening you will have little time for doing private reading.
There will be an hour’s rest during the day; but after strenuous
labour, you will hardly feel up to reading anything. Thus strictly
speaking there is no such thing as 8 hours’ day in the Ashram for
392

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

volunteers who come under the Ashram discipline. You will be
expected to retire to bed at 9 o’clock at night. In fact one motto at the
Ashram is that work for the common good is prayer and work is
devotion to God. If you feel that you can go through the Ashram
discipline, please let me know and I shall forward your letter to the
Manager of the Ashram with a recommendation to admit you.
Whether you may be finally admitted or not will depend upon the
Managing Committee who has full control over everything in the
Ashram.
Yours sincerely,

C. NARAYANA R AO , E SQ.
EXCISE DEPARTMENT
BEJJIPURAM
(BERHAMPORE P. O.)
From a photostat: S.N. 12564

394. LETTER TO N. H. TELANG
NANDI HILLS,

May 15, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

Owing to my sickness I have not been able to do anything
further in connection with your letter. If you join the training class,
your own expenses will be paid, provided, of course, that you enter
into an agreement after the training is finished to serve the All-India
Spinners’ Association. If you show considerable aptitude, it is possible
that you will get a pass certificate before the ordinary time and might
then be admitted to the service at once. If you are prepared to take the
training in the circumstances, I do not anticipate much difficulty
about your admission.
Yours sincerely,

N. H. TELANG,
TEACHER
A. V. SCHOOL
BALAPUR

ESQ.

From a microfilm: S.N. 12567-A

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

393

395. LETTER TO BENARSIDAS CHATURVEDI
NANDI HILLS, B ANGALORE,

May 15, 1927
CHI. BENARSIDASJI,

I have your letter. Before I got it, I had no knowledge of all that
had been written from the Ashram. You are no doubt aware that I am
lying ill in bed. I can only guess why such a letter came to be written
from the Ashram. Thus, as I have found Totaramji very systematic in
all his work, this letter too must have been written at his instance. If
this is true you have no reason to feel unhappy about it. As for me, I
have full faith in your truthfulness. But when a particular job.... 1 a
man should willingly act in conformity with the common rules.
Whatever the best man does. . .2

Again you may not be aware that a managing committee has
now been formed in the Ashram and all business is transacted through
it. And it has relieved me of all my responsibilities after I fell ill.
Consequently it is implied that I should claim or exercise no
prerogative. If I have not been able to satisfy you even after writing all
this please write to me what else I should do.
What are you doing these days? What means have you adopted
for earning your livelihood?
My health is now improving.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2576

396. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
Unrevised

NANDI HILLS,

May 16, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter. You may be declared to be a discharged
patient now I suppose and so I have eased down a bit in my sending
you love letters.
1

As in the source
Bhagavad Gita III. 21; the whole verse reads: “Whatever the best man does is
also done by other men; what example he sets, the world follows.”
2

394

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am making steady progress. Bangalore doctors came today
and they found the blood-pressure to be only 150 and the general
condition quite good. They now want me to eat more. I shall see what
is possible in that direction. I have been obliged to omit bread and
vegetable because I thought them to be too heavy. I must now make
another attempt. But there is no doubt about my getting better.
I see you are making headway with your work. How many
women are there and how many girls? How many men and how many
boys? Give me, when you can, a general idea of the Ashram and its
inmates.
I do not know if anybody has told you that at Sabarmati of late
we have been having much too much attention from thieves. Once our
watchman suffered bad injuries in a scuffle with them. That woke me
to a sense of our duty. And I thought that this work of guarding was
as much our duty as a common kitchen. I therefore suggested that we
must become our own watchmen and watchwomen and that we should
seek not to beat the thieves out of the Ashram, but try to wean them
from their error if they could be got at and that we should risk being
beaten by them. The suggestion has been adopted and there are now
over thirty volunteers including five women. This is a good beginning.
The common kitchen is daily improving. Shankaran has proved
an ideal chief and chef. There are over twenty dining at the kitchen.
All this will delight your heart when you return.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5229. Courtesy: Mirabehn

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

395

397. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
Vaishakha Sud Purnima [May 16, 1927] 1
SISTERS,

I am very glad to know that you are not afraid. A person who
knows that God is the Protector of all, why need he fear? By saying
that God is the Protector of all, I do not mean that none would be able
to rob or harm us. If this happens, it is not a reflection on the capacity
of God to protect us; it is an indication of our lack of faith in Him.
The river is ever ready to give water to all. But if one does not
approach it with a pot in which to fetch water, or avoids it thinking its
water poisonous, how can that be the fault of the river? Fear is a sign
of lack of faith. But faith cannot be developed by means of reasoning.
It comes gradually through reflection, meditation and practice. To
develop such faith, we pray to God, recite bhajans, read good books,
seek the company of the good and take to sacrificial spinning at the
wheel. He who has no faith will not even touch the spinning-wheel.
I am getting better.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
I did not notice all this space on the rear side. We know we are
all poor, so how can I now throw away this space?
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3649

398. LETTER TO TARA MODI
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakha Sud 15 [May 16, 1927]
CHI. TARA,

I do get news about your health. How did your health give way?
Why should you get hysteria? Write me a detailed letter if you have
the strength. If you have to fast, I am not going to worry at all because
1

396

Year is fixed from the reference to the scare from robbers at the Ashram.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am more and more convinced that when no other medicine works,
fasting is a sure remedy. Fasting does no harm, but don’t try it if you
don’t have the courage.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1697. Courtesy: Ramniklal Modi

399. LETTER TO SHANKERLAL BANKER
Purnima [May 16, 1927] 1
CHI. SHANKERLAL,

I have your letter. I am steadily regaining the vigour. Do not
worry in the least. I will try to take complete rest.
It would be good not to saddle Jamnalalji with more
responsibility for the present. Whatever the problems, I shall be able to
take quick decisions and perhaps you too will be able to explain to
me. I am afraid Jamnalalji might fall ill. I like Rajaji’s suggestion. If
you can work in the Nandi Hills for two months, the work can get
done quickly and conveniently. Houses are plentiful and so it would
be no trouble for me at all. Please consider and if you feel the need
come over. It would be good if you too could have some peace.
I had a fairly long discussion with Bhai Dhirajlal at Bombay. He
talked to me quite frankly and openly. He wants to have training at
Bardoli and then work in Bombay. He does not seem to have found a
clear direction yet. But it is just as well that he should spend a little
time at Bardoli or Sabarmati.
I have received Anasuyabehn’s letter. She will definitely be
coming to the Nandi Hills. It will not cause any trouble or congestion
for me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32723

1

The date has been inferred from Gandhiji’s stay at Nandi Hills from April 19
to June 5, 1927. Purnima during this period corresponded to this date. 424
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

397

400. LETTER TO GANGADEVI SANADHYA1
NANDI DURG,

Vaisakha 15 [May 16, 1927]
DEAR SISTER,

You have not recovered as yet. How is it? Quite some time has
gone by. Do you not wish even to change the treatment? Totaram
should write to me all the details. You need not bother to write.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2548

401. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
NANDI HILLS,

May 17,1927
DEAR SATIS BABU,

When my illness is fast becoming a thing of the past yours
seems to be obstinate. Whilst it remains so, you must not stir out. But
why does it persist like that? Are you undergoing any treatment there?
What exactly is the food you are taking? I ask this question as Mr.
Gregg has sent me a book containing the latest researches on food
and its relation to health. One thing does appear to me, however apart
from the book. May it be that your vegetarian food does not agree
with your body that has been built up upon flesh foods? While the
change may not have done any visible harm, may it have undermined
the constitution or may it be that the change of diet does not serve for
rebuilding a shattered constitution? So it happened in my case. I went
on famously on fruit and nut alone for more than six years. But after
that severe attack of dysentery I could not rebuild the body without
milk to which in some shape or other the constitution was used up to
45 years or rather 40 years. You know my rigid predilection, bordering on fanaticism, for vegetarianism. But my fanaticism exhausts
itself with my own person for the simple reason that it is a mater of
lifelong habit and of deep religious conviction. But religious convic1

Wife of Totaram Sanadhya, a Fiji-returned immigrant, an inmate of the
Sabarmati Ashram

398

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

tion is a matter personal to every individual. Therefore, even being a
vegetarian, I never enforce my conviction on friends but leave them
free to do as they choose, even when they are under my influence, as I
did for instance for Prabhudas, Chhaganlal’s son. I had an English
friend living with me in Durban. He had become a vegetarian under
my influence. After some time he became ill. I could see that he could
not get on well without his usual diet. I begged of him to procure
meat from outside and become well. I could not introduce it in my
own home. I want you to seriously consider the question therefore.
You have to think not only of yourself but of Nikhil also and even
Hemprabha Devi if she is still as bad as you are and Tarini if he is a
vegetarian. If you are eating pulses, they are of course a fatal thing for
weak persons and those with sedentary habits. You saw with what
agitation Andrews cabled to me all the way from South Africa about
milled rice. And my concern about your food became enhanced upon
reading the book sent by Mr. Gregg.
If there is any particular book on Buddhism that you require
please tell me and I shall try to procure it.
The paragraph about yoga in Navajivan was unfortunate. I did
think of yoga practices, but only from two sides, their reputed
helpfulness in restoring health and in aiding brahmacharya, the latter
for the sake of helping the student world whose mind is cut up to
pieces under dissipating practices, and the former with reference to
my own health. Having read a book on brahmacharya, during my
illness and having heard copious references to use of asanas I began
further research. I do not hope to get much help for acquiring greater
purity. Not that I do not need all that I can get, but I do not feel that I
shall get it through these practices. One who considers himself
proficient in yoga told me that in their final stages Raja Yoga, Hatha
Yoga and Karma Yoga were one and the same and that it was only in
the final stage that conquest of passions in every shape and form was
at all possible; and that in Hatha Yoga the final stage was difficult of
attainment and required extensive practice. I was not surprised to hear
this. For, I knew it before I was so authoritatively told. For that
conquest therefore I have only to continue along the path I have so
long followed. But I am taking gentle exercise by way of some of
these asanas and am eager to take more as I become stronger. You
need not therefore think any more about the yoga practices. Some
day in order to remove expectations and misunderstandings, I propose
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

399

to write about this thing in the pages of Young India. If I make any
discovery about the simple use of asanas for regaining health, I shall
certainly write to you.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1570

402. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
NANDI,

Tuesday [On or after May 17, 1927] 1
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

I had desisted from replying to your last letter hoping that you
would soon be arriving here. Meanwhile however I have had letters
from Saklatwala. Hence this letter to you. I also enclose his letters as
well as a copy of my letter to him.
My health is certainly good. The doctors say my bloodpressure is a little low. It has certainly not gone up.
Rajaji arrived here today. I take it you will now be arriving soon.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32786

403. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
NANDI DURG,

Viashakh Vad 2 [May 18, 1927] 2
CHI, MATHURADS,

I have your telegram. I am relieved. If you are able to walk 20
furlongs at a stretch without getting tired and without a rise in
temperature, we can say that you have turned the corner.
Talwalkar is an honest and industrious man and he thinks that in
1

From the reference to the Saklatwala papers which Gandhiji received on May
14, 1927, during his stay at Nandi Hills for recuperation of health. The first Tuesday
after May 14 was the 17th.
2
The addressee received this letter on May 20, 1927. Vaishakh Vad 2 in 1927
corresponded to this date.

400

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the treatment of tuberculosis he has no rival. I do not have the same
regard for his ability as I have for his good nature. That is why I have
not told you anything about him. But I know him very well. He
treated Kaka and Uttam Chand—whom you do not know. And at
present it appears that both of them have recovered. That is what the
two of them think too. I know that others also have faith in him. His
treatment consists essentially of injections in which he has profound
faith. I do not think he has talked to you about the injections. But I
can talk to him if you wish. But I think that if he wants to give you
injections and you want to take them you will have to stay at
Ahmedabad.
You must have met Nargisbehn and others.
My health is gradually improving.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

404. LETTER TO KHUSHALCHAND GANDHI
NANDIDOORG, 1

May, 18, 1927
2

BHAISHRI 5 KHUSHALBHAI ,

I received your letter. I was very pleased.
Please do write to Ramdas and tell him whatever you think he
ought to do. I believe khadi work to be both a business and a form of
national service. When the use of khadi has become widespread, the
very men who have now taken possession of the Mulji Jetha Market3
and send crores of rupees abroad and make profits of lakhs for
themselves, will compensate the thirty-three crores of Gods of India4
to the tune of crores of rupees and retain lakhs for themselves. And, in
1

In the Mysore state. Gandhiji was resting here after he had a mild stroke in
the last week of March of 1927.
2
Gandhiji’s cousin, father of Gandhiji’s nephews Chhaganlal, Maganlal and
Narandas who helped him in his numerous other activities. The figure ‘5’ in old style
letters expressed reverence for the person addressed.
3
A busy cloth trade centre in Bombay
4
That is, the people of India whom Gandhiji regarded as the Gods of ancient
Indian mythology
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

401

this way, both the Gods and the cloth merchants will prosper1 . Today,
these cloth merchants are making their profits, as they believe them to
be, at the expense of the Gods. I do wish that Ramdas, and to the
extent possible Nimu, should take full part in helping the change that
is currently taking place in cloth trade, transforming it from an immoral trade into a moral one. But that wish is of secondary importance
to me. The more important thing is the freedom of Ramdas and
Nimu. I myself am content telling them what I think, and will be
satisfied with whatever course of action they adopt. You have as much
right as I naturally have to take a share in promoting their good. You
are as much in place of a respected elder to them as I am. I, therefore,
wish that you should guide them. It is your right and also your duty
to do so. It would of course be very good if we both held the same
views. But I would see no harm even if our views differed. Sincerely
held differences of views conduce to our good. I hold that we harm
each other’s good by suppressing our views out of false regard for
each other. Therefore, please do tell Ramdas whatever you think.
I was glad to learn from your letter that Chi. Navin is now
coming round to the right path.
Jai Shrikrishna from

MOHANDAS
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

405. LETTER TO MULCHAND AGRAWAL
NANDI DURG,

Vaisakha Krishna 2 [May 18, 1927]
BHAI MOOLCHANDJI,

I have your letter. You have started khadi work, for which I
thank you. Nowadays owing to my illness, Jamnalalji is handling the
work of the Charkha Sangh. I shall pass your letter to him. He is due
here in a day or two.
Vandemataram from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 761

1

The reference is to Bhagavad Gita. Chapter III. verses 10 and 11, in which
Shri Krishna says that Brahma created the people to nourish the Gods through such
offerings, the Gods in turn nourishing peoples so that both might prosper.

402

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

406. NAGPUR SATYAGRAHA
I see an Associated Press telegram in the papers, in which Mr.
Manchershah Awari is reported to have said, that he had my consent
and full sympathy for his movement of civil disobedience with regard
to the Arms Act and the Explosive Substances Act, designed for the
release of the Bengal detenus.
If my recollection is correct, either the Associated Press representative has misunderstood Mr. Awari, or the latter has misunderstood me. I have no recollection of having given my consent in
advance to Mr. Awari’s proposed launching out on civil disobedience
in any connection whatsoever. It is really contrary to my practice to
give such consent in advance. I did discuss the theory of civil disobedience with Mr. Awari, for whose patriotic spirit and self-sacrifice I
have great regard. I drew his attention to the grave limitations of civil
disobe-dience. He spoke, and rightly, with great warmth and concern
about the Bengal detenus, and I remember having said, that if some
move-ment in the shape of civil disobedience could be conceived and
successfully launched, it would be a great thing. I hold that view even
at the present moment. For I regard the indefinite detention of the
Bengal patriots without any trial of any sort as a grave injustice. And
if I have remained dumb, it is not because I do not feel the wrong as
keenly as the closest friends of the detenus, but because I do not
desire to make a fruitless exhibition of my powerlessness. A public
worker has to learn to endure with fortitude what he cannot cure. And
bed-ridden though I am, if I could think of any feasible civil plan for
securing the release of these prisoners, I should embark upon it
without the slightest hesitation. But I confess that I have none in view.
My own personal opinion is that there is no atmosphere in the country
for civil disobedience. We have fallen upon evil times. The atmosphere today is one not of non-violent disobedience but of very violent
and suicidal disobedience.
I have no knowledge whatsoever of what is being done in
Nagpur. I can pronounce no judgment upon Mr. Awari’s movement.
I have given no consent for the movement. I had intended to say not
one word about the movement, and it would have been well if Mr.
Awari had not dragged in my name. If he thought that his movement
had my consent, he should have laid the whole of his plan in a
concrete form before me and secured it in writing. If I had approved
of it and if I could not have taken an active part myself, I would at
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

403

least have backed it with all the force at my command through these
columns. He must now thank himself if my disclaimer harms his
movement in any way.
And let it be a warning in future to everyone concerned against
using my name in connection with any movement without my previous consent in writing. Indeed it is necessary for workers to become
self-reliant and dare to prosecute their plans if they so desire without
hankering after the backing of names of persons supposed to be great
and influential. Let them rely upon the strength of their own conviction and the cause they seek to espouse. Mistakes there will be.
Suffering even avoidable there must be. But nations are not easily
made. There will have to be rigid and iron discipline before we
achieve anything great and enduring, and that discipline will not come
by mere academic argument and appeal to reason and logic.
Discipline is learnt in the school of adversity. And when zealous
young men will train themselves to responsible work without any
shield, they will learn what responsibility and discipline are. And out
of this army of candidate leaders, will arise one real leader, who will
not have to plead for obedience and discipline but who will command
it as a matter of course, because he will have been tried in many a
skirmish and will have proved his right to undisputed leadership.
Young India, 19-5-1927

407. HORRIBLE PRACTICES
Mr. Andrews in the course of a letter from Durban says:1
I know the temple at Umbilo, which may really be called a
suburb of Durban. Even years ago, when the temple was erected, I had
my misgivings. Bitter experience has taught me that all temples are
not houses of God. They can be habitations of the devil. These places
of worship have no value unless the keeper is a good man of God.
Temples, mosques, churches are what man makes them to be. I am
therefore not surprised at the painful and horribly superstitious practices going on in this so-called temple. The origin of these practices is
easy enough to trace. There are three classes of Indians in South
Africa. The free Indian trader has nothing to do with these practices.
1

Not reproduced here. The correspondent had referred to the evil practices of
self-torture like “fire-walking” festivals by Indians at Umbilo temple and to a page of
pictures of such things in The Natal Advertiser.

404

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Nor have the large number of Colonial-born Indians who have
received in the face of terrible odds a tolerably liberal education. The
third class is the indentured Indian, now become free. He is drawn
naturally from the poorest class here. Nothing has ever been done by
the Government or the employers or by the free Indian community to
help these unfortunate men and women out of their ignorance and
superstition. The result is that they are preyed upon by superstitious
and even evil-minded men who pose as priests and holy men. They
mutter a few Sanskrit verses whose meaning they do not know and
which they horribly mispronounce, and resort to all kinds of
awe-inspiring practices. And what can be better than a temple, where
simple people congregate and where every kind of superstition derives
a halo from associations attributed to temples? I think that the
common law of South Africa is wide enough to deal with these practices if the Government desires to put them down.
The fact is, unfortunately, that the prejudice against Indians in
South Africa is not ascribable to these practices, nor is it directed
against the men who are victims of this barbarism. It is directed
chiefly against the free trading class who have nothing to do with
these practices. And therefore these practices have gone without any
notice or comment. And if they are now being noticed, it is in order to
prejudice the European mind against the Habibullah Agreement and
against what little relief is sought to be given by it to the Indian
settlers. It should also be borne in mind that these practices are by no
means common amongst Indians throughout South Africa. They are
confined only to the part of the coast of Natal where indentured
Indians are to be found in their largest numbers. If therefore the
Government intend to put these practices down, they can do so under
the common law with ease, and they can be dealt with also through
municipal bye-laws. I am sure, that if action is taken, not a voice will
be raised against it in the name of religion falsely so called for
sheltering these practices. No cultured Indian will have anything to do
with them, and the ignorant people who witness these tortures with awe
will not dare to defend them in a court of law. What we can do here is
to encourage cultured Indians in South Africa to fight the
superstition. They should, without seeking Government intervention,
work in the midst of the poor people, and wean them from these
barbarisms, and advise them to help the Government, if they choose to
prosecute those who take part in those practices, thus showing their
desire not to reproduce in South Africa all that is bad in our life, but
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

405

to reproduce only that which is good in our civilization. It is our duty
to advise and encourage our countrymen in South Africa to do
nothing that will give a handle to the agitation against them.
Young India, 19-5-1927

408. LETTER TO SATCOWRIPATI RAY
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE S TATE ),

May 19, 1927
DEAR SATCOWRI BABU,

I got your letter day before yesterday after that day’s mail was
closed. I could not possibly over-take your letter yesterday.
You have my deepest sympathy with you in your troubles. But I
have much fear it is out of my power to help you in the direction
desired by you. All the same please let me have a full description of
your property, where it is situated, what is its extent, whether there are
any buildings on it and if there are, their dimensions. Possession of
this information will be useful for me. But your case is not out of the
ordinary. I know many who are passing through the same difficulty.
It is also one of the things we have to go through in our march
towards our goal. And I want you to bear your troubles with philosophic calmness as I know you will do.
But why do you say insolvency is not to be thought of? Honest
insolvency is no crime if a borrower [borrows] in good faith for
investing in a prosperous enterprise. Suppose that through no fault of
my own the enterprise fails and the loaner knew that I had no other
means of repayment. Surely if he is impatient, insolvency is the only
honourable course left open for me even if I desired as I should to
repay the loan in spite of insolvency. For, insolvency would be the
only way of my doing further business. As a lawyer you know the
genesis of insolvency law. It was created to protect honest but unlucky
enterprise and to encourage trade and enterprise. No doubt the golden
rule is not to borrow. But so few of us follow the golden rule. The
next best therefore is not to accept a defeat but to seek the protection
of the insolvency court and open a new leaf, and if successful, in the
next enterprise, repay of one’s own free will the original loaner. There
are such celebrated instances of men having deliberately become
insolvent and then repaid their creditors. In my own practice, I advised
406

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

one of my nearest clients 1 , who because he had taken part in the
satyagraha movement, was forced into the insolvency court. I called a
meeting of the debtors. They were unbending. I challenged them to
do their worst. The consequence was insolvency. But after the insolvency, the client paid the creditors in full to their agreeable astonishment. They apologized and they showed their sincerity by giving him
afterwards unlimited credit which they had no occasion to regret. I
therefore strongly advise you to meet the creditors, place the position
frankly and fearlessly before them and tell them that you will repay if
you earned. If they don’t listen, let them make you insolvent, or if the
insolvency law here admits of voluntary surrender you may even
surrender voluntarily. Then you will have breathing time and then if
you do not want to resume practice, you will join the Khadi Service.
Khadi Service will never give you Rs. 25,000. But if the movement
goes forward with a leap, khadi will become a commercial proposition,
and when it does become that, there will be a moderate amount of
money in it also. This may seem to be all far-fetched; not so to me. I
regard khadi as a far sounder proposition even from a commercial
standpoint than the least that can be made by our merchant princes.
After all sound commerce is of slow growth. But my confidence in
khadi is such that, though it is of slow growth, in the long run, it will
prove to be the shortest route to healthy commercial prosperity of
individuals as it certainly will be of the nation.
I do not want you [to] succumb therefore under the influence of
false pride or [a] false sense of honour. I want you to be a pattern for
others, and therefore please follow my advice and get rid of the
burden which is evidently bearing you down. Then make a firm
resolution not to borrow a single farthing henceforth. Public workers
must not borrow. And insist upon your numerous family dependants
to work for their livelihood and let them all work for khadi, and if
they don’t want to do that, the male members may make their own
choice; females may grumble but will submit to the inevitable. This
regulation of family obligations is also a necessary corollary to
national uplift. We must break through this family crust if we are to
grow to our national height. These falsely assumed obligations I know
are hampering the progress of individuals and the nation in a way
very few things are doing. It is wrong, I almost want to say immoral, to
support men and women who have some capacity for work. Even a
1

A. M. Kachhalia; vide “Representation at Meeting of Chachalia’s Creditors”
22-1-1909.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

407

rich nation, if it made1 an attempt to support one half of its members
without taking any work from them, it will go to the dogs. But we are
doing infinitely worse and still expect to become a strong, self-reliant
and self-respecting nation; it is an impossible proposition.
Do let me know your final decision and do not hesitate to write
to me as often as you like. It will be a terrible thing if you are lost to
public work.
Yours sincerely,
SATCOWRIPATI R AY , E SQ.
27, K ALIDAS P ATITUNDU LANE
KALIGHAT
C ALCUTTA

From a photostat: S.N. 12579

409. LETTER TO S. SRINIVASA AIYENGAR
NANDI HILLS,

May 19, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I must dictate in order to conserve my energy.
I appreciate your considerate telegram2 . I haven’t enthused over
it because of the wretched atmosphere about us. Our best resolutions
come to naught because we seem to have lost the power of taking the
people with us. Of what use will be our resolutions if the people
continue savagely to break one another’s heads? But I have said of
you that where others have failed, you may owing to your invincible
faith succeed. I wish therefore all strength to your elbow and shall
rejoice if you succeed in putting an end to this disgraceful civil war
and make men out of beasts that we have become at present.
I am making steady progress and trying to follow your movements as carefully as I can.
With all good wishes,
Yours sincerely,

S JT. S. S RINIVASA AIYENGAR
MYLAPORE
From a photostat: S.N. 14124

1

The source has “Even rich nations if they made”.
Reporting a unanimous resolution on Hindu-Muslim question by the A.I.C.C.
on May 15 and 16 at Bombay
2

408

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

410. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL GANDHI
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakha Krishna 3 [May 19, 1927] 1
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

You write it would be better if Manibehn stayed [at the Ashram]
instead of going over to Karachi. God alone knows whether or not she
would have the opportunity to go. But if she is not to go there, still she
has to be sent out somewhere because I wonder if she has yet
developed any attachment to the Ashram. The girl is extremely candid
and honest; so wherever she is, she is sure to do the work, but it is for
you all to create in her affection and interest. Do keep her there if you
can. And if this is possible [for the time being], I need not arrange to
send her elsewhere. I would let the [chance] at Karachi materialize if it
is to happen. But She can also be called back from there after a short
period. I am [glad] that the [Ashram] women have [taken up] the
mess. Please congratulate them all and tell them that they must fulfil
with credit what they have undertaken.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9187. Courtesy: Chhaganlal Gandhi

411. LETTER TO FULCHAND K. SHAH
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakha Krishna 3 [May 19, 1927] 2
BHAISHRI PULCHAND,

Your letter. It has always been my view that we should on no
account bring in the British Government to mediate in the affairs of
the native States. But we cannot say that this principle is to be followed
on every occasion, because as I expect a man who would neither ask
for nor want the mediation of the British to possess the strength to
resist oppression peacefully or otherwise or acquire the capacity to
suffer it silently. But a man who is unable to fight, who cannot put up
1
2

Year inferred from contents
ibid

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

409

with oppression and either enlists the aid of the British or loses his
manhood by abject submission to oppression should certainly seek
the help of the British.
According to my concept of the Kathiawar Political Conference,
there is no question of seeking British help; and hence if it works in
accordance with my idea, it would consist of only the simple unsophisticated people offering non-co-operation and satyagraha and wearing only khadi.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 2854. Courtesy: Sharadabehn Shah

412. LETTER TO SHAPURJI SAKLATVALA
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE S TATE ),

May 20, 1927
Here is an extract from Pandit Motilalji’s letter in answer to
mine. Please tell me what you would have me to do further in the
matter.
Yours sincerely,

Enclosure 1
S HAPURJI S AKLATVALA, M.P.
HOUSE OF C OMMONS
LONDON S.W. I
FROM DEAR FRIEND,

From a Photostat : S. N. 12504

1

410

Vide also “Letter to Fulchand K. Shah”, 11-5-1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

413. A LETTER
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI , 1

May 20, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you. Besides the writings
mentioned by you, there is a monograph by the late Rev. Joseph
Doke, also by Dr. P. J. Mehta, and by H. S. L. Polak besides other
writings collected by G. A. Natesan and copies of Young India since
1922, and my booklet called Indian Home Rule 2 . Most of these
publications I think can be secured from G. A. Natesan of the Indian
Review, Madras. Young India is edited by me and is published at
Ahmedabad. Ethical Religion is not an original book. It is a
translation of an adaptation in Gujarati of an American publication
called Ethics of Religion by Salter which I read years ago. In its
translated form I have not read it. It will be therefore risky to derive a
knowledge of my belief through that book. If you desire any further
information, you will [not] hesitate, please ask for it.
I thank you for your enquiry about my health which is steadily
improving.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 14125

414. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakha Krishna 4 [May 20, 1927]
CHI. VASUMATI,

Your letter. Even if you have nothing to write, you will not be
excused from writing once a week. At least I can certainly hope to see
the improvement in your handwriting. And if you find nothing to
write, just say what you did on that day (or on the previous day).
Blessings from

BAPU
VASUMATI DHIMATRAM NAVALRAM P ANDIT
KELAPITH
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 474. Courtesy: Vasumati Pandit
1
2

Permanent address
Vide “hind Swaraj”, 22-11-1909.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

411

415. LETTER TO ANASUYABEHN SARABHAI
Friday, May 20, 1927
CHI. ANASUYABEHN,

I have your letter. You will have got copies of my letters to
Saklatwala.
I certainly like the idea of opening a school for Antyaja girls
and I know very well that you have stayed back only for that reason.
My health is picking up. I have increased the duration of my
walks. I have begun taking a little bread and butter. I have given up
one fruit and instead introduced some green vegetable in my diet. I
shall observe the result.
Jamnalal and Rajendrababu arrived here today.
Look after your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: S.N. 32823

416. LETTER TO GEORGES MIGNON
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI , 1

May 21, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter for which I thank you.
You may publish in your magazine the chapters of my writings
called “My Experiments with Truth”. Their rights of publication in
book form in French have already been given to M. Emil Roniger.
You will please therefore confine your translation to its publication in
your magazine. I take it you will kindly send me copies of your
magazine that may contain the translation from time to time.
Yours sincerely,

M. G EORGES MIGNON
EDITOR OF “EXTREME-ASIE”
S AIGON
From a photostat: S.N. 12505
1

412

Permanent address
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

417. LETTER TO DR. M. A. ANSARI
NANDI HILLS,

May 21, 1927
DEAR DR. ANSARI,

I was grieved to hear of your illness. I hope you will soon
recover. Why not come here to regain your strength? The climate here
as you know is very nice.
Somehow or other the resolution 1 of the A.I.C.C. does not fill
me with immediate hope, much less, enthusiasm. The hope deep down
which is born of implicit faith is there. But it receives no added
impulse from the resolution. For, I feel the few who have a detached
mind and who are keeping their heads cool, can produce at present no
impression upon those who are fighting or those who are at the back
of the fighters. I don’t know if you think that you have any influence.
I see nothing but devilry going on under the garb of religion. Not
until we learn to become men and therefore instead of breaking heads
for the vindication of supposed rights, we learn to refer to arbitration
matters even of attacks upon our rights supposed or real and until we
cease to think of Government interference, shall we have real peace or
real swaraj. Anything short of that gives me no satisfaction. My only
hope therefore lies in prayer and answer to prayer.
Yours sincerely,

DR. M. A. A NSARI
1, D ARYAGANJ
DELHI
From a photostat: S.N. 14126

418. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
NANDI DURG,

May 21, 1927
CHI. MANI,

I have your letter.
You have surely heard the song with this first line “Never give
up, even it you lose your life”. That is to say, we may lose our life but
1

On Hindu-Muslim unity; vide “Letter to S. Srinivasa Aiyengar”, 19-5-1927

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

413

never lose heart. And where is the sense in admitting defeat as regards
spinning, for instance, and writing a good hand, especially when I am
by your side to encourage you? “Stone upon stone a dam is built and
drop by drop the lake filled up.” Nothing is impossible for the
industrious. So do not lose heart. By regular spinning you are sure to
increase your speed and you will improve your hand by constant
practice in writing clear and bold letters. I know of a great many
people who have thus improved their handwriting. You have done well
in taking up the work of the Ashram stores. Now do not give it up but
do it perfectly. Never mind if you don’t have to keep accounts, but
you should acquaint yourself with the general principles. If this work
takes up so much of your time that you cannot spin for two hours
every day, you may spin for a shorter period but with concentration.
It is better to spin for a short time with application than to spin longer
and impatiently; for you will thus spin stronger and more uniform
yarn and that too faster.
Do keep me informed about Gangadevi.
Yours,

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro—Manibehn Patelne, p. 62

419. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
NANDI DURG,

May 21, 1927
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I have your letter. I have read your letter to Jamnalal and also
those to Chhaganlal. I understand about Ramachandra and Ganesh.
Do what all of you think proper.
It occurs to me that there is one thing I should write to you
about. Ramchandra and Ganesh are both good and honest persons.
Such persons should be retained if possible. But while they are
retained, we must be firm with them as well as gentle. We should not
have the slightest hesitation in pointing out their faults. That is what I
mean by firmness. You must frankly tell Ramchandra: ‘You
exaggerate. You are hasty and hot-tempered and never willing to see
your own faults. You can stay here only by recognizing those faults
and overcoming them. It is no use appealing to Gandhi, because he
has delegated all powers to us.’ If he stays on even after such frank
414

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

talk, he should be allowed to stay and if he wishes to go, he should be
allowed to go, whatever the inconvenience caused thereby. You must
also tell Ganesh frankly: ‘We suspect that you do not wish to teach the
others the craft you know. We can carry on only if you teach others
and train them. If not, you are free to go. But we shall not drive you
away if you should wish to continue here even after you have trained
somebody. You will continue to receive the help you are having
today. We want you to stay. But you can stay only on our conditions.’
In other words, firmness lies in telling a person what we think about
him. We should be gentle in conveying this and it should not be an
expression of hasty judgment. Gentleness also means an effort to see
whatever good may be seen in a fault. But ultimately, we can proceed
correctly and carry on our work only when we have fully expressed
our view about a fault of which we are convinced. Then alone can we
consider ourselves true satyagrahis. I see that relations among people
are not smooth. At present there is hesitation in frankly expressing
our views on the faults of others which are clear to us. If that veil of
hesitation is removed, much of the work can become easy. This is
intended only by way of guidance.
I am returning the letter from Ramachandra in case it is of use
to you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Chhaganlal Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Sabarmati
Museum and Sangrahalaya

420. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
NANDI DURG,

Vaisakha Krishna 5 [May 21, 1927]
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

Jamnalalji is here since a couple of days ago. He has conveyed
your message to me. I can think of nothing further to write to you
than what I have already done. Regarding an audience with the
Emperor I think you should not try for one. You should not, however,
refuse it if the Secretary of State for India or the Prime Minister
proposes to arrange it. As far as I know I think political matters are
not discussed with the British Monarch. Only formal greetings are
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

415

exchanged. Do meet the ministers and talk with them whatever you
want to. Observe closely the British jails and also visit the poorer
districts of London with some knowledgeable person and study the
condition of the poor. Once or twice, on a Saturday evening, stand
near the pubs of the poor and the bars of the rich and watch their
doings.
I am improving day by day.
I wrote to pujya Malaviyaji long ago. I expect no reply from
him as answering letters is contrary to his nature. But he does send a
telegram in reply to one. I am going to write to him again all the
same.
I hope you are well.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From the Hindi original: C.W. 6147. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

421. HE SHOULD BE DISMISSED
I have now got the name and the address of the doctor, the
account of whose inhuman treatment of an Antyaja woman was given
to us by Shri Amritlal Thakkar. 1 Now an inquiry is being made into
the case and in the mean time I do not see any necessity of disclosing
his identity. A well-known doctor friend writes :2
My reason for publishing this letter is that the inhuman
treatment of the Antyaja woman was such as no one can possibly
condone. I do not believe that if the doctor is a private practitioner,
the only alternatives before us are to grieve over the incident in
helpless silence, if we wish to follow the path of non-violence, or, if
not, give the doctor a thrashing. A thrashing is not likely to make the
doctor change his ways. Antyaja brethren will not benefit in any way,
and we will probably fail either to do justice to the doctor or win
redress for the cruel ill-treatment of the woman. One who follows
non-violence need not feel helpless. The path of non-violence is
neither for the coward nor for the stupid. It is for those who are ever
1
2

416

Vide “Man’s Inhumanity to Man”, 5-5-1927.
The letter is not translated here.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

vigilant. The law of violence concerns the body and its requirements,
while the law of non-violence appeals to the heart. Through nonviolence we can arouse religious consciousness among the people,
which means cultivating bold and true public opinion. If the true spirit
of compassion were alive in the village in which this incident occurred,
such cruelty would never have been possible. The poor doctor was
only an agent. The spirit of cruelty was in the atmosphere and that is
why he had the courage to demand two rupees in advance and, though
he got the money, felt afraid that he would be polluted by touching
the Antyaja woman, even for treating her. It is the duty of men who
follow the path of non-violence to be always vigilant and educate
public opinion so as to create an atmosphere in which men like the
doctor would find no encouragement for the evil in them.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 22-5-1927

422. THE COW AND THE BUFFALO
A votary of non-violence writes:1
When writing the article on the cow and the buffalo, I had
assumed that no clarification was called for about the matter of swaraj
to the buffalo. When we domesticate an animal, we deprive it of its
freedom, however good our intention in domesticating it may be.
Hundreds of Englishmen feel happy in the belief that they rule India
with a good motive and, even if we reject that rule, they think us to be
fools and do not relinquish what they consider to be their duty of
ruling over us. But if a judge were appointed between us, this statement by us would suffice: ‘How can these self-appointed protectors of
ours understand our sufferings. Only the All-seeing God and we
ourselves know them. And we of course say that our good lies in
being released from our bondage.’ Similarly, if the buffalo could
speak and if an impartial judge were appointed between her and us
and the buffalo entered a similar plea, and I do believe she would do
so—the verdict would be in her favour. And so I said that by giving
up our fancy for rearing buffaloes, we would not be forsaking her,
1

The letter is not translated here. Referring to Gandhiji’s article “Cow V.
Buffalo or Cow-cum-Buffalo?”, 8-5-1927, the correspondent had asked what Gandhiji
had meant by granting swaraj to the buffalo.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

417

that is, would not be doing her any harm, but would be granting her
freedom. There is no question in this of our disowning an accepted
responsibility. We must accept responsibility for those buffaloes which
we have reared, but, if I am right in my view, no duty like that which
we have accepted in regard to the cow, of adopting ways and means of
increasing and improving the progeny of the cow, devolves upon us in
regard to the buffalo. Hence it is not necessary to regard the
protection of the buffalo as included in our special duty of cow-protection. If people accept my suggestion, it will naturally be our duty to
collect together all the buffaloes we have reared in regions where the
cow and the bullock cannot, but only the buffalo can be maintained,
and provide for the protection of her male progeny as well.
It was not my intention to suggest that there should be separate
dairies and tanneries for villages, but the fact is that in the existing
circumstances, it is only after making experiments in the cities that we
can take to villages the science of cattle-rearing, of extracting the
maximum quantity of milk from the cow without torturing her, and
that of tanning her hide and so on. Such is our pitiable condition at
present. In these days, when village pasture lands have disappeared
and oilcake, hay, etc., have become dear, the villagers maintain their
cattle with great difficulty. We rest content with whatever use the
illiterate tanner can make of the hide. The bones, etc., are wasted. As a
consequence, this living wealth perishes and, if the cattle do not die,
they live on as skeletons, often become a burden to the owner and in
the end, land in slaughter-houses in Bombay and other cities. I know
that, in these circumstances, important changes need to be adopted,
but I am at present unable to say how to bring them about, what
methods we should adopt from the West, and so on. This whole thing
is at the moment in an experimental stage. If I have been able to
explain what needs to be done, it is for every individual worker to
experiment on his own and discover how to do it. There was a time
when appropriate changes could be effected in our civilization and
people accepted the need for such changes. As long as these
conditions of progress were accepted, so long, we can say, our
civilization was living. Now we believe that whatever is written in a
book which is published as a Shastra and which finds its way into our
hands is the Lord’s word and cannot be altered in any way. We must
get out of this horrible mental death. We can see with our own eyes
that there have been changes in our ways of thought and life in every
age. Accepting this truth, cultured workers should enter the villages
418

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

with confidence in themselves. It is necessary for all of them to accept
certain general principles; there will be differences in the methods of
implementing them. That is inevitable and should be welcomed. From
that we shall find the best ways of implementing those principles.
From this point of view, the question whether we should introduce
Western machines and, if so, to what extent, becomes secondary. The
general principle is that we should produce or make whatever we can
in the villages themselves, and while we can do with the indigenous
razor, should not bother to introduce the German Krupp razor
because it is regarded as superior. If, however, we cannot make the
sewing needle in the village, we should not set our face against the
easily available and cheap needle from Austria. I see nothing wrong in
accepting from any quarter whatever is good and is worth accepting
and which we can assimilate.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 22-5-1927

423. LETTER TO ISABEL BAMLET
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE S TATE ),

May 22, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. When I say1 the problem is not so simple as it
appears to you, I mean two things. It is not enough merely to take the
name of God or believe in this thing or the other or even in this man
or the other; but it is necessary ever to wait upon God and find out
what His will is. I have found this to be a most difficult, though very
agreeable, task. It is often a question, and a very delicate one, when
what we may consider to be His will is really His and not ours. Thus
we come to what St. Paul has said: “Work out your own salvation.”
The second difficulty is that all religions have more or less
similar formulae, and all have produced, and continue to produce,
good, true and godfearing men and women.
In the circumstances, it is not a simple matter for a humble
student of all the faiths of the world to find out by prayer which is the
truest religion. But it is not difficult to say, as I do say, that all
religions are more or less God-given and that therefore one must work
out one’s own salvation in the religion of one’s own forefathers; for, a
1

Vide “Letter to Isabel Bamlet”, 10-5-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

419

seeker after Truth finds out that all religions melt and become one in
God Who is one and the same for all His creatures.
I shall bear your caution in mind if I write anything in Young
India. I shall certainly not make use of your name.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
MRS. I SABEL BAMLET
C/ O THE BRISTOL HOTEL
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat: C.W. 4442. Courtesy: Carlisle Bamlet

424. LETTER TO ABBAS TYABJI
NANDI HILLS,

May 22, 1927
MY DEAR BHRRR AND PROUD FATHER,

I must dictate this although it is a love letter, as I better conserve
my energy if I dictate stretched on my bed. There is nothing however
to be concerned about my health, as I am making steady progress
though it will be some time before I regain the strength that I lost in
the twinkling of an eye. It may not be possible to regain all that I have
lost; but the doctors are of opinion that much of it, it is perfectly
possible to get back.
Please give my congratulations to Sohaila and Professor
Muhammed Habib. Though I cannot be with you in the body, I shall
be with you in the spirit. I wish them both a happy life of useful
service to the country. Sohaila must remember that she is not going to
be married to become a mere doll and become lost to the country.
But she would be expected, like her grey-headed young father, who is
daily getting younger, to serve the country with the same devotion that
her young father is doing; and if her husband is at all lukewarm, to
touch him with her spirit and make him joint partner in such service,
as he would be joint partner in all the joys and sorrows of life. It is no
use my even wishing that there should be no sorrow and all joy. It
would be a flat and dull picture without any beautiful shades. There
may be joys but they must be relieved by occasional sorrows. So my
wish and hope is that God will give them a fair measure of joys of life
if He must also give them doses of sorrows to remind them that He is
not to be forgotten in the midst of life’s joys.
420

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I was wondering what you were doing and how you fared in
Rangoon. You have kept me without a letter now for a very long time.
I suppose it is all deliberate and out of considerateness for a bedridden friend. Raihana also has followed suit. But you should know
that neither your letter nor hers can possibly be a tax on my energy.
Give my love to the bride and the bridegroom and all the
friends and members of the family who may have gathered there to
celebrate the coming event and accept the same for yourself and Mrs.
Abbas.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 9558

425. LETTER TO SONJA SCHLESIN
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI , 1

May 22, 1927
DEAR MISS SCHLESIN,

As you know I am just now bed-ridden and I must therefore
dictate my reply to your letter of the 20th April just received. It is
difficult to recall what I wrote in all my letters to you. So far as my
memory serves me, there is not a single letter of yours which has gone
by without an acknowledgement. There are many compliments which
I do not and cannot appropriate; but the one about my being a
prompt correspondent, I can ever claim in spite of your different
experience. For, everybody else of my acquaintance has paid me the
compliment of being a prompt correspondent, that is of course
comparatively to many others.
I have no letter of yours dated 4th January. But I have one dated
3rd January in my file. I do not think that I gave you, if I did at all, a
detailed reply to that letter. It was received at the Ashram on the 3rd
February. It was then redirected to me during my tour. Soon after, I
became incapacitated.
Mr. Stanley Jones’s book 2 I read but only cursorily as during
the tour I was able to do very little of reading. Indeed, it was not even
possible for me to look at the many books that came to me. This I did
1
2

Permanent address
The Christ of the Indian Road

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

421

as it was accompanied by a letter from Mr. Stanley Jones whom I
knew very well. I do not remember his suggestion and I have not his
book by me.
I quite agree with you that karma and the cross may well go
together. If you have followed the pages of Young India, you must
have noticed that last year I read the New Testament every Saturday to
the students of our National College. I did stumble over the words
“without a cause” 1 , and in explaining it I simply rejected the thing as
redundant. But I was agreeably surprised on turning to Moffat’s and
Weymouth’s translations which I had by me to make the discovery
that you made. In reading all religious works, I have learnt one thing.
Never to take them literally, but understand the drift and catch the
drift also by means of what is to me an infallible canon of
interpretation, and reject those which cannot stand the test of Truth
and Ahimsa. I know that even in spite of this canon of interpretation
difficulties do arise; but they are solved if one has patience and if one
has a living faith in God.
I am sending your letter to Mr. Jones as I have no doubt he will
like to see your argument. I am not likely to meet him in the near
future as I shall be for some months still in the South. Your letters
should be addressed to the Ashram as usual.
The autobiography is not yet complete. Ganesan cannot send
you a copy of the autobiography. The three parts that have been
completed are in course of publication in book form. But for the
present, you have to rely upon the numbers of Young India which
contain the chapters to date. You may borrow the volumes from
Manilal or you should wait till the three parts are published in book
form. You may know that before I commenced the autobiography I
finished the history of the South African Passive Resistance. The
original is in Gujarati. Its translation is now being published in
instalments by Ganesan. I am afraid it will be some time before the
whole history is available in English.
Do see Mr. Sastri, India’s first Agent for South Africa. He is an
extremely fine man. As you know he is Gokhale’s successor. He
knows all about you and is himself eager to see you.
1

St. Matthew, v. 22. The words found in the Authorized Version are omitted in
the Revised and later versions.

422

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I am getting better. Of those you know Mrs. Gandhi and Devdas
are with me.
Yours sincerely,

MISS S CHLESIN
BOX 2284
JOHANNESBURG
(SOUTH AFRICA)
From a photostat: S.N. 12353

426. LETTER TO REV. STANLEY JONES
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE S TATE ),

May 22, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

Here is a letter from Miss Schlesin, a dear friend in South
Africa. You will be interested in it. Please return it after perusal.
I must ask you to tell Mrs. Jones again that the pamphlet
addressed to boys and girls on purity of life is still being hatched in
my mind and I have not despaired of being able to write out
something or rather dictate something from this sick-bed.
I am now gradually regaining the lost strength.
Yours sincerely

Enclosure 1
R EV . S TANLEY JONES
S ITAPUR, U.P.
From a photostat: S.N. 14127

427. LETTER TO DEVESHVAR SIDDHANTALANKAR
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE S TATE ),

May 22, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have carefully preserved your letter of 29th January in the
hope some day of being able to write to you. It was received during
my tour and I was not able to read the cuttings till during the last three
days. Lying on my sick-bed I have been gradually overtaking my
correspondence and I have now gone through the cuttings. They are
valuable. In some places your translation does not do justice to the
original. But the pains you have taken to be just leads me to hope that
the mistake is due to inadvertence.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

423

The extracts you have collected certainly makes one sink. I am
not a critical student of religious books including the Koran. I have
read these books with sympathy and with a view to deriving religious
consolation. The effect therefore produced upon your 1 mind by the
passages collected by you was naturally not produced upon my mind.
The commentary you have given upon the text, “there should be no
violence in religion,” is quite new to me and gives a different
meaning from the one which the text bears without the commentary. I
would however like to consult Mussalman friends about it. But after
all the careful thought I have given to the passages extracted by you, I
adhere to the conclusion that Islam is not a religion of the sword; but
it is like all other great religions a religion of peace. I say so for this
reason. I have met numerous Mussalmans who no more think of
slaying men of different faiths than you or I do. And these
Mussalmans are by no means scoffers. They are devout followers of
their faith. The long line of Sufis whose veneration for the Koran
cannot be questioned owe their illuminating philosophy of peace and
love to the Koran. I have read Maulana Shibli’s Life of the Prophet as
also portions of his Al Kalam. I have read also his Leaves from the
Lives of the Companions of the Prophet. The sum-total of the
impression left on my mind by these writings is of an elevating
character. I hope you do not wish to suggest that Maulana Shibli and
such other writers on Islam have written what they did not believe and
in order to throw dust in the eyes of others. All this does not however
mean that I regard the life of the Prophet to have been perfect or that
the Koran itself is a perfect book. Like all other religious books
including our own, there are passages which cause difficulty. But the
difficulties caused in reading the Koran are not greater than those
caused by reading books of other faiths. Christianity, I surmise,
admittedly is a religion of peace; but the Old Testament which is part
of Christian teaching is full of blood and thunder, and the history of
early Christianity is also by no means creditable to the Christians.
You ask me to quote from the Vedas passages alike to those in
the Koran. You have yourself admitted the reference to the dasyus.
The gloss you put upon the passages relating to dasyus may be quite
all right; but that is precisely how sympathetic commentators of the
Koran explain similar passages. Dasyus do not consider themselves to
be wicked.
1

424

The source has “my”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Everybody justifies his description of practices by imputing
wickedness to those whom he distrusts. General Dyer himself surely
believed that English men and women were in danger of losing their
lives if he did not take the measures he did. We who know better call it
an act of cruelty and vengeance. But from General Dyer’s own
standpoint, he is justified. Many Hindus sincerely believe that it is a
proper thing to kill a man who wants to kill a cow1 and he will quote
scripture for his defence and many other Hindus will be found to
justify his action. But strangers who do not accept the sacredness of
the cow will hold it to be preposterous to kill a human being for the
sake of slaying an animal. Guru Nanak 2 who undoubtedly read the
Koran and is reported even to have gone to Mecca, returned with lofty
regard for Islam. Kabir3 did likewise. So did Dadu. I cannot therefore
help thinking that it is a fruitless and undesirable effort to show that
the Koran is a wicked book and that followers of the Koran are still
more so. I suggest that the better method is to find out the good
points and the beauties of these writings which have transformed the
lives of those who have believed in them. It is unsafe and even
dangerous to judge Islam and Mussalmans by the conduct of many of
those who are misrepresented here in India and then to seek to ascribe
their conduct to the teachings of the Koran. In order to defend the
general trend of the Koran in favour of peace I am not required to
disprove any atrocity by a single Mussalman or to explain away the
few misdeeds that I see going on before me, But my liberal estimate of
the Koran thus enables me to extend to the Mussalmans the justice
that I would have extended to fellow-Hindus. It is an easier task to
sympathize with the different religions of the world than to pick up
one and seek to prove it as the only true religion and then set about
demolishing all the rest.
I have entered into a long reply to your letter because I believe
you to be a seeker after Truth. If you want any further explanation
from me, I shall gladly give it.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DEVESHVAR S IDDHANTALANKAR
NAINI (U.P.)
From a microfilm: S.N. 12383

1
2
3

The source has “to kill men who want to kill a cow”.
1469-1538; religious reformer and founder of Sikhism
Mystic poet and saint of medieval India; disciple of Ramananda

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

425

428. LETTER TO NARMADA
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakha Krishna 6 [May 22, 1927]
CHI. NARMADA,

I had replied to your letter but I had sent it to your school
address because I did not know your full name and address. You must
have received that letter.
I did not know you were to be married so soon. I hope you
would continue your studies and that you would not give up the noble
patriotic feelings that you had expressed to me and also conveyed
through your letter and that your husband would let you cherish
them. Never give up khadi and the spinning wheel....1
Blessings from

MOHANDAS
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4755

429. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
May 23, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

Throughout the week I have not written to you though I have
received more than one letter from you. And for the most part for the
present I propose not to write more than once per week. I want to
conserve my energy for the work for Young India, Navajivan and
Gita. I am doing now at least five times as much as I used to on the
Gita. I want if possible to finish the translation before the end of
August. And during this rest I would like to give more attention to
Young India and Navajivan without feeling in any way responsible
for filling the columns. But of course I shall write oftener if necessary
or if you again have those moods returning. But you will not now.
I am so glad you resisted the bhang. It is as bad almost as
liquor. In any case you will remember what I wrote2 over the betel leaf
offered by Hakimji—never to eat a single thing without knowing it
and its quality. In case of doubt always refrain and refer to me if
1
2

426

Illegible
Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 10-1-1927.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

necessary. I understand from Jamnalalji to whom I mentioned the
matter that Maharajji himself took it. Unfortunately many religiously-minded people take for feeling exalted. The exaltation is all
false I know. However, you have done your duty by mentioning the
thing to him. The things must take their own course now.
Jamnalalji showed me your Hindi letter to him. It was quite
good. The writing was very good. J. leaves for Bombay tomorrow.
I am looking forward to your translation of Rolland’s letter to
you.
I have resumed bread or bhakhari and a vegetable for the
midday meal. Today is the fifth day. Nothing untoward so far. I am
walking too, better.
With love,
Yours,

BAPU

[PS.]
The accompanying for Gangu.
From the original: C.W. 5230. Courtesy: Mirabehn

430. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
NANDI,

Silence Day, Vaishakha Vad 7 [May 23, 1927]
SISTERS,

You have taken on yourselves the management of the store. I
regard it as a great step forward. Now stick diligently to the work. God
will help you to succeed. There are plenty of other such duties that
you can undertake by which you can bring credit to the Ashram. But
I am in no hurry about it. Since your minds are pure, you will
gradually take up many new duties of your own accord. Concentrate
for the present upon making the management of the store a complete
success. Do not neglect even the smallest detail connected with it. You
must of course learn how to keep accounts. Do not imagine that it is
difficult. It is very easy to keep and understand accounts. Addition
may be difficult. If one does not know the multiplication tables or
addition, one would certainly experience some difficulty. But addition
comes with practice. Learn addition, subtraction, multiplication and
simple division, whichever it is that you do not know. All this does
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

427

involve a little trouble, but once you have mastered these processes the
rest is all very easy. If one has the will, one may even find it
interesting.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3650

431. LETTER TO ASHRAM CHILDREN
Monday, May 23, 1927
Bal remembers that God was the first brahmachari. The idea
seems extremely beautiful to me. A perfect brahmachari must be
perfectly pure. Who else but God can be so? But we must try to
become pure like Him. All Shastras proclaim that that is possible.
There is nothing but joy in trying to become like Him. It is my
experience that we do not get even one-ten-millionth part of that joy
from the things of this world which are supposed to give us pleasure.
Hundreds of yogis have said the same thing from their experience.
Have faith in their experience and try to observe brahmacharya to the
best of your ability.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

432. LETTER TO RADHA
May 23, 1927
I was glad to know that you were not frightened by that lump of
earth. It was good that it did not cause you any great hurt. But what
even if it had? If at all, such a lump of earth will hurt only the body.
The body is like a glass bangle. The glass bangle which is the human
body is of no account whatever in the eternity of Brahman, as life of a
glass bangle is of none in comparison with the human life-span of a
hundred years. What does it matter if it perishes today or tomorrow, or
if it develops a crack? The intellect grasps this idea very easily, but
one will never know fear if it sinks into one’s heart. Such a person
would never do wrong. He would oppress no one. We should return to
this thought whenever faced with any danger, and, in order that it may
428

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

come to us unfailingly at such times, we should constantly meditate on
it.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

433. LETTER TO V. L. PHADKE
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakha Krishna 8 [May 24, 1927]
BHAISHRI MAMA,

I have your letter discussing the problem. It is well written
indeed, but you will see that I have written no word about Surat and
Baroda in Navajivan. There was a purpose in this. If I were to say that
mischievous elements deliberately indulge in hooliganism that would
have on them the opposite effect [to that intended]. I even go to the
extent of believing that if the newspapers write nothing about the
disturbances, they will subside by themselves. But not all newspapermen want it, so it will not come to be. But let those of us who
know remain silent. Let those who want to fight do it. If we happen to
be present there and feel like sacrificing ourselves and if we have the
strength let us do it. That’s enough. And if we can sacrifice ourselves
with a detached mind, let us be confident that its result will definitely
be good.
If you ask for your article to be returned you can have it; I have,
therefore, saved it till now. If I do not hear from you, I shall destroy it,
after waiting for a while.
I am steadily improving.
Blessings from

BAPU
MAMASAHEB P HADKE
ANTYAJA ASHRAM
GODHRA
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3817

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

429

434. A PRAYER
May 24, 1927
Oh Lord! Give us the strength to follow what we sincerely
believe to be dharma and while doing so to bear, with love and
patience, people’s censure, abuse, assault, death, penury or any other
evil.1
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

435. LETTER TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE S TATE )

May 25, 1927
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL,

I had your letter whilst I was on the sick-list and unable to do
much correspondence. I am still convalescing and am able to do only
a moderate amount of work; but I am making steady progress.
You have been there a long time now; but I know you have not
wasted it. I hope however that Kamala will become completely
restored when you return. If her health requires a longer stay, I
presume that you will remain there.
I read most carefully your public report as also your private
confidential report about the doings of the Oppressed Nations’
Conference. I myself do not expect much from this league, if only
because its free activity depends upon the goodwill of the powers that
are partners in the exploitation of the oppressed nations and I feel that
the members of the European nations that joined the league will not
be able to sustain the last heat. For, they will not be able to accommodate themselves to what they would consider to be an injury to
their self-interest. On our side there is danger of our people again
looking to external forces and external aid for salvation instead of
seeking to achieve it by evolving internal strength. But this is mere
academic opinion. I am not at all carefully following European
events. You are on the spot and you may see an altruistic improvement in the atmosphere there which I miss altogether.
1

In a letter to Chhaganlal Gandhi, Gandhiji advised him to say this at prayertime every day.

430

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

There is some talk of your being chosen as President for the
coming Congress. I am in correspondence with Father about it. 1 The
outlook here is not at all happy in spite of the unanimous resolution
of the A.I.C.C. on the Hindu-Muslim question. I do not know whether
the process of breaking heads will in any way be checked. We have
lost hold upon the masses, and it seems to me that if you became
President, you will be lost for one year at any rate to the masses. That,
however, does not mean that Congress work has to be neglected.
Someone has got to do it; but there are many who are willing and
eager to do that work, maybe, due to mixed motives, even selfish
motives; but they will keep the Congress going on somehow or other.
The institution will always be, at their wish, at the disposal of those
who may be qualified for mass work and may have gained control
over the masses. The question then is how your services can be best
utilized. What you yourself think, you should do. I know you are
capable of taking a detached view and you will say quite unselfishly
like Dadabhai or MacSwiney “put the crown on my head”, and I
have no doubt that it will be so put. I do not myself see the way so
clear as to make me force the crown on you and plead with you to
wear it. Father will be writing to you also by this mail, if he has not
done so already. I am sending a copy of this to him.
It might be as well for you to cable your wishes. I am likely to
be in Bangalore till the end of July. You may therefore send your
cable directly to Bangalore, or to be absolutely certain send it to the
Ashram and it will be repeated to me wherever I may be.
With love to you all,
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: S.N. 12572; also A Bunch of Old Letters, pp. 54-5

436. LETTER TO MOTILAL NEHRU
NANDI HILLS,

May 25, 1927
DEAR MOTILALJI,

Jamnalalji delivered your letter to me and he told me you were
sending a long letter. Ever since the receipt of your first letter, I have
1

Vide “Letter to Motilal Nehru”, 14-5-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

431

been constantly thinking over the matter. The President is here and he
broached the subject yesterday. I mentioned Jawaharlal’s name. He
had not thought of it. He, however, preferred Ansari and I told him
that if Dr. Ansari could be induced to accept the honour, there was an
end to all talk about Jawaharlal and that I thought it would be good
luck if Dr. Ansari could be induced to shoulder the burden. However,
I have written to Jawaharlal and I send you a copy of my letter 1 to
him. It expresses my opinion to date. At first I thought I would let
you send my letter so that you could stop it if you liked; but I then
thought that after all there was no harm in my letter going to
Jawaharlal before you had seen it. You could add whatever you liked
to my letter so as to enable Jawaharlal to form a correct judgement.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 14614

437. LETTER TO H. CLAYTON
NANDI HILLS,

May 25, 1927
DEAR MR. CLAYTON,

I am extremely grateful to you for your prompt and exhaustive
reply to my letter of the 13th instant. I have carefully gone through
the cutting from the Municipal Corporation Proceedings of 1918; but
I see nothing wrong there to warrant the suggestion that I made any
inquiry or that I made any report to the late Dr. Turner. As I was
interested in everything connected with untouchability and as I was
closely in touch with the Servants of India Society, so far as I recollect,
I went with Mr. Thakkar at his instance to see the chawls and see the
unfortunate people. On hearing that I had gone, Dr. Turner sent me a
message and I gladly met him and told him what I had been doing in
the chawls. You will not call this an inquiry by me or a report. If I had
conducted an inquiry, it would have naturally taken a proper shape, I
would have taken the evidence of men in writing, I would have seen
the officials who were charged with corruption and made a proper
written report. As it was, I happened to be in Bombay at the time in
the course of my touring and Mr. Thakkar took me to the chawls as
other people took me to many other places. I do not think that this
1

432

Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

visit of mine and my conversation with Dr. Turner should for ever be
used to damage Mr. Thakkar’s reputation as a careful investigator.
However, I want to turn this account to a useful purpose. I do not
propose at this stage to say anything in the papers. But I am in
correspondence with Mr. Thakkar. I am taking the liberty of sending
a copy of your letter to him making suggestions to him so that this
matter of alleged corruption might be once for all set at rest.
I quite agree with you that there should be no unfounded
accusations made against anything or person and no general accusations made against the Corporation staff without adequate evidence
to support them. With your permission, after finishing the correspondence with Mr. Thakkar, I hope to revert to the subject-matter of
my letter.
Thanking you for your enquiry about myself. I am making fair
progress and I shall certainly be delighted when I next pass through
Bombay to meet you to revive the pleasant recollections of our
meeting in Godhra.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm: S.N. 12911

438. LETTER TO TOTARAM SANADHYA
NANDI DURG,

Vaisakha Krishna 9 [May 25, 1927]
BHAI TOTARAM,

I have your letter. Now I understand the true nature of
Gangadevi’s disease. Other things may well continue but she must be
taken out. She cannot walk by herself. Therefore, either some boys
should take her out in a chair for half an hour in the open air or even
a wheel chair may be used. The wheel chair can be managed by one
or two boys only. She can also lie down in it. Rest is imperative but so
is open air. You should not hesitate to arrange for this. Ba seldom
writes to anyone nor am I in the habit of mentioning her in my letters.
Nevertheless she always remembers everyone.
Gangadevi should take it that my blessings always include Ba’s.
I am very pleased by the fortitude shown by both of you and I
know it is an example for all of us. May God grant you peace, as ever.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

433

My health is improving.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2529

439. HIGHLY UNSATISFACTORY
I wish it was possible for me to tender the Government of
Bengal congratulations upon the release of Sjt. Subhas Chandra Bose.
The release has been granted, not because public opinion demanded
it, not because Government considered the Chief Officer of the
Calcutta Corporation to be guiltless, nor because they considered that
he had been sufficiently punished for a crime of which neither he nor
the public has any knowledge, but because their own medical officers
considered the distinguished prisoner to be seriously ill, so seriously
ill as to cause fear about his life. If Sjt. Subhas Chandra Bose is
a danger to society or to the life of anybody, and if he is a man of
determination as he is reputed to be and even believed by the
Government to be, he is no less dangerous because he is seriously ill.
Why should the Government be afraid of his dying in their prison?
Surely it is not customary with them to release every prisoner who
becomes dangerously ill. And if it was right to discharge him for his
illness, why was he not discharged when he first showed signs of
tuberculosis? Papers have been for a long time full of information
about the alarming character of his disease. His brother repeatedly
warned the Government about the prisoner’s illness.
It is, I venture to suggest cowardly to fling a dying man in the
face of his relatives and wash oneself of the guilt of his death. This
release brings us no nearer to the solution of the question of
imprisonment or indefinite detention, without trial, of prisoners whom
Government choose to suspect. The Bengal Regulation remains where
it was. More or less healthy detenus must continue to rot, and are now
deprived of the support of an agitation which was kept at a fairly high
pitch because a powerful man was under detention. No doubt some
sort of agitation will still continue for the release of the other detenus.
But there is every fear of its lacking strength. Indian nature is grateful
for the smallest mercies. It is easily satisfied. And the public will
condone the detention of the other prisoners for the release of Sjt.
Subhas Chandra Bose, forgetting that the release is due not to any
434

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

relenting on the part of the Government but due to Nature’s supreme
intervention.
It may seem cruel, but I must confess that I would far rather not
have any release at all than have a release on false issues, which merely
complicate the main issue and make it more difficult to deal with than
before; for behind the agitation for the release of the detenus is the
great question of the liberty of the citizens and the question of
extraordinary powers exercised over the lives of people by an utterly
irresponsible Government. The one consolation that the public can
derive from this painful affair is, that Sjt. Subhas Chandra Bose up to
the very last moment manfully declined to accept the humiliating
conditions from time to time proposed by the Government for his
discharge. Let us hope and pray that he will be soon restored to health
and that a long life of service will be vouchsafed to him.
Young India, 26-5-1927

440. AN APPEAL TO INDIAN HUMANITY
In another place will be found a substance of the observations
made in the columns of Navajivan by Sjt. Kishorelal Mashruwala. He
is a worker of long standing and was up to recently Registrar of the
Gujarat Vidyapith, and it was only due to illness that he was obliged to
relinquish the post. He is one of the most thoughtful among the silent
workers we have in India. He weighs every word he writes or utters. I
mention these qualifications of his; for I am anxious that his
reflections should not be dismissed out of consideration as so many
writings nowadays have to be.
The story of the abuse of the helpless women of the Raniparaj
community is a blot upon the nation. Sjt. Kishorelal Mashruwala has
made his appeal to the Parsis, and from his standpoint, rightly too. For
it is the Parsis who will be better able, if anyone is, to influence the
Parsi men who are said to be corrupting innocent womanhood. But I
am painfully aware of the fact that it is not the Parsis alone who hold
so cheap the honour of poor sisters. Indians belonging to the other
faiths, placed in similar circumstances, have been known to behave
exactly as the Parsi canteen-keepers are reported to be doing. But that
is no justification whatsoever for the inhuman crimes of the latter. The
lust for money, which drives these adventurers to a trade which they
know saps the manhood of the otherwise fine forest-dwellers miscalled
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

435

Kaliparaj, i.e., black people, tempts them to the worse crime of
defilement.
The British Government or rather the Government of India and
the Baroda State must be held primarily responsible for the tragedy
described by Sjt. Mashruwala; for it is they, who for their wretched
revenue allow liquor shops to be opened or to exist in the midst of
these simple people. These people have never asked for these shops,
and even if they had, it would be still criminal to open liquor shops
for them, even as it would be to allow a little child to play with fire
because he desires it. But a reformer does not stop before
commencing action to philosophize or to distribute blame through
golden scales. He begins his reform wherever the opportunity offers
itself. And now that the corruption has been brought to light, it
behoves Parsi reformers to go to the delinquents and appeal to their
sense of honour and try to wean them from the crime of violating the
womanhood of the simple, innocent and guileless Raniparaj, even if
they cannot also be weaned from trafficking in liquor.
Unfortunately, there is much truth in the taunt levelled at us as a
nation, that we have not sufficient regard for the honour of our
women. It is no use false patriotism seeking cover under tu quoque
argument; nor must we mix up sexual immorality, in which depraved
men and women of equal status indulge of their own free but
unbridled will, with the instances of crime quoted by Sjt. Kishorelal
Mashruwala.
Immoralities of the first kind are bad enough and do incredible
harm to mankind; but the crimes like those of the Parsi canteen-keepers are infinitely worse and have not yet, thank God, received the
tacit endorsement of fashionable society. In the instances quoted by
Sjt. Kishorelal Mashruwala, the canteen-keepers are in the position of
trustees, and it is insufferable that they should induce ignorant women
in whose midst they are living to become instruments of their criminal
lust. It is this kind of indifference to the honour of ignorant sisters
who come under the influence or protection of the so-called better
class men, which has been justifiably criticized, and which we must, if
we want to become a self-respecting and independent nation, outgrow
at any cost. The honour of the least among our sisters must be as dear
to us as that of our blood-sisters.
Young India, 26-5-1927

436

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

441. NOTES
ALL-INDIA S PINNERS’ ASSOCIATION

The Council of the All-India Spinners’ Association has, owing
to the necessity of prolonged rest that I must take from active and
routine work, relieved me of the burden of directing the affairs of the
Association and appointed Sheth Jamnalal Bajaj as officiating
Chairman. Whilst, therefore, I still nominally remain President of the
Association, the whole burden of directing its affairs will now fall
upon Jamnalalji, and correspondents will henceforth, whenever they
find it necessary, write to him rather than to me. The proper course
certainly is to write to the working Secretary Sjt. Shankerlal Banker to
whom naturally Jamnalalji will have to refer all correspondence before
coming to any decision. This does not mean that I shall take no
interest in the affairs of the Association. On the contrary, whenever in
the opinion of the Council or the officiating Chairman or the
Secretary, any matter should be referred to me, it will come before me
for guidance and advice. But the Council’s decision and the
arrangements I have come to with it are that I should not worry myself
as hitherto over details and over every individual matter trifling or
otherwise. They have taken an undertaking from me to refrain from
doing so and to throw the burden on them and leave it for them to
refer to me matters which they may consider to be important enough
for referring to me. The test of a living organization is that it depends
upon no single individual, however important, however able he may
be. A living organization goes on irrespective of persons. The
endeavour of the members of the Council is to make the Association a
living and efficiently working organization. I trust, therefore, that
khadi workers and khadi lovers will fall in with the new arrangement
and render all the help they can to the Council in working this
growing organization to the fullest extent possible.
AN EXAMPLE TO C OPY

The State of Jaora seems to be noted for its dyeing and printing.
I understand that His Highness the Nawab Saheb is interested in the
khadi movement and, in order to make khadi more attractive by
putting it through the dyeing and printing processes and thus to
encourage it, he has exempted khadi from any tax. I congratulate the
State on this praiseworthy step, and hope that other States will grant
favoured treatment to this great and growing national enterprise which
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

437

is fraught with tremendous economic benefit to the starving millions.
VIVEKANANDA AND S PINNING

A correspondent sends me interesting extracts from Vivekananda’s answers to his American questioners. I take the following
from them on spinning:
Speaking of Indian village life he says: “In some places the common
village girl with her spinning-wheel says: ‘Do not talk to me of dualism, my
spinning-wheel says, So’ham, So’ham, I am He, I am He.’ What is the value of
these machines and sciences? They have only one result; they spread
knowledge. You have not solved the problem of want, but only made it keener.
Machines do not solve the poverty problem; they simply make men struggle
the more. Competition gets keener.... The value of everything is to be decided
by how far it is a manifestation of God.

Young India, 26-5-1927

442. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
NANDI HILLS,

May 26, 1927
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your letter and I have one from Kshitish Babu also. You
already have seen my note 1 in Young India. I had assumed when
Jamnalalji who was here told me that I should write a paragraph in
Young India about the new arrangement that all the members of the
Council had agreed to it. The original idea was to have my resignation
in its entirety. The resolution already passed adopts the middle course.
I thought that my ceasing to be the President of the Association would
be too hasty and might damage the cause, and it was not warranted by
anything in my health. But I thought that it was quite a good idea to
relieve me of the responsibility of routine work and let the Council
evolve independently of me, whilst my advice and guidance were
available wherever necessary.
Personally, I think that the tour had nothing to do with the
collapse. It was the very exacting nature of the work that I myself
voluntarily undertook. No one pressed me to go through the hurri1

438

On All-India Spinners’ Association; vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cane touring. I let the co-workers think and thought myself that my
constitution would somehow or other stand the pressure that was put
upon it, and do you know that the collapse came upon the very last
day of this severe trial? For, I had intended to turn over a new leaf
after finishing the Maharashtra tour and had given due notice1 to
Rajagopalachariar that I would no longer be hurried and was looking
forward to finishing the rest of the tours during the year in easy
stages. If the collapse had not occurred, I would have thought in my
pride that I could tax my constitution to any extent. Nature took her
vengeance and she did it so gently that, as Dr. Wanless put it, “it was
Nature’s first fairly severe warning”. He thinks, many other doctors
think and I think also that, if I regain, as I think it is possible to do, a
fair measure of the strength I lost in the twinkling of an eye, I should
be able to do a moderate amount of touring. Doctors even think that it
might do good, though the condition is imperative that there must be
daily rest; no hurry; no bustle; no working to time and order; only
one meeting per day, and not much speaking even then and so on. I
am trying to adjust my mind to this new mode of life. If I succeed, it
may be possible to prolong the life and still do a moderate amount of
work. Please, therefore, do not worry about what has happened. Later
on, I may even resume the routine work.
You should regularly give me a weekly letter and tell me how
you and all the others are faring. As for myself, I am making steady
progress daily. In a month’s time, I might be able to do a little of
gentle touring in Madras Presidency in order to take charge of the
purses already collected.
With love, Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 1571; also from a microfilm: S.N. 19777

1

Vide “Letter to C. Rajagopalachari”, before 21-2-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

439

443. LETTER TO JANE HOWARD
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI , 1

May 26, 1927
DEAR MISS HOWARD,

I was delighted to receive your letter giving me details about the
late Mr. Howard and yourself. Of your connection with him and your
selfless devotion, I knew nothing. It does one’s soul good to read the
account you have sent me, for which I am most grateful to you.
I hope you are now getting your Young India regularly; if not,
you will please let me know. Do please write to me from time to time.
I am obliged to dictate this letter as I am just now on the sick-list.
With loving regards from Mrs. Gandhi and myself,
Yours sincerely,

MISS JANE HOWARD
R OSEMARY
50, PANDORA R OAD
MALVERN
JOHANNESBURG
From a photostat: S.N. 12354

1

440

Permanent address
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

444. LETTER TO FRANCISCA STANDENATH
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI , 1

May 26, 1927
MY DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter now after a long time. I always think of you.
You need not be anxious about my health. I am making steady
progress. The collapse, though it was temporary, left me very weak. I
am however able to attend to a moderate amount of work daily.
I shall look forward to your account of your meeting with Mr.
Ranchhodlal Amritlal.
I note what you say about the two publications. We should not
however mind them. We cannot prevent people from holding what
views they like. We have to respect other people’s opinions even
though they may not be to our liking even as we expect them to
respect ours.
Yours, sincerely,

MRS. F RANCISCA S TANDENATH
GRAZ (IN S TYRIA )
TRAUTMANSDORFGASSE 1
(AUSTRIA)
From a photostat: S.N. 12493

445. LETTER TO SRI PRAKASA
NANDI HILLS,

May 26, 1927
MY DEAR SRI PRAKASA,

I was delighted to receive your letter redirected to me from the
Ashram. Your yarn is passable, and you should enlist yourself as a
member of the Spinners’ Association without any misgivings.
In the hot days, I can understand the takli giving you trouble. It
would then be best to do it at dawn when you can see the thread
clearly without artificial light at all. At that time there is even in
thedriest climate a certain humidity which makes the slivers more
workable. And, at the time of doing the takli, if you are doing it in
quiet, you can recite all your Bhagavad Gita or any other favourite
1

Permanent address

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

441

shlokas.
Herewith receipt for Rs. 265-3-0 which they have sent me from
the Ashram.
I am glad you have decided to make khaddar wear and spinning
compulsory in the Vidyapith.
I hope you have not abandoned the idea of passing some time at
the Ashram.
Yours sincerely,

Enclosure 1
From a microfilm: S.N. 19776

446. LETTER TO R. B. GREGG
NANDI HILLS,

May 27, 1927
MY DEAR GOVIND,

The occasion for writing this letter is supplied by your capital
letter of the 17th instant to Maganlal of which he has sent me a copy.
Your suggestions are all perfect, if the premises can be accepted
by us. Probably Maganlal has not even thought of what I am about to
tell you; though I shouldn’t be surprised if he has also thought of the
same thing, for I think that he has assimilated the inwardness of the
spinning movement. What I want to state is this: the movement is
bound to fail if we expect to succeed by adopting the same methods,
or very nearly the same methods with necessary adaptations, as the
adversary, if such a term can be properly used under a plan of life
which admits of no enemies. In my opinion, we have to devise other
ways of making the movement a living and universal force at least so
far as India is concerned. The adversary believes in the latest
appliances and therefore is bound to adopt the methods of those who
are adepts in using those appliances; but in the spinning movement,
modern appliances are largely discarded and the few that are retained
are used in a different way. Typewriters, shorthand assistance and the
like are taken in our movement as a temporary measure. Immediately
one goes to the villages, these become a hindrance rather than a help.
If the movement has to depend upon first-class stenography, it will fail
before long. For, it cannot make any headway under those conditions
beyond the cities. It cannot succeed even if it has to depend upon the
English language for its spread. And so you find that at the Ashram,
in the Association office and even here we are managing with most
442

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

indifferent stenography. Even if we advertised, we shall probably not
get the best stenographer, because he will know that there is room
only for half a dozen stenographers in the movement, and then we
shall have to pay not 100 or 125, which is the most I think that is
being paid, but we should have to pay anything between 200 and 400
for getting the assistance such as you have in mind. I should quite
agree with you if you argue that even that salary would be economy
even if only one man has to be obtained. Experience, however, shows
that it is not possible to retain the services of such a man unless you
are prepared to allow him to become the master and to dictate his own
terms in every respect. Thus it would be useless to have an able
stenographer who has no faith in the movement, who would disdain to
wear khadi and who would require polished furniture before he will
settle down to work. The spinning movement, so far as I can see, will
never afford the high wages that are demanded by good men in such
a line of business. Do you know that if in khadi service we offer high
wages even to one man, there is immediately and naturally a ferment
throughout the rank and file and they would all begin to compare
their low wages to the high wages given even to one single man? The
proper working of the spinning movement is still being evolved. It is
in a state of flux, and it will be some time before it can be said to be
stabilized. It is a movement which has to grow from within. It is a
movement which requires a fair measure of continuous sacrifice from
those who have become accustomed to city life. The class of men and
women required for the movement have got to be trained and brought
up. They cannot therefore be had by advertising. The reason why we
have not got efficient stenography is because no endeavour has been
made to train stenographers. It is quite possible for instance to make
of Chhaganlal, Mahadev, Krishnadas, Pyarelal and many others whom
I can name first-class stenographers. But it was considered not worthwhile doing so. It would have been like throwing away a rupee for a
pice, and so we are managing with fourth-rate stenographers hoping
that if they assimilate the spirit of the movement they will distinguish
themselves in the work they have undertaken by coming up to the
highest level. I have entered into this elaborate argument—very badly
expressed because it is for the first time that I am reducing to writing
this thought about the movement—because I am anxious that you
who are saturated with the spirit of the spinning movement should
understand all that is at the back of my mind and then give me the
benefit of your criticism. If I have not expressed myself clearly, as I
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

443

am afraid I have not, do not please hesitate to ask me for further
explanation and by an interchange of a few letters, probably, I shall be
able to express myself more clearly than I have done. But of course
apart from what I have said above, there is much to be said for your
view.
Young India and Navajivan are not all I want them to be. There
are reasons for it into which however I need not enter just now. Some
are avoidable and some are unavoidable. I hope to be able to cope
with those that are avoidable.
I got the book on vitamins. I read it through as soon as I got it.
It is a good book. But it failed to convince me. The subject of
vitamins has still, so far as I can see, to be investigated. The author’s
statement does not appear to me to be the final word. Their ruling out
all the nuts and the pulses in preference to meat foods goes against the
grain and is contrary to all I have read in the vegetarian literature. If
what the authors have said be the final word about them, it is a severe
blow to vegetarianism. But the authors could not possibly have
sufficient data about the effect of nuts and pulses to enable them to
come to a just decision. Accurate observation about the efficacy or the
inefficacy of vegetable protein foods can only be made on an
extensive scale in India, where alone one meets thousands of born
vegetarians. Their diet and their habits have to be scientifically
observed and analysed before safe deductions can be drawn; and then,
too, there are so many disturbing factors. Climate, harmful customs
and suchlike have to be taken into account before using the values of
foods taken by them. I am therefore taking all the statements in that
book with a great deal of caution. The late A. F. Hills was President of
the Vegetarian Society in London. He was a good man. I do not know
the extent of his scientific knowledge. But he indulged in bold
speculations about diet. He carried on a series of experiments himself.
He wrote a number of articles on what he called “vital food”. He
divided foods into three or four divisions: one for those whose
occupation was pre-dominantly body-labour; another for those whose
occupation was predominantly intellectual; third for those whose
occupation was predominantly spiritual and the fourth for those who
were not in a healthy condition. His reasoning used to appeal to me in
those days. I do not know whether it would now if I read all his
writings afresh. I followed also keenly the controversy going on in the
medical profession in those days about food values, and I know that
444

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

one army of doctors defended white bread for all they were worth,
and another army suggested that white bread was the staff of death
and that the brown bread alone was the staff of life. There was even a
Bread Reform League with Miss Yates as its energetic Secretary. I
used to come in close contact with the lady. But I learnt even then that
either side was fanatical, either produced statistics and analysis of
various types of bread. No one had sufficient data for its absolute
conclusions. For they could not set a large number of men, who
would for the sake of their observations, live purely on brown bread
and water or white bread and water. I remember one example that was
given by a doctor. I think it was Dr. Allinson. He said he put one of
his dogs upon white bread for one month and it died; and another
upon brown bread for one month and it lived. The irresistible
inference was that white bread was the staff of death and brown bread
was the staff of life. He did not state whether both the dogs were kept
under restraint the whole of the time, nor did he state whether both the
dogs started with the same stamina. Let me confess that in those days,
that is nearly 40 years ago, I sided with Dr. Allinson and I swallowed
his testimony about the dogs and used to eat nothing but brown bread,
and in the brown bread variety also, largely Allinson’s brown bread;
because, the worthy doctor took care to emphasize the necessity of
taking Allinson’s brown bread, for that alone contained the whole
wheat-meal ground to the necessary fineness. He was a good man. I
read all his writings. Even in 1914, I consulted him when I was
suffering from pleurisy when I constantly refused to take even milk.
Probably the worthy doctor is still alive. All the same I came to
discount, as experience ripened, most of the argument of the type I
have mentioned. The upshot of all this is to tell you that I have not
made many changes in my food beyond what I reported to you. I still
take unboiled milk. I dilute it with water. The milk that comes fresh
from the goats is poured over boiling water; that gives the necessary
warmth to the milk and addition of water makes it lighter. I am taking
yet a little bread or a little bhakhari made of home-ground wheat, and
I am taking one green vegetable. The authors of the book say that
addition of soda destroys the vitamins in the vegetables. But without
soda, the vegetables refuse to be soft. I have therefore decided to add
soda to the vegetable. It is difficult to digest it unless it is thoroughly
cooked. Uncooked green cabbage, my system rejects. You will have
observed that all the four vitamins are to be found in milk. They are
to be found also in the fruits I am taking and therefore I do not lose
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

445

much by adding soda at the time of cooking cabbage or Indian
marrow. There is no difficulty about the cooking of spinach without
soda and so whenever I get spinach, soda is not added. There is no
occasion for worry about my health; for, I seem to be getting better
though slowly. No food will give me personal satisfaction unless I can
revert to fruits and nuts. But it seems to me that I shall have to close
this earthly life without getting that personal satisfaction.
Yours sincerely,

[PS.]
Forgive me this very long letter. I did not know it was going to
be so long.
From a photostat: S.N. 12574

447. LETTER TO MAGANLAL GANDHI
NANDI DURG,

Krishna 11 [May 27, 1927] 1
CHI. MAGANLAL,

I have heard what you wrote about Ramachandra to Mahadev. I
have nothing to say about it at this moment. Since you have handed
over my letter to him, watch its effect. Talk over the matter with
Jamnalalji when he comes there and do what is necessary. Then if
there is anything for me to write, let me know.
Govindji’s letter is very nice. I have conveyed to him the
thoughts it raised in me. Herewith a copy of my reply.2 Read it
yourself and let Narandas too read it. If he has not read the original
letter, let him do so. If any ideas occur to you on reading my reply,
write to me. If there is in it anything that you do not understand,
please let me know. We would obviously be imperfect in a field where
we do not at all wish to compete with the other party. But where we do
so or where we claim to specialize, we should try and be as perfect as
possible. There will be no difficulty in publishing in Navajivan or
Young India any material that you think should appear, if you send it
to me and if I approve it. If you let me have a draft of an
advertisement of books that ought to be taken notice of in Young
India or Navajivan, I shall do what is necessary.
1
2

446

Inferred from the contents
Vide the preceding item.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I had prepared a note about Henry but I held it back after I had
your letter and Jamnalalji’s. Now get it from Swami and examine it;
and, if you think it can be included, after making the necessary
changes, send it to me. If it is not to be included at all, nothing need
be done.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 7767. Courtesy: Radhabehn Chaudhri

448. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
NANDI HILLS,

May 28, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your two letters as also your telegram. In order not to
delay replying for two days I am resorting to dictation. I do not want
to break the rule as far as possible of not writing letters myself except
during silence. Both your letters are precious. I now understand the
Ashram much better than I ever did before. It is almost like having
been there myself and seen it. So characteristic is your account, and it
is usefully supplemented by Valunjker’s letter.
You did well in not entering into the comparative merits of
respective parties, and I do hope that you will remain unmoved even if
you hear comparisons that may not please you. Those who enter into
comparisons do so honestly. That it is improper to enter into such
comparisons they do not know. And what is the use of being ruffled
by listening to an expression of views honestly held?
This use of bhang is a disturbing factor, and if it is not checked
in time, it will prove the undoing of that institution. But you are again
right in not insisting on the reform. You have not gone there as a
supervisor or an inspector to make reforms. You have gone there to
perfect your study of Hindi and in so doing to give such service as
you can and as may be acceptable. And that brings me to your Hindi.
You have been quickened into action yourself. Of course our formula
has been Hindi first, everything else after. I had felt that the formula
was being somewhat overlooked. In my letters whilst you were in
Delhi, I had emphasized this thing when you were discussing the
various limitations of the Delhi Gurukul. But I thought that to bring
the formula up and further in my letters would be undesirable, and I
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

447

knew that you were yourself on the watch and would pull yourself up
if you found yourself napping. This you have now done, and I am
glad and quite satisfied. Of course there are innumerable things you
can do usefully wherever you are placed. And the test of the
possession of the religious sense really consists in one’s being able to
pick out the ‘rightest’ thing out of many things which are all ‘right’
more or less. This is the meaning of a verse in the Bhagavad Gita
which says: “Better even to die doing one’s duty, however lowly it
may be, than doing some other’s however grand it may be.’’1 And so,
I have myself not a shadow of doubt that you will be entitled to pass
by many things which you can easily do, if the one thing for which
you have left Sabarmati has at all to be sacrificed or neglected. And, if
there or at any other place, you become an unwelcome visitor because
of your insistence upon that one thing, that is sufficient warning for
you to leave the place. And when you feel that imperative call, you
will simply not listen to any other suggestion. But that burning
overpowering desire must come from within. I must not goad, I will
not goad. I shall be entirely satisfied with what progress you can
make, no matter how slow it is. You will do your Hindi in the way that
you think is best, and if you find that it is more conducive to your
peace of mind to have several other occupations side by side with
Hindi, you will take them up. Do not therefore please continuously
think of what I would like, but do what you think you can easily,
without impairing your health, of both body and mind; and in the
execution of your plan when you want my assistance or advice, you
shall fall back upon it immediately, as for instance about going to Brij
Kishan. Your telegram leads me to think that now there is no occasion
for you to leave that Ashram. But you evidently do not know that Brij
Kishan has not been keeping well and has therefore been sent to
Mussoorie. But if you desire to go to Delhi, I doubt not that you
could go to Brij Kishen’s house although he himself is not there. And
of course there are many places where you can be sent for your Hindi,
if Bhagwadbhakti Ashram does not give you all you want in the shape
of Hindi,
With love,
Yours,

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5231. Courtesy: Mirabehn

1

448

XVIII. 7
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

449. LETTER GULZARILAL NANDA
NANDI HALLS,

May 28, 1927
MY DEAR GULZARILAL,

I was delighted to hear from you. Whilst lying on my bed, I
have constantly thought of so many like you in whom I am deeply
interested and from whom, I expect many large and big things if only
God will give them the requisite health for the task before them.
Your description of a truly religious life is accurate. I have not a
shadow of a doubt that this blessed state of inward joy and freedom
from anxiety should last in the midst of the greatest trials conceivable.
It admits of no exception whatsoever. Naturally, it is unattainable
except by the very fewest. But that it is attainable by human beings, I
have also no doubt. That we do not find in history evidence regarding
the existence of any such person merely proves to me that all the
record that we have has been prepared by imperfect beings, and it is
impossible for imperfect beings to give us a faithful record of perfect
ones. The same may be said of our own experiences. We have to be
very nearly perfect in order to meet perfect souls as you have
described. Nor need you think that I have laid down an absurd
proposition inasmuch as it is incapable of being recorded, or being
experienced by the average man. To raise such a doubt would be
begging the question, for we are here picturing to ourselves extraordinary mortals, though mortals nevertheless, and surely extra-ordinary
powers are required to find out these extraordinary mortals. This
statement is true even of much lesser things, things almost ridiculous,
and yet very difficult of accomplishment, such, for instance, as the
discoveries of Sir J. C. Bose or the finest paintings. Both these, we
average beings will have to take on trust. It is only the privileged few
who have got the special faculty for understanding and appreciating
either those discoveries, or those paintings. These do not appear to us
to be incredible and we are able to accept them on faith only because
in favour of these we have the testimony of a larger number of
witnesses than we can possibly have for the things of permanent value,
such as human perfection of the utmost type. Therefore the limitation
that you have accepted is quite a workable thing for the time being.
For, even inside the limitation, there is ample scope for widening the
field for the progress of the state of being and remaining unruffled in
the face of the onslaught of sorrows and trials, which before
regeneration would have paralysed us.
I am glad you have intensified your devotions. I do not know
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

449

what you are reading at present. And I do not know whether I told
you that we must arrive at a time when we do not need the solace of
many books but that we make one book yield us all we want. In the
last stage, of course, when life becomes one of perfect surrender and
complete self-effacement, the support of even one book becomes
unnecessary. At the present moment, though I am reading many
things, the Bhagavad Gita is becoming more and more the only
infallible guide, the only dictionary of reference, in which I find all
the sorrows, all the troubles, all the trials arranged in the alphabetical
order with exquisite solutions. I think I did tell you that the Song
Celestial was the best rendering I had come across of the Bhagavad
Gita. But if you do not know Sanskrit, I know that a knowledge of
Sanskrit to enable you to understand the Bhagavad Gita is easily
within your power. You can almost in a month’s time know enough
Sanskrit to understand the original text. For, though the English
rendering is grand and though you might be able to get some Hindi
or Urdu translation also, of course there is nothing like the original.
The original will enable you to give your own meaning and gloss to
the text. That book is not a historical record, but it is a record of the
concrete experiences of its author, whether it was really Vyasa or not I
am not concerned. And if it is a record of anybody’s experience, it
must not be beyond us to be able to test the truth of it by repeating
the experience. I am testing the truth almost every day in my life and
find it never failing. This of course does not mean that I have reached
the state described, for instance, at the end of the Second Chapter. But
I know that the more we carry out the prescription given in it, the
nearer do we answer the description given of the perfect state.
I hope you are keeping good health. I am of course making
steady progress.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a photostat: C. W. 9641. Courtesy: Gulzarilal Nanda

450

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

450. LETTER TO DHAN GOPAL MUKERJI
ASHRAM, S ABARMATI , 1

May 28, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your kind letter with your subscription for Young India.
If you do not get it regularly, please report it to the manager and let
me have a line also.
Please do not have any anxiety about my health. I am taking all
the necessary care and am giving myself as much rest as it is possible
to give.
Yours sincerely,

DHAN GOPAL MUKERJI , E SQ.
THE TOWN HALL C LUB
123, W EST 43RD S TREET
NEW YORK
From a photostat: S.N. 12507

451. LETTER TO MAHARAJA OF NABHA
NANDI HILLS,

May 28, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 20th instant. I do not know why you
considered my letter of the 1st January to be insulting. I can only give
you my assurance that no insult was intended.
The paragraph you have copied in your letter, I do not
understand.
You are wrong in inferring that the letter of 1st January was
either dictated or prompted by Pandit Motilalji. I had left the
Congress before the session was over, and I did not know that Pandit
Motilalji was in Calcutta on the 1st January. But whether he was or not,
he certainly knew nothing even of the fact that I was writing to you. I
simply felt that I would be doing a friendly turn by writing to you as I
did.
1

Permanent address

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

451

I know nothing about the Lakhna Raj case. Your letter was the
first information to me about even the existence of Lakhna Raj. That
there was any case in connection with it, I had no knowledge
whatsoever.
I venture to think that your description of Pundit Motilalji is, to
say the least, ungentlemanly. He may be all the things you have said
of him, but the code of honour prevalent in good society debars one
from impugning before a stranger the character of any man, whoever
he may be. And, after all, I am a perfect stranger to Your Highness. In
spite of your imputations on the character of Pundit Motilalji he
remains for me a high-souled, able, self-sacrificing patriot enjoying in
the country a position not attained by many public workers. As it
happens at the present moment, his politics are not my politics. But if
they were mine, I should certainly deem it an honour to allow my
judgement to be influenced and tested by his.
Yours sincerely,

HIS HIGHNESS THE MAHARAJA OF NABHA
DEHRA DUN (U.P.)
From a photostat: S.N. 12581

452. LETTER TO DR. M. S. KELKAR
NANDI HILLS,

May 28, 1927
DEAR DOCTOR,

I have your letter. Though I do not propose to trouble you to
come over here, I would like you definitely, if you can, to write out
what you will have me do, and I shall incorporate as many of your
suggestions as it is possible for me.
I cannot get distilled water in Nandi. I know that it can be made
by oneself. But I have not got the proper tubes and utensils for it here.
When I go down to Bangalore, I shall see whether I can procure
distilled water.
As it is, I take raw milk diluted with boiling water. This seems to
agree with me better. I am taking 30 ounces of raw milk and about
two ounces of whole-meal flour turned into bhakhari to which is
added a little butter, soda and salt. I take also one vegetable well
boiled and added to it a tea-spoonful of fresh butter from goat’s milk.
I add to the morning milk the juice of 10 full-grown leaves of neem
452

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

tree. I sleep well and I do about four hours’ dictation daily, one
hour’s writing and at least one hour’s reading. This is fair amount of
work for a patient who is convalescing. In addition to this, I have half
an hour’s fairly brisk walk in the morning and half an hour in the
evening. And I retire at 9 in the night and get up at 4 in the morning.
Of course the morning and the evening prayers are there. I do also
deep-breathing morning and evening. I sleep about an hour and half
during the day with an earth bandage on the head. Now you may
make any suggestions you like.
Now about yourself. I am really most anxious to help you. But,
in spite of all the goodwill in the world, I have not been able to
enthuse over your treatment. I think it is wrong to say that all the
patients I placed at your disposal were those who had passed through
many doctors and had almost been given up. You had Prabhudas, you
had his grandfather, you had Gomatibehn, you had Navin, and many
others whose names I can recall if I tax my memory. Your insistence
upon eggs and your great partiality for astrology are two serious
drawbacks. I respect your insistence upon eggs. But they don’t suit
my religious sense. I respect also your partiality for astrology. But I
cannot get rid of my scepticism about it. Therefore I can only make a
limited use of your attainments.
I wonder whether you have studied the use of asanas as part of
treatment of disease. My attention has been recently drawn to them.
But as you have a fair knowledge of physiology, I would like you, in
the light of that knowledge, to examine the claims made on behalf of
the various asanas. Have you also studied the newest researches made
about vitamins?
Yours sincerely,

DR. M. S. K ELKAR
342, SADASHIV P ETH
P OONA C ITY
From a photostat: S.N. 14131

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

453

453. LETTER TO VASUMATI PANDIT
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakha Krishna 12 [May 28, 1927]
CHI. VASUMATI,

Your letter to hand. It may well be that they are working without
getting results. But what I got from your diary you could not have
given even through many letters. Therefore even if it relates only to a
day prior to that on which you write to me, do let me have your diary.
It is good that you regularly write to Ramdas.
My health is improving.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 471. Courtesy: Vasumati Pandit

454. LETTER TO TARA MODI
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakha Krishna 12 [May 28, 1927]
CHI. TARA,

Your letter. I learn from Surendra’s letter that you have grown
very weak. Strength which is lost will come back only gradually. Need
I tell you to have patience? Moreover, the presence of Nathji is for
you a soothing balm. I write this not with the expectation of any reply
from you but only to bring you peace, if I can. Ramniklal will write, if
necessary; if you want to convey anything to me, tell him about it. But
on no account should you write yourself. I find from my own
experience that good fresh milk, that is, pure milk if available there, is
easier to digest, when mixed with boiling water. Moreover, all doctors
here agree that if a cow is free from disease, if its udders are washed, if
the container is clean and the milkman washes his hands well with hot
water before milking the cow, such fresh milk when taken without
boiling is more nourishing and easier to digest. If it is boiled, the
vitamins are destroyed.
We have already a long tradition of drinking slow-boiled milk.
So if it is available, give it a trial.
Ba sends her blessings.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 1696. Courtesy: Ramniklal Modi

454

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

455. LETTER TO LAKSHMIDAS
May 28, 1927
BHAI LAKSHMIDAS,

Your letter. I have read Bhai Jethalal’s letter. We have been
doing khadi work in the native States. But I have always had a fear
that when the impact of khadi begins to tell on foreign cloth, it will be
attacked from all quarters; I doubt whether at that time we shall be
able to carry on our work in the native States. If our tapascharya is
prolonged and sincere, we might perhaps survive such attacks. Now
the question naturally arises what stand we should take in the native
States during this transitional period. My inner voice tells me that we
should plainly reject [their favour] if it means giving undertakings
which would compromise our honour. How can we give in writing
anything that would seem like ignoring Pathik and Ramnarayan? We
should talk to them politely and try to persuade them. ‘We propose to
do only khadi work in your territories. That too as a matter of
business. We have no wish to interfere in the affairs of your State.’
This we shall state, if you like, in writing. ‘We wish to do khadi work
in your State merely from the business point of view. But we do not
want this to be interpreted to mean that even outside your State we will
have nothing to do with politics or that we have no line of thought on
the subject. We have no political affiliations with Pathik and others,
but we do not wish to by-pass them in any way; nor do we regard
them as traitors. But we do not wish to be instrumental in harming
them in their relations with you.’ I think we should boldly say
something to this effect. If we do not act in some such way khadi will
lose its power. If the Government takes away khadi work from us and
gets it done arbitrarily through its own machinery, shall we be able to
attach all the power to khadi that we do today? In short, we would
swallow many a bitter pill for the sake of khadi. We may put up with
personal insults, but even khadi work may not be carried on under
such circumstances as would compromise our principles. The fact is
that under such circumstances, khadi work simply cannot be done.
Perhaps you are not aware that an attempt was made to get the
Charkha Sangh registered. The Charkha Sangh is an independent
limb of the Congress enjoying the power to secede from the parent
body. The officials agreed to register it if this spiritual bond were
broken. We decided against getting the Charkha Sangh registered and
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

455

declined to snap that bond.
Well, I am dictating this from a height of 5,000 feet; you may
therefore look at it in the right perspective after making the necessary
allowances. I write not for being acted upon, but only because it may
help you in finding some solution. I have discussed this matter with
Jamnalalji to some extent. He will soon be at the Ashram when you
too should see him and do what you all wish to. But then “the
master’s advice must be left at the door’’.1
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

456. WELCOME DONATION FOR CAUSE OF
SUPPRESSED CLASSES
A telegram has been received from Shri Vallabhbhai saying that
a generous gentleman has donated Rs. 50,000 for the benefit of the
suppressed communities, and another has donated Rs. 2,500. I saw in
the papers that the name of the first donor is Mansukhlal Chhaganlal.
It seems that the other has not thought it proper to let his name be
known. I congratulate both these gentlemen. My conviction grows
stronger day by day that such thoughtful donations are alone
religious charities. It is a happy sign that the desire to make donations
for religious causes is still alive among us. But we hardly know what is
religion. I have often said that in this age much adharma is done in
the name of dharma. On the one hand, therefore, we have to nurse the
religious sentiment of the people and, on the other, we have to point
out the right way for the exercise of that sentiment. Good intentions
by themselves do not take one to heaven. There is a saying in English
that the path to hell is paved with good intentions. There is much truth
in this. Many thieves steal with good motives. Many are those who tell
lies with good motives. Even a religious person like Yudhishthira
makes the mistake of uttering a falsehood with a good motive, and for
that he had to suffer the stink of hell. We see ourselves that numerous
murders are committed with good motives. Hence, good intentions by
themselves are unavailing. They should be accompanied by good
deeds, and that is possible only if we have right knowledge. It would
1

456

A Gujarati proverb
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be good, therefore, if religious-minded men and women follow the
example of these two donors, find out religious causes and support
them.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 29-5-1927

457. MEANS OF COW-PROTECTION
Shri Pragji Mavji, manager of the pinjrapole in Nasik, makes the
following suggestions in a letter1 which he has written:
In these suggestions there is not much that is new and has not
been said in Navajivan. But I have printed them to show how a
devoted servant of mother cow and experienced manager of a
pinjrapole supports the suggestions which have been made earlier in
these columns. The letter also contains some useful information. For
instance, the information about the use which contractors make of
dead cattle, if these are handed over to them, is such as will shock us.
Such wicked things happen because, in the name of religion, people
themselves do not make use of the dead animals but hand them over
to others. The suggestion in regard to bones needs some modification.
Burying bones as they are does not produce manure; they have to be
ground into powder. The flesh and intestines need not be buried.
Intestines are used even now for making leather strips, strings for
musical instruments and catguts, and the fat obtained from flesh is
used in great quantities for lubricating machinery. So there remains
very little to be buried in its natural form. But this concerns the future.
If we accept in principle that by making in goshalas and pinjrapoles
all those things against the use of which we have no religious
objection, we can save the maximum number of cattle, other
discoveries will follow.
The reproach to cow-protection workers implied in the last
suggestion deserves attention. Every such worker should bear in mind
that there is a greater need for workers who will devote themselves to
active work of service and make themselves proficient in their field of
work than for preachers who go round exhorting others.
But, along with this letter 2 , I have before me a press-cutting
containing a long interrogatory addressed to me on the question of
1
2

Not translated here
What follows is the translation as found in Young India, 3-11-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

457

cow-protection. The underlying suggestion obviously seems to be that
the methods of cow-protection advocated by me are not consistent
with my profession of Hinduism. For in his introductory remarks to
his questions the writer has tried to make light of the basic principle of
cow-protection that I have formulated, viz., that what is economically
wrong cannot be religiously right. In other words, if a religion cuts at
the very fundamentals of economics it is not a true religion but only a
delusion. My critic on the other hand believes that this view is
opposed to the teachings of our ancient scriptures. I, at least, am not
aware of a single text in opposition to this view nor do I know of any
religious institution that is being maintained in any part of the world
today in antagonism to the elementary principles of economics. As
for Nature, anyone who has eyes can see, that it always observes the
principle that I have stated. For instance, if it has implanted in its
creation the instinct for food it also produces enough food to satisfy
that instinct from day to day. But it does not produce a jot more. That
is Nature’s way. But man, blinded by his selfish greed, grabs and
consumes more than his requirements in defiance of Nature’s
principle, in defiance of the elementary and immutable moralities of
non-stealing and non-possession of other’s property and thus brings
down no end of misery upon himself and his fellow-creatures. To turn
to another illustration, our Shastras have enjoined that the Brahmin
should give knowledge as charity without expecting any material
reward for it for himself. But they have at the same time conferred
upon him the privilege of asking for and receiving alms and have laid
upon the other sections of the community the duty of giving alms,
thus uniting religion and economics in a common bond of harmony.
The reader will be able to find further instances of this kind for
himself. The religious principle requires that the debit and credit sides
of one’s balance-sheet should be perfectly square. That is also the
truest economics and therefore true religion. Whenever there is any
discrepancy between these two it spells bad economics and makes for
unrighteousness. That is why the illustrious author of the Gita has
defined yoga as “balance” or “evenness”. But the majority of mankind do not understand this use of economics to subserve religion;
they want it only for amassing “profits” for themselves. Humanitarian economics, on the other hand, for which I stand, rules out
“profits” altogether. But it rules out “deficit” no less for the simple
reason that it is utterly impossible to safeguard a religious institution
by following a policy of dead loss. That is the reason why in spite of
458

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

our 1,500 goshalas we have not only failed to protect the cow, but its
slaughter is day by day on the increase. If in spite of this we delude
ourselves into the belief that we have done our duty by the cow by
establishing these homes for cattle, and remain smugly self-satisfied
there, whatever comfort it may give us, it won’t bring us one whit
nearer the goal of cow-protection, whereas it can be demonstrably
shown that by adopting the policy that I have suggested we can easily
realize this goal. It does not require much effort to see that but for the
fact that the cow yields us milk, the duty of cow-protection would not
have come into being at all. There are a host of other innocent
animals besides the cow in the world but nobody has ever thought of
setting up their protection as a religious obligation, and if somebody
had attempted it, it would have simply remained a dead-letter. We have
use for the cow. That is why it has become religiously incumbent on
us to protect it.
To turn now to the questionnaire drawn up by my critic, I will
embody the questions in my answers without reproducing them
separately:
1. Every goshala or Pinjrapole should have a tannery
adequate to its needs attached to it. In other words, the manager in
charge of every such institution should have a thorough knowledge of
the immediate steps necessary for utilizing the remains of dead cattle.
If this is done, the question, viz., how many heads of cattle should a
particular goshala contain, won’t arise at all.
2. I do not know what the rate of mortality of cattle in
goshalas is, nor is it relevant to my proposition. So long as there is a
single head of cattle in a goshala, its manager ought to know how to
dispose of its remains after it is dead, just as he is expected to know
how to look after it while it is alive.
3. Such humanitarian institutions for the protection of cattle
as I have described should normally take charge of the remains of the
cattle that might die in the village. Therein lies the interest of the
cattle, the depressed classes and the general public alike. In villages
where there are no goshalas or the concomitant tanneries, some local
person who believes in cow-protection should take it upon himself to
get the carcasses removed to the nearest tannery or get the preliminary
processes performed upon it and send the useful parts there.
4. The establishment of such tanneries as I have described
does not require much capital outlay. Only some initial expenditure
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

459

would be needed to train up workers for this work.
5. It is true that at present the leather prepared from
slaughtered hides is superior in quality to that prepared from dead
hides. But during the late War the Government of India spent
enormous sums of money to improve the quality of leather from dead
hides; and tannery experts have told me that dead hides can be tanned
into as good leather as leather from slaughtered hides. I myself am
conducting experiments in this direction. In Cuttack, Sjt. Madhusudan
Das has been doing the same for a number of years and with success
as he tells me. The Calcutta Government Research Tannery is also at
present engaged in similar experiments.
But the tragedy of it today is that we annually export crores
worth of hides to foreign countries, and by ignorantly using leather
goods made from the hides of slaughtered cattle, become indirectly
participators in the sin of their slaughter.
It rests in our hands entirely to prevent the export of hides of
our dead cattle to foreign countries. And this we can easily do by
bringing the export trade in hides under our control through the
establishment of tanneries on altruistic lines. We cannot only save nine
crores of rupees annually to our country but by employing that sum
properly save a countless number of cattle.
I need hardly say that the humanitarian tanneries that I have
suggested would also be utilizing the bones and other useful parts of
the dead cattle. In fact it is more necessary than ever.
[From Gujarati]
Navajivan, 29-5-1927

458. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
NANDI,

May 29, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I sent you a fairly long reply to your two letters and wire. I have
not heard in continuation of your wire. This dictation enables me to
overtake much work without tiring me, as I can do the dictation lying
down. It is likely that in the course of a few days, we shall remove to
Bangalore, as it is getting very windy here and the climate seems to be
too bracing for me. I must not yet take brisk walks. You may there460

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

fore safely write your letters now addressed to Bangalore. Coomara
Park will very probably be the address. You will say Bangalore City
because there are two watertight divisions, Cantonment and City, and
unless ‘City’ is mentioned, the letters first go to the Cantonment as
they do all over India where there is also a Cantonment.
There is nothing new to report so far as health is concerned. I
think I did tell you that I had reverted to bhakhari and a vegetable.
With love,
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5232. Courtesy: Mirabehn

459. LETTER TO NARGIS CAPTAIN
NANDI HILLS,

May 29, 1927
Do not compliment me on my promptness in acknowledging
your letter. Only it facilitates my work and therefore recovery if I do
what little I can from day to day and have no arrears weighing upon
my mind.
Letters like the one you have sent me I rarely publish. The rule
is to publish such letters when there is something in them which
requires a public discussion. The letter you have sent me is really too
personal for publication and there is no warrant for printing it except
to gratify my own pride. There is therefore no question of my
advertising you just yet or putting Dr. Scarpa in a false position by
bringing in his name in the pages of Young India and in connection
with an Italian letter.
I see that your letter is three letters rolled into one. Please tell
Perin and Khurshed that you are not there to encourage their laziness.
It will be time for them to cease to work and let you work for them
when they cease to eat and let you eat for them. There is a verse 1 in
the Gita whose paraphrase is: Those who eat without working are
thieves, except of course patients like myself. For myself I have still
only progress to report. It is getting colder here day by day. This is
the rainy season here though the rains have not yet properly set in.
Yours,
From a photostat: S.N. 14129
1

III. 12

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

461

460. LETTER TO R. B. GREGG
NANDI HILLS,

May 29, 1927
MY DEAR GOVIND,

I have your very important letter. It crossed mine. I cannot
appropriate the credit you give me for gentle criticism of your handwriting. What I wanted to say was that although I liked handwritten
letter, there was no occasion for you to revert to writing your letters
for my sake and that you should continue type-writing as you believe
in it, and as I know it does result in economy of time. Nor do I
consider your handwriting to be bad. It might be clearer. But fortunately for my friends I have my own writing as the criterion and that
being so, I know very few whose writing is worse than mine, and yet
because of my dislike of typewriters, if I could possibly write with my
own hand, I will inflict that illegible hand in preference to having my
letters typed or typing them myself. The reason underlying is this. If I
have any concern for my friends, I should endeavour to write a better
and more legible hand. Typewriter is a cover for indifference and
laziness. Moreover I believe in the dictum —handwriting reveals the
writer. Typewriting certainly results in economy of time. But whilst I
admit that time is money, I do not admit that money is everything, and
therefore I can conceive innumerable occasions when economy of
time would be misplaced. And the inroads that the typewriter is
making have all but destroyed the magnificent art of calligraphy. I
wonder if you have seen old handwritten manuscripts when people
used to pour forth their very soul into their work. But I must not stray
away from the subject on which I want to write.
Your suggestions about selecting a few untouchable boys and
making them ideal farmers does great credit to your heart. But it
betrays your ignorance of the situation. Even if half-a-dozen
untouchables could be trained as you suggest, that will in no way
bring us nearer the solution of the problem of untouchability. To
petrify on this matter—Hindu mind will immediately say, we shall
touch every untouchable who qualified as these six men have. You
perhaps know that there have been many and many pariah saints, but
their sainthood has not saved this suppressed class. The orthodox
mind again argues the pariah saint becomes so because of his past
karma and he naturally commands our respect. When the others do
likewise, they will also command the same respect. It is this immoral
462

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

deduction from the theory of karma which has got to be combated at
every step and the Hindu mind has got to be educated by fierce
penance and understanding that the theory of karma is not intended
to kill all reform and all efforts, but that it is intended for mankind to
work out all evil karma and he who does not do so is not entitled to
belong to the human species. The Hindu mind has therefore to be
educated to regard intrinsically as equals the lowest, the fallen and the
downtrodden and to give them a helping hand so as to make them
level with the rest. And why, apart from the question of untouchability, should not the most promising young men be sent out to
become accomplished farmers and try the experiment suggested by
you? Surely you do not wish to imply that the touchables in their
pride will not care to learn farming with a view to utilizing human
excreta as manure. If that is your argument, it would be wrong to
expect untouchables to handle work which others would consider as
degrading. As you know at the Ashram, we have untouchable boys.
We do not even ask them to do the sanitary work. The initiative is
taken by the so-called high-caste men; for, on such points the
so-called untouchables would be very touchy. I am having that
experience everywhere. Underlying your suggestion, therefore, is the
question not of untouchability but of improved farming methods
along simple lines. But I have simply not handled this question
energetically because I believe in the doctrine of one thing at a time.
There is much scattered work here, so much laziness, so much blind
imitation, so little concentration that it is necessary to hammer away at
one very simple but fairly universal thing, and if that succeeds, the rest
can follow. And agriculture is an industry which can only be
improved when it receives state assistance. In an ill-governed country,
I think with Thoreau that the citizen who resists the evil government
must ignore property rights. And without assurance of settled
ownership, it is impossible to do much in the way of agriculture. I do
not want to elaborate this thing. I have said sufficient to enable you to
fill in the rest. Whilst your suggestion does not seem to me to be
feasible so far as the untouchables are concerned and difficult of
accomplishment, even as a general scheme the extract sent by you is
valuable and I propose as soon as I find space to reproduce it in
Young India so that those who are at all inclined in the direction
might take the matter up.
I did not get the larger volume about vitamins. What I got was
Food and Health. But that book also gives enough information about
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

463

vitamins. Dr. Kellogg’s writings I know. I have read his book, and if it
has not been lost as many of my books have been, it must be in the
Ashram library. However, you seem to know him personally, and I
shall look forward to what he has to say. Have you put the whole case
before him and asked whether he can suggest an effective vegetarian
substitute for milk in the case of patients?
Yours sincerely,

R. B. GREGG, E SQ.
KOTGARH
S IMLA HILLS
From a photostat: S.N. 14132

461. LETTER TO T. N. SARMA
NANDI HILLS,

May 29, 1927
MY DEAR SARMA,

I remember your visit at Calcutta and the conversation that you
had over your Ashram. I am sorry about your wife’s illness. I am
likely to descend this hill in the course of a few days and go down to
Bangalore for completing the cure. When I am in Bangalore do come
whenever you wish and we shall have a chat.
All you say about Hanumantarao is quite true. He was a man
among men. Let us make him live in us and through us by following
him closely, in his self-sacrifice, self-effacement, love of truth, ahimsa
and devotion to duty.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. T. N. S ARMA
199, E AST P ARK R OAD
BANGALORE C ITY
From a photostat: S.N. 14133

462. LETTER TO SAM HIGGINBOTTOM
KUMARA P ARK,
BANGALORE,

May 29, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

A correspondent in Mysore has sent me the following which is
being distributed fairly liberally. Before I say anything about the
464

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

writing, will you kindly tell me whether you are correctly reported and
whether the extracts reproduced do you full justice.
I had your letter of kind enquiry for which I thank you. I am
making steady progress. I am likely to be in these parts yet for a
while. It will therefore be better to send your answer directly to the
address noted at the top.
Yours sincerely,

DR. S AM HIGGINBOTTOM
AGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE
ALLAHABAD
From a photostat: S.N. 14134

463. LETTER TO K. T. PAUL
NANDI HILLS,

May 29, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. I am likely in the course of a few days to go
down to Bangalore and take the rest of the cure there. Do come
whenever you can and I shall be delighted to see you whether I am on
the Hill or in Bangalore. You will know at once from the papers when
I have gone to Bangalore. In any case you can’t come to the Hill
without taking Bangalore on your way.
I am aware that so many friends have prayed for my recovery.
unknown friends has been that God may, if He spares me My
counter-prayer in answer to all the prayers of known and, make me
worthy of those loving prayers.
I am making fair progress.
Yours sincerely,

K. T. P AUL , E SQ.
THOTTAM
S ALEM
From a Photostat: S.N. 14135

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

465

464. LETTER TO ASHRAM WOMEN
NANDI,

Vaishakha Vad [14, May 29, 1927] 1
SISTERS,

There has been no letter from you this week.
Have you received any letters from Mirabehn? I find from her letters
that she has been working hard among both men and women. There is
in her letters something about which I would like you to know. She
writes that the women with whom she comes into contact are all
extremely good, but at the same time terribly ignorant. They do not
know even the simplest things. If Mirabehn talks to them of the
spinning-wheel, they are surprised. They cannot of course understand
that spinning is necessary in the interests of the poor. Their idea of
religion is visiting the temple. They hardly know what ‘service’ is. It
may be that some of this is a result of Mirabehn’s lack of experience.
But we are all aware of the general ignorance of our women. It is men
who are mainly responsible for this. The only remedy lies, doesn’t it,
in their awakening. But the responsibility for bringing about that
awakening rests upon you. All of you should prepare yourselves for
the work according to your abilities.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3651

1

466

The source has Vaishakha Vad 13, which however was a Kshaya date.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

465.LETTER TO JUGALKISHORE
May 29, 1927
I hope you will get from this work all the intellectual and
spiritual nourishment you need. I have no doubt that once you have
mastered the elements of this science you will get thoroughly
interested in it. Learning the elements of anything is always difficult
and irksome. It is so with the delightful art of music too. We all know
about mathematics. The same is the case of this grand and noble
science of the charkha. I call it grand because the more closely we
study it the more we discover in it. And we need as much skill to attain
proficiency in it as in any other major craft. I call this noble because it
touches millions of people. I know of no other science save
agriculture which has such universal applica-tion. Therefore I wish
your devotion to this task is strengthened.
I have understood your nature. You keep away from a thing so
long as your head and heart do not accept it fully and this is quite
right. Write to me about your experiences.
[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

467

466. LETTER TO RANI VIDYAVATI
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakh Krishna 14 [May 29, 1927] 1
DEAR SISTER,

I have your letter. I was very happy. The receipt for the money
has been sent from the Ashram. The solution to your difficulties with
regard to the spinning-wheel has also been suggested. If even then the
spinning-wheel cannot be worked write again to the Ashram and also
to me.
It was a meritorious act on your part to have collected funds for
cow-protection. I hope that all women will give attention to this work.
Yours sincerely,

MOHANDAS GANDHI
From the Hindi original: Rani Vidyavati Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi National
Museum and Library

467. LETTER TO GANGA DEVI
NANDI DURG,

Vaishakh Vad 14 [May 29, 1927]
DEAR SISTER GANGA DEVI,

I have received your letter. It makes me anxious that you are
still so weak. If you feel hungry, you should increase the quantity of
milk. We get good milk there. Hence it will be all right to take it even
unboiled. Along with milk, I also take the juice of ten neem leaves. It
does not spoil the taste of milk. Try it for a couple of days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Benarsidas Chaturvedi Papers. Courtesy: National
Archives of India

1

468

The year has been inferred from Gandhiji’s stay at Nandi Durg.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

468. LETTER TO IMPERIAL INDIAN CITIZENSHIP
ASSOCIATION
NANDI HILLS,

May 31, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I wish your meeting every success. The Rt. Hon’ble Srinivasa
Sastri embarks upon his arduous mission under the best of auspices.
He takes with him the goodwill of all India, and both the Europeans
and our countrymen in South Africa are looking forward to his
advent. I know that if any man can possibly produce harmony
between the Europeans and the Indian settlers, it is certainly Sjt.
Srinivasa Sastri. May God give him all the wisdom and all the strength
he will need in South Africa.
Yours sincerely,

THE S ECRETARY
THE IMPERIAL INDIAN C ITIZENSHIP ASSOCIATION
P ETIT BUILDING
359, H ORNBY R OAD
BOMBAY
From a photostat: S.N. 12355

469. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
NANDI HILLS,

May 31, 1927
DEAR SATIS BABU,

I have your letter. I have said my say. I understand your
reasoning and value your determination. However, I send you the
book on Food and Health. As a chemist you will understand it better
than I can. Personally, I challenge many of the authors’ conclusions.
But my challenge is based upon prejudice. I attack their data on
insufficiency of evidence; but I have no data myself to support my
challenge. I know the healthier condition of widows.
So far as Nikhil is concerned, he need never go to Calcutta. If
Hemaprabha Devi can be happy at the Ashram, she can live with
Nikhil there and husband his strength. Or, she can stay in Patna, and
she can be in Wardha also with quarters all to herself.
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

469

I must finish Madras and would really like to go through the
other provinces also if I can do them gently and in a leisurely fashion
leaving ample margin for rest and having no more than one meeting
per day or even per two days. Not to do Madras, if I can at all manage
it, would be criminal as there is already nearly three lakhs of rupees
collected and locked up and people will not part with it unless I
present myself to receive it. I can therefore combine rest and work. It
becomes fairly cool in the Madras Presidency in the month of July.
The whole of June will be spent in resting. The Mysore tour will be
easy, because Mysore is on a higher level. It is a plateau of 3,000 feet
above the sea level and the climate at this time of the year is
exceptionally mild. Then there are other parts of the Madras
Presidency too which are quite cool. And Karnatak is perfect after
June. You need have therefore no worry whatsoever, and, of course, I
shall be taking soundings as the tour progresses. What is more, the
ever kind and the ever vigilant Nature will give warning betimes of
any danger that may be lurking. And then, in spite of all the
extraordinary precautions, she will one day send her messenger who
like a thief in the night will steal in some day and unperceived by
anybody administer the dose which will send me to long sleep.
Yours,

BAPU
S ATIS C HANDRA DAS GUPTA
HOME VILLA
GIRIDIH
(BIHAR )
From a photostat: G.N. 1572

470. LETTER TO C. VIJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
NANDI HILLS,

May 31, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. Either Jamnalalji committed a blunder or the
interviewer. There is absolutely no chance even if I become obdurate
of my being able to resume my tour in the middle of June. Let alone
the doctors, I have myself no such confidence. Nandi has done me
good. But there is much leeway yet to be made up. I get easily tired
and I cannot move about with ease. A month more is the very least I
470

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

shall require. What I feel is that I shall not be able to venture out much
before the third week of July.
Rajagopalachari is not just now here. He has gone to Bangalore
to find and prepare quarters for me there as the weather here is now
becoming too bracing for me. He is the jailor in charge and it is he
who has to dispose of me finally, so far as this Presidency is
concerned. But in so far as I have any control over my rnovements, I
would certainly love to be your guest if Salem is on the list at all. And,
if it is not on the list, you can easily have it on the list by collecting a
fat purse for the dumb millions from among your innumerable
friends in Salem.
I never know that the European Association at Calcutta had
passed such an original resolution as you have described.
Yes, I do feel, without being able to assign any justification for
the feeling, that behind all the seeming anarchy, order is being
evolved and that we shall not for ever remain a damned country.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. C. V IJAYARAGHAVACHARIAR
F AIRYFALLS VIEW
KODAIKANAL OBSERVATORY P. O.
KODAIKANAL HILLS
From a photostat: S.N. 12586

471. LETTER TO KHANCHAND AIDAS R. KOBE
NANDI HILLS,

May 31, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of the 15th April last redirected to me for
which I thank you and the donors. You have not mentioned any
particular cause to which the collection should he devoted. Unless,
therefore, I hear from you to the contrary, it will be used for khadi,
untouchability or cow-protection work whichever may be most in
need according to the judgement of the Managing Board of the
Satyagraha Ashram. Please let me have a line in reply.
Yours sincerely,

SJT. KHANCHAND AIDAS R. KOBE
From a microfilm; S.N. 14139

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

471

472. LETTER TO TARUN CHANDRA SINHA
NANDI HILLS (MYSORE S TATE ),

May 31, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. At the present moment I can only ask you to
read the reprint of the articles I wrote in Young India. The reprint is
called Self-restraint v. Self-indulgence. It can be had at the Young
India office, Ahmedabad. And if you propose to get the book and
read it, you may correspond with me after you have read it and tell me
whether you have found any help. Meanwhile I can only pray that
God may give you the right guidance and strength of mind to do the
right thing.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. T ARUN C HANDRA SINHA
S HUSUNG P.O.
(MYMENSING DISTRICT)
BIHAR
From a photostat: S.N. 14136

473. LETTER TO BASANTA KUMAR RAHA
NANDI HILLS,

May 31, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter. As I do not know whether the English letter is
written by you or for you, I shall have a translation of this letter
enclosed with this.
It is not because I do not want to comply with your proposal but
because I have no fitness for becoming anybody’s guru, being myself
in search of one. After all a person who sets out to become anybody’s
guru, if he is a sincere man, must have confidence in himself. The
relation of a teacher and disciple is not a mechanical one but it is
organic. The only suggestion, therefore, that I can make to you is that
if you cannot be satisfied with personal effort and struggle, you can
have the guru of your imagination; but then it won’t be my conscious
self; for I should be utterly incapable of giving you unerring guidance which a true guru is supposed to give and you may draw what
472

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

comfort it is possible for you to do from the imaginary picture. I am
sorry that I can give you no other or further comfort. The best thing
one can do however is to kneel down to God above and ask Him to
give the required guidance. He is the only source of light and of
peace.
Yours sincerely,

BABU BASANTA KUMAR R AHA
BARNES JUNCTION
DISTRICT JALPAIGURI (BENGAL )
From a photostat: S.N. 14137

474 A LETTER
NANDI HILLS,

May 31, 1927
DEAR SIR,

I have your letter of the 21st instant. I am afraid, your notions
of business and mine seem to be so diametrically opposite, that it is
not possible at the present moment to find a meeting ground, and
after all, our depots, it seems to me, cannot be of any service to you.
Yours faithfully,

M. K. GANDHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 14138

475. LETTER TO JAIRAMDAS DAULATRAM
NANDI HILLS,

May 31, 1927
MY DEAR JAIRAMDAS,

I have your letter. I understand your difficulties and your
struggles as I have always done and have therefore sympathized with
you even whilst I have been powerless to give you any help or
guidance. Personally, as I have implied in my letter to the President, I
have not much faith in patched-up compromises brought about by
mutual fear. And then, the contracts made by us, polished patriots,
have no effect upon the masses, who either act under the impulse of
the moment or under the guidance of mischief-makers. We, the
so-called representatives of the people, build airy houses of our own
imagination. But I suppose the imaginary is real to the one who sees it
as such, and what is real is imaginary to him. A shadow is the real dog
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

473

to the one who only sees his own self through the clear water and
bleeds himself to death by straining every nerve in barking at his own
shadow.
When you are sufficiently sick of the business and tired, do
come and pass a few days with me. I descend from this hill in the
course of the week and shall be in Bangalore at least for one month.
Yours sincerely,

S JT. J AIRAMDAS DAULATRAM , M.L.C.
HYDERABAD (SIND )
From a photostat: S.N. 14140

476. LETTER TO TULSI MAHER
[End of May 1927] 1
CHI. TUSI MAHER,

I have your letter. I am sorry to read of your illness. You need
not have been over-enthusiastic. All that we do must be done with a
detached mind. And nothing done in this way will be beyond our
capacity and therefore affect our health. You should spare no pains so
long as you are not attached to results. To exert oneself beyond that is
to ruin one’s health and undo the work done. That was the cause of
my breakdown. I did not observe even a nominal limit to my capacity
during and after my tour of Maharashtra. Now I am paying the
penalty ten times over. Had I added even of a quarter of the last two
months (spent in rest] to the Maharashtra tour, the programme would
have been completed smoothly and possibly I would have been spared
this illness. For me the shore is in sight but you have just set out on
your voyage. Taking a lesson from my case you should calm down
and do quietly whatever you can. Milk and ghee may be taken
without any qualms if considered necessary for recouping your
strength. Haven’t I said that a friend who gives up milk and ghee is
himself responsible for the risk incurred and that if he cannot sustain
his body with this abstinence he must forthwith return to the milk and
ghee diet.
1

From the reference to Gandhiji’s tour of Maharashtra and to the passage of
“two months” since his “breakdown”

474

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I expect to have another letter from you before you reply to
this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 6531

477. LETTER T0 V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
NANDI HILLS,

June 1, 1927
DEAR BROTHER,

In a few days’ time you will be on the waters and at the end of
the month you will be in South Africa. My thoughts and my prayers
will be with you throughout your stay in that subcontinent. This
appointment is to me a unique event. I must not let myself say one
word more. May God keep you and bless you.
Do let me have a line whenever you can. I hope you got the
important letter1 I addressed you at Madras just after we last met.
Yours sincerely,

THE R T. H ON ’BLE V. S. S RINIVASA S ASTRI
C ARE OF S ERVANTS OF INDIA S OCIETY
S ANDHURST R OAD , G IRGAUM
BOMBAY
From a photostat: S.N. 12356

478. LETTER TO H. HARCOURT
NANDI HILLS,

June 1, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of 1st May last for which I thank you. I have
no recollection of the terms of the challenge I issued or your reply to
the challenge.2 And it would be very difficult for me now, especially
when I am convalescing far away from the Ashram, to refresh my
memory as to the terms of the challenge by referring to the papers of
1921-22.
1

Vide “Letter to V. S. Srinivasa Sastri”, 15-5-1927.
In his letter, Harcourt had said that he had replied in a note to a challenge
addressed to Government by Gandhiji.
2

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

475

I have enquired about your pamphlet 1. I now understand that
the pamphlet was seen by one of my companions; but, as it was seen a
long time after its receipt by him and as I was in the midst of my work
which hardly left me time to see any pamphlet, he did not bring it to
my notice. I am sorry that it remained without acknowledgement. I
have now sent for it. I have leisure enough during my convalescence
to look at your pamphlet; and if I trace it, I shall certainly read it and
let you have my views upon it.
I am sorry that you had to remain in suspense for such a long
time with reference to the two matters about which you had a right to
expect from me at least an acknowledgement and it is contrary to my
habit to leave such things unacknowledged.
Yours sincerely,

H. H ARCOURT, E SQ.
119, G IPSY HILL
LONDON S.E. 19
From a photostat: S.N. 12494

479. LETTER TO J. P. BHANSALI
June 1, 1927
How can I put obstacles in your way or in the way of anyone
else who, prompted by a religious motive, undertakes a religious
effort. But I wish to place a suggestion before you. Fasting concerns
the body. Hence, though it has an important place in one’s spiritual
develop-ment, relatively it is a small thing. It is a means and serves a
useful purpose only when the mind is behind it. I know that your
mind cannot but be behind your fast, otherwise you could not have
fasted for so many days. Nevertheless please think more deeply over
the matter and reconsider it. Do you fast for some sort of self-purification? Do you weigh afterwards the benefits of your fasts? Or are
you indifferent towards them? If you are, how do you justify your
fasts as spontaneous acts? The desire for fruit is implicit in describing
a fast as meant for self-purification. This is not an unworthy desire; it
is a worthy one. In interpreting what is meant by the desire for fruit,
one must use discrimination. One’s duty is to be a mumukshu. A
mumukshu is one who aspires after moksha. The true meaning of
1

Sidelights on the Crisis in India by H. Harcourt and Chhotu Ram; Harcourt
was a member of the Indian Civil Service and Deputy Commissioner of Gurdaspur and
Chhotu Ram was Minister for Agriculture in the Punjab Government.

476

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

renunciation of the desire for fruit is that one who renounces it knows
that the fruit does follow. He does not mind if he himself does not
enjoy that fruit. Absence of the desire for fruit makes a man
courageous and helps to maintain the purity of the means.
But I have written more than I should. My aim was merely to
caution you. That was my duty. But do as your inner voice tells you.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

480. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
NANDI DURG,

Jyaishtha Shukla 2 [June 1, 1927] 1
BHAI GHANSHYAMDASJI,

Your letter to hand. While I am dictating this letter Mahadev
reminds me that you had sent word through Jamnalalji that I should
write to you in English. But I propose to write nothing that needs be
conveyed to anyone. I am, therefore, having this letter written in
Hindi.
I have the letter you wrote from the steamer. I have already
written two letters to your Geneva address. They must have reached
you. I am steadily improving. I write regularly to pujya Malaviyaji.
No sooner had I written to him this week than a lengthy telegram
arrived from him, telling me that his health was now better but
weakness persisted. He is at present in Bombay. It won’t be right to
say I do not take care of my health. I do take all the precautions that I
think are necessary to preserve my health. Pujya Malaviyaji does not
do it as I have complained on many occasions and he took no rest
even after solemnly promising to do so. He has great faith in the
treatment of vaidyas and believes that he keeps and can keep well by
taking their pills and powders. And so strong is his self-confidence
that in spite of his weakness and ill health he is determined to live at
least up to seventy-five. May God carry him through his resolve. Who
can try to persuade him? I have written to him in a lighter vein but
with as much severity as can be combined with courtesy. The truth is
that man’s wisdom is determined by his past karma. In such matters
there is very little scope for human effort. It is our duty to try and we
1

Year inferred from the contents

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

477

ought to do it but there comes in the life of every man a time when all
effort appears futile and luckily God gives us no fore-knowledge of
the end so as to avoid the frustration. Why then worry over the
inevitable? The affairs of the nation depend neither upon Malaviyaji
nor upon Lalaji 1 nor upon me. All are but instruments; moreover I
think a good man’s efforts bear fruit only after his death. It is not
correct as Shakespeare says, “the evil that men do lives after them, the
good is oft interred with their bones”. Evil does not endure. Rama is
still in our midst and we cherish his memory. Ravana and his
wickedness are no more. Not even the wicked utter his name. Who
knows what Rama was in his own age? The poet certainly says that in
his own lifetime even Rama did not escape recriminations. But now all
his imperfections have, with his body, turned to ashes and we worship
him as an incarnation of God. And the Kingdom of Rama is much
wider now than it ever was while he lived in the body. When I write
this I don’t mean to philosophize or persuade you to suppress your
feelings. But I emphasize that we should never grieve over the death
of one whom we regard as a saint. And we must have the firm belief
that a saint’s deeds begin to work or, say, truly bear fruit only after his
death. The achievements which were regarded as great in his own time
are only infinitesimal compared to the influence they will have in
times to come. Yet it is certainly our duty to emulate to the best of our
ability the good deeds of those whom we regard as saints of our age.
Regarding your health I would suggest if you have no faith in
allopathy, and you need not have it, that you should visit the
institutions of Louis Kuhne and Just when you go to Germany. Their
treatment with open air and water has benefited hundreds of people.
Contact the Vegetarian Society both at London and Manchester.
There are always some nice, serious-minded people to be found there
who will be courteous and considerate. Of course, you will come
across some faddists and fanatics too. You said milk was not available
on the steamer. Next time you should carry Horlick’s Malted Milk. It
is pure milk-powder. The chemists say that this dehydrated powder
contains all that milk does. You can try it.
Yours,

MOHANDAS
From the Hindi original: C.W. 6148. Courtesy. G. D. Birla

1

478

Lala Lajpat Rai
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

481. A LETTER
[After June 1, 1927] 1
This is a simple example of how to see action in non-action.
With a spinning-wheel or the Gita or the Ramayana in one’s hand
one can never say that one has no work to do. Till we are so content in
our minds that we feel thus, we are bound to be restless for one reason
or another. You ought to get over such restlessness; I have always
expected that of you. You should finish with lightning speed whatever
task falls to you in the natural course of events.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

482. LETTER TO MANILAL NATHUBHAI DOSHI
[After Jane 1, 1927] 2
I got your letter. Brahmacharya is to be observed in three
ways— in mind, in speech and in body. As long as the mind feels the
slightest evil desire, there is always a danger of the desire for
indulgence being aroused. The evil desires of the mind are not
controlled in a moment; their control, being the aim of man’s highest
effort, takes ages to attain. It is logical to believe that a person who
conquers the evil desires in him in this life has succeeded in doing so
by reason of the efforts in many lives rather than merely through his
efforts in this life. If in our conscious moments the body is about to
violate brahmacharya, it is our duty at that time to commit suicide
and destroy the body. Hence one cannot be too vigilant towards one’s
body; anyone who cannot be so vigilant has yet to learn the first
lesson of brahmacharya. Brahmacharya in speech is practically
included in bodily brahmacharya, for, though it is the mind that
inspires speech, in itself speech is a bodily function. There remains the
mind. As one acquires greater control over the mind, one finds it easy
to keep the body under control without having to struggle to do so,
but until the mind is completely subjugated, there is a chance of
involuntary emission. We should not be frightened at such emission. It
is the mind we should fear. Involuntary emission is Nature’s warning
1
2

In the source these two letters follow the entries for June 1, 1927
ibid.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

479

to us that the mind has not been subjugated. We see that even lustful
men remain complacent because they do not have involuntary
emissions. They feel pleased with themselves because of their freedom
from such emissions. But, truly speaking, their being self-satisfied in
this manner is their fall. In America they employ means which prevent
involuntary emissions while the mind remains filled with lustful
thoughts. But to regard such a man as a brahmachari amounts to
murdering the language. Hence, though safeguarding of the vital fluid
is the external form of brahmacharya, one cannot definitely say that
its preservation is necessarily a manifestation of brahmacharya.
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that it is an essential aspect of complete
brahmacharya. My point in writing this is that, if there is involuntary
emission despite our continuous and sincere struggling to avoid it,
despite our vigilance and after we have neglected to adopt no measure
which can possibly help us to avoid it, we need not get frightened or
lose heart and feel that we have committed a great sin; rather we
should look upon it as kind Nature’s warning and look deeper into
ourselves. We should find out where evil desires are lurking in the
mind and strive harder still to banish them. The effort is its own
reward. If we have been cheating ourselves and mentally indulging
our secret desires, we should make sure that we run away from those
activities or associations which cause our downfall or make us weak. It
should not matter if, in doing so, one ruins one’s business or loses
one’s wealth and passes for a fool among the people.
It is necessary to be almost completely free from sensuous
desires in order to be blessed by the vision of God; the desires that still
remain will be destroyed only by that vision. There is no sure means
which can help us to have this vision. No one else can bring us to it.
Truly speaking, the Shastras and those learned in them can only
recount their experiences, and, if we lack faith, their experience may
awaken faith in us; but no one else can make the necessary effort on
our behalf. I can, therefore, tell you only this: do not give up your
struggle for a single moment. To get a vision of God is the highest
aim of human effort. Add up, therefore, all the struggles that human
beings are ready to undertake to get certain things in this world and
add up all those efforts; it is necessary, in order to get a vision of God,
to make an effort a myriad times more difficult than the sum of all
those struggles of human beings in this world. If one does not gain
that vision, even after such an effort, one will be free to raise questions; there will be some justification for lack of faith then. But, till
480

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

then, we must not give up our faith and our struggle.
The example of Mansukhlal which you have cited is inappropriate. He possessed much knowledge of the Shastras, and he
struggled [for self-control] but he had not become free from desire,
neither did he make such a claim. Hence the fact that he felt a desire
for a thing like a water-melon during his last hours is not enough
reason to fill us with despair or to justify our disparaging him. We
should not deceive ourselves and believe, living in these evil times and
in this world full of difficulties, that we can easily become free from
desires, nor should we entertain such expectations even of a person
whom we believe to be good lest we get a shock or doubt his goodness
when we have a contrary experience of him. We should remember that
the soul’s power is unlimited. He whose desires have totally perished
is practically fit to be God. Let us not believe that good men with
whom we come in contact have gained such fitness and thereby
reduce God’s measuring rod to the littleness of our finger.
If we see any person standing even on the first notch on that
yardstick, we should feel happy and hope that, if one person can
become fit enough to stand on the first notch, all of us can, if we but
try, acquire the strength to stand on the second notch, and strive on in
that hope.
[From Gujarati]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

483. HOW TO PROTECT THE COW
I gladly publish these notes1 from Sjt. C. V. Vaidya. Those, who
believe in the methods advocated in these columns for cow-protection,
will be glad to find, that a scholar of Sjt. C. V. Vaidya’s repute is in
substantial agreement with those methods. The distinction that the
learned writer draws between pinjrapole and goshala need not cause
any anxiety or difficulty. My own opinion is, that either may be also
the other, so long as separate accounts are kept and separate methods
of feeding and housing the disabled and the working animals are
adopted. Legislation and the State aid advocated by Sjt. Vaidya need
not at present distract our attention. For there is immense scope for
private effort, building public opinion in favour of the proposed
1

Not reproduced here

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

481

methods and showing their workability in practice. We are so far
behind, indeed, that we have not even enough trained workers to
conduct dairies and tanneries along the lines suggested by Sjt. Vaidya.
There are at least 1,500 pinjrapoles and goshalas according to the
figures in my possession, which can, without much further donation,
but by efficient management, test the usefulness of the methods. Their
adoption will simply revolutionize the management of these
institutions and put life into these, today for the most part, lifeless
bodies. These pinjrapoles and goshalas, as they are at present being
conducted, are more a salve to our conscience than a protection to the
cow. The learned writer’s categorical statement, that during the Vedic
and the Brahmana period cow-slaughter was countenanced and beef
was eaten, will be hotly contested by Pandit Satavalekar, who has been
a close student of Vedic lore for the past 35 years, and by Acharya
Ramadeva who claims to be a historian and to have critically studied
the ancient history of Bharatavarsha. But with the historical portion
practical men and women will not concern themselves. They will
perhaps be content like me to hope that our ancestors in the Vedic
times knew better than to seek to gain merit by sacrificing innocent
animals or to satisfy their palate by eating beef.
Young India, 2-6-1927

484. CHOICE BEFORE US
A correspondent sends me a cutting from the Press giving most
gruesome facts about the growing infantile crimes and illicit gratification among girls in the New World.
A boy of four years is reported to have shot his mother, because
she forbade him to play with matches. When the police confronted
him, he was in no way taken aback. He threatened “to shoot them
too”, and when questioned by the Coroner, he grew so impatient with
him that he picked up a knife from among the exhibits lying in front
of him and rushed to strike him. It is said, that hardly a day passes in
America without some crime being committed by a boy or a girl, and
in most American colleges there are said to be suicide clubs or crime
societies, and the more horrible part of the account shows that many
girls, even of exclusive colleges, have become so lawless as to run
away in pursuit of illicit adventures.
It is difficult, in an age in which newspapers, in order to provide
482

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

sensational food for their readers, invent stories when they have no
facts to weave narratives from, to believe without reservation reports
such as I have condensed. But whilst one may make ample allowance
for exaggeration, there is no doubt that infantile crime and lawlessness
among boys and girls are sufficiently extensive in the New World to
make us beware of a civilization which must be held responsible for
these crimes and lawlessness. That life in the West goes on—and it
may be said progressively after a fashion—in spite of these infantile
crimes, may be granted. And it may also be granted that the wise
people of the West are not only not unaware of the evil, but that they
are manfully struggling to overtake it. Nevertheless we have to decide
whether we shall indiscriminately copy this civilization. We may well
pause in the face of the awful revelations that come to us from the
West from time to time, and ask ourselves, whether after all it is not
better to hold by our own civilization and seek, in the light of the
comparative knowledge that is available to us, to reform it by
removing its known excrescences. For, there is no doubt, that if the
West has its terrific problem arising out of its own civilization, we have
no less grave problems of our own to deal with.
It is perhaps unnecessary, if not useless, in this connection to
weigh the merits of the two civilizations. It is likely that the West has
evolved a civilization suited to its climate and surroundings, and
similarly, we have a civilization suited to our conditions, and both are
good in their own respective spheres. This may be safely said that the
crimes and the lawlessness described by me are almost impossible with
us, and I hold that this is due to our pacific training and the
restraining influence in the midst of which we are brought up.
Cowardliness which often springs from pacific training, and
obsequiousness which comes from the restraint that is handed down
from generation to generation, have somehow to be avoided, if the
ancient civilization is not to perish before the mad modern rush. The
distinguishing characteristic of modern civilization is an indefinite
multiplicity of human wants. The characteristic of ancient civilization
is an imperative restriction upon and a strict regulating of those wants.
The modern or Western insatiableness arises really from want of a
living faith in a future state and therefore also in Divinity. The
restraint of ancient or Eastern civilization arises from a belief, often in
spite of ourselves, in a future state and the existence of a Divine
Power. The record condensed above is a warning if we will take it,
against a blind imitation of the West, which one sees so often in the
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

483

city life of India and especially among the educated classes. Some of
the immediate and brilliant results of modern inventions are too
maddening to resist. But I have no manner of doubt that the victory of
man lies in that resistance. We are in danger of bartering away the
permanent good for a momentary pleasure.
Young India, 2-6-1927

485. THE WHEEL OF LIFE AND THE VEDAS
Pandit Satavalekar of Aundh wrote in 1922 a booklet in Hindi
called
i.e., Charkha in the Vedas, and favoured me with a
copy whilst I was resting in the Yeravda jail. I glanced then through its
pages and with interest, but asked myself what good would it be to us
in this age of so-called advancement to know that the charkha was to
be found in the Vedas. Everybody knows that our remote ancestors
spun and wove in their cottages even as they did so many other things.
But we no longer do them. So I said to myself. The booklet, I hastily
concluded, was not of much practical value and I laid it aside. On the
sick-bed I have again an opportunity of turning, so far as my strength
permits, to quiet studies. Another book of Pandit Satavalekar (of
which more hereafter) has attracted me to his writings, and he has now
favoured me with another copy of the booklet in question. I observe
that it has undergone a second edition. I have read it this time more
carefully, and I find that the mantras cited by the author from the
Vedas demonstrate not merely the fact that our ancestors in those
times were spinning and weaving, but they present, perhaps, a, for us,
novel way of looking at the wheel. Here is what may be called the key
mantra for spinners and weavers from Rig-Veda (X. 53-6) quoted by
the author:

I give a free rendering as follows:
Having spun the thread and given it a shining colour,
weave it without knots, and so guard the pathways which the
enlightened have chalked out, and thinking well, lead posterity
unto the divine light, or (according to the author’s rendering)
bring forth divine progeny. This truly is the work of poets.
If the translation is at all correct—and the author has not merely
given his own rendering but has reproduced Griffith’s translation also
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

485

in his booklet—the mantra proves not merely the existence of
spinning and weaving in the Vedic times, but that it was the calling of
the noblest men and women as well of the humblest. It was one of the
pathways which wisdom hath prepared and to guard which was the
work of poets. Little did I know, when I humbly presented the
charkha to our Poet 1 as a sacrificial rite, that I had behind me the
authority of what is understood to be the oldest Veda. I commend the
mantra to all those who are engaged in reviving this ancient and
sacred industry and art. Let them thoughtfully recite this mantra
whilst doing their sacrificial spinning. Let them treasure it in their
hearts and keep their faith unshaken even in the face of disappointments and reverses in their forward march.
I cannot resist quoting another beautiful mantra from the
booklet:

This is again from the Rig-Veda (X. 130-1). It means:
Hundred and one artists are working at the sacrifice which
through the myriad threads overspreads the earth. Here are the
elderly guardians. They watch the processes saying,“Weave on
here, do this right there.”
Thus we see that spinning and weaving was regarded as a
sacrifice even in those ancient days and commanded the protecting
care of the elders. The author shows abundant evidence that both
spinning and weaving were done by men as well as women. In fact the
industry was as universal as farming. He shows too that the sartorial art
was well advanced in those times. There were different dresses prescribed for different occasions as also for different states. If the farmer
had his langoti2, royalty had its robe. There is mention of colours,
fringes and gold borders. The author has also shown that some of the
most beautiful metaphors have been taken from the language of
spinners and weavers.
I must resist the temptation to quote more extracts from this
thoughtfully written booklet. There is a mantra which proves that the
1
2

486

Rabindranath Tagore
Loin-cloth
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

soldiers of those days were not above doing these processes; that the
bridegroom’s garment was always made by the bride as is still the
custom in Assam.
There is one thing, however, the author leaves to other research
scholars in the Vedic lore to discover. So far as he has been able to
study the Vedas, he has not found a single equivalent for cotton as he
has for wool and silk. He is, therefore, unable to say whether in those
days our ancestors had only woollen and silken garments or whether
they had already discovered the cotton fibres.
Young India, 2-6-1927

486. LETTER TO HELENE HAUSSDING
NANDI HILLS,

June 2, 1927
I have your sweet little note. But it is disturbing to think that you
are not yet well. If your recovery is dependent upon mine, well then
you must already have recovered, because you had two letters from
me telling you that I was on the road to recovery. I hope you got
those two letters. But though I am on the road to recovery, I have to
take care of myself and take plenty of rest. I, therefore, do most of my
correspondence lying down and through dictation. Hence this
typewritten letter.
You know my theory of the disease, don’t you? I regard it as a
result of some conscious or unconscious sin as I call or breaches of
Nature’s laws. When you lose mental equanimity, be it ever so little, it
sets up terrible agitations in the body, and these latter produce visible
effects upon it. I know that I am not free from these affections or
perturbations as I would call them and I had the collapse. I do not
flatter myself with such unctuous pleas as overwork, terrific strain, etc.,
in order to drown my conscience. On the contrary, I know that
overwork and terrific strain are just as apprehensible, even though
they may be in a good cause, as a drinking-bout or visiting cinemas.
The results of both are the same. And, if I have attained equanimity, I
should unerringly know when to work, when not to work and should
be able to have the same control over the mind as I should have over
the body. But I confess I have not. The mind continuously gives me
[the] slip and outruns me. What wonder then that I am still
convalescing? But all this confession is merely a preface to tell you
486

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

that you must not hug your disease to yourself and from your
philosophic height blame the doctor, the weather, the food and
everything and everybody else but yourself. Let us call a spade a
spade.
Yours,

MISS HELENE HAUSSDING
GERMANY
From a photostat: S.N. 12510

487. LETTER TO M. M. GIDWANI
NANDI HILLS,

June 2, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

It was good of you to have sent your article for Young India
entitled “The Present Situation”. But I am afraid that it will not be of
much use for the readers of Young India. That it will lead popular
education is an admitted fact. But the only question is how to do it
and who shall do it. And Young India is published either to suggest
new lines of thought or to show practical methods of working out
plans and policies already accepted. I return your article lest you may
want it.
Yours sincerely,

P ROF. M. M. G IDWANI , M. A.
EDITOR ,
“SINDHUDESH”
KARACHI
From a microfilm: S.N. 14142

488. LETTER TO GOSIBEHN
NANDI HILLS,

June 2, 1927
I am glad I have at least succeeded in drawing you. I have ward
to your letter especially after Perin had prepared me for It. I am glad
also of the confession. But a good confession results in a change of
ways. But I see you have not yet become a Gujarati scholar, nor
evidently did those excellent copy-books sent by grandfather produce
any impression upon you. But here I cannot judge. If I did, it would
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

487

be like pot calling the kettle black. In spite of schoolmasters having
put copy-books before me, I write a hand much worse than yours.
I thought that Nargis had sent A.E.’s book The Interpreters. It
came before your letter. I think that very book was sent to me through
Jaijee when I was in Yeravda. But alas! I was discharged before I could
read the book through. There is not much danger of a sudden
discharge now. I shall therefore read it and tell you what I think of it.
We remove to Bangalore on Sunday. You must all come there.
There is going to be a Khadi Exhibition in July. I am writting to
Mithubehn about it, and if you could come for that exhibition, you
could all become stall holders and take the Bangalore public by
storm.
I am gaining strength slowly.
Yours,

S HRIMATI GOSIBEHN
OMRA HALL , P ANCHGANI

From a photostat: S.N. 14143

489. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
NANDI HILLS,

June 3, 1927
CHI. MIRA,

I have your letter. It fills me with both sorrow and joy; sorrow
because for the time being at any rate that Ashram has fallen in my
estimation, and joy because you are so gentle and yet so brave. You
become a shield both for yourself and Gangu. That you committed
the initial mistake of accepting the invitation to witness the bhang
preparation dwindles into insignificance in the face of your
subsequent firmness combined with gentleness. Your acceptance of
the invitation was as good or as bad as acceptance of an invitation to
watch the manufacture of brandy in a brewery. But that acceptance
itself was due to your great anxiety to please Maharajji and not out of
any unpardonable or improper curiosity. On reading your letter, my
first thought was to wire to you for you, Valunjker and Gangu to leave
the Ashram at once. I then said to myself that that would be wrong
especially when you had proved your presence of mind and bravery
in the face of a wretched situation. I therefore decided to write to you
and give you my reflections and then let you act as you thought
proper in the circumstances.
488

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I regard the scene you have described as highly improper, even
immoral, on the part of those who sought to tempt you and almost
force the vile stuff down your throat and poor Gangu’s, and then as
you turned your backs upon them, to sprinkle the dirty water was
more like a scene in a tavern than in a brahmacharya Ashram, where
service of God and man is supposed to be the goal and where
brahmacharya is strictly enjoined. Your fast was good for your
purification. It has washed you clean of the initial mistake, and if they
will take it, it is a gentle warning to the managers of the Ashram. It
seems to me, however, that you should follow up the action by having
a firm conversation with the Rao Saheb and other inmates, and, if you
wish it, with the Maharajji himself. Whereas in a previous letter1 I told
you that it was no business of yours to rid the Ashram of the bhang
habit, now in view of the developments described by you, it becomes
your duty either to end the bhang or to end your presence there. I
regard it to be next to impossible, both for men and women, to remain
without sensual agitations whilst they are under the influence of bhang
even though they may be able to exercise outward bodily control,
though from my own experience of it, it seems to me that when I was
under the influence of bhang any man or woman could have played
fast or loose with me. And now that your eyes have been opened, it
would be improper to lend any countenance to that Ashram unless
they are sincerely ready to reform their ways. You may not co-operate
with the Ashram even to gain a kingdom or even if it was the only
place where you could finish your Hindi course. You may tell them
that you are not there to impose your views, but as a friend you were
bound to draw their attention to the evil which had forced itself upon
your attention, and that unless the evil was eradicated—and that too
not for your sake but out of conviction—you could not remain there
to receive personal courtesies and personal favours in the shape of
Hindi teaching. If therefore they could not see eye to eye with you
about the evil of bhang, you would still be friends with them but you
couldn’t possibly remain in the Ashram, nor Valunjker and Gangu
who are also under the same discipline as you. You may read this
letter to whomsoever you like. Discuss first with Valunjker—for, he is
a wise man—the propriety of the step I have suggested, see what he
has to say, see also what Gangu has to say. She is like a simple
glorious child. But wisdom often comes out of the mouths of babes
1

Vide “Letter to Mirabehn”, 28-5-1927.

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

489

and her intuition may be better than our reasoned judgement. And
then if you feel like referring to me, do so by all means. If you wish
to consult Jamnalalji, you may write to him also. I am sending him
your letter and a copy of this so that you don’t have to say much to
him. Do nothing in a hurry, nothing in a huff, certainly nothing in
anger; but take whatever step you wish after humble prayer and with
the greatest deliberation.
I am perfectly at ease having dictated this letter. Such experiences,
when they come to us unsought, are precious trials that God sends to
those who would listen to the “still small voice” within. If I have read
more into your letter than you meant and have been guilty of any
injustice to the people at the Ashram, you will not
With love,
Yours,

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 5233. Courtesy: Mirabehn

490. LETTER TO K. VYASA RAO
NANDI HILLS,

June 3, 1927
DEAR FRIEND,

I have carefully gone through your pamphlet Foundations of
Swaraj, as also your manifesto. About the manifesto, I cannot say
anything because I do not know the facts. About the pamphlet, I am
sorry to say it was a deep disappointment to me. You have lost
yourself in the exuberance of your own language. You have not taken
the trouble of studying a movement, not by any means insignificant
so far at least as its extent is concerned, and have set about
demolishing a picture of your own imagination. You have not cared
to understand the implications of soul-power or the implications of
the spinning-wheel. The other chapters betray a most superficial study
of questions handled by you. I understood from you that you had 25
years’ experience of public service at your back. It is a matter of deep
sorrow to me that so many years of study should have brought forth
such little fruit. Please do not be flattered by the testimonials that you
have received about your other book from distinguished newspapers.
I know nothing about the other book. But if it is based upon the same
490

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

preparation that is betrayed by the pamphlet you left with me, it could
not be up to much. A good command over a language is often a
hindrance rather than a help when that facility for expression is not
backed by deep thinking and industrious research.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S JT. K. VYASA RAO
C HENGALVARAYA MUDALI S TREET
TRIPLICANE
MADRAS
From a photostat: G.N. 84; also S.N. 14144

491. LETTER T0 RAIHANA TYABJI
HILLS,
JUNE 3, 1927
ANDI

MY DEAR RAIHANA,

What a wonderful and poetic love letter you have sent me! I
would wonder if my letter to Father crossed yours or whether this
letter of yours is prompted by the reminder sent in my letter to Father.
Not only must I not write much myself, but I must not even dictate for
any length of time. I don’t want therefore to chat with you long. But
let me hasten to tell you that if you can be happy and comfortable in
the Ashram, I would love to have you in spite of your not doing any
work with your hands. Spinning by the hand is after all a test, an
emblem, an earnest of what is within, and I know that you have all that
substance within you. What does it matter that through no present
fault of your own, you are simply physically incapable of spinning.
The work done by the spirit within is infinitely precious, more
precious than the formal spinning done by many without the heart in
it. Come therefore when you like to the Ashram as your very home
and I shall certainly take all that your voice can give me. But I should
prize your presence even if you had not that rich melodious voice.
What I prize is your goodness, which can act without speaking. It is
like the fragrance of a sweet flower. It does not need any movement
and yet the fragrance is all pervading and unmistakable, and it
survives for a while even after the flower is withdrawn. How much
longer must the fragrance of goodness last even after the body is
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

491

withdrawn? But be absolutely sure that you will like the Ashram and
that your body can sustain the Ashram life.
Do you write to Mira? If not, do please now. Her address is
Bhagavadbhakti Ashram, Rampura, Rewari (Dt. Gurgaon).
With love to all.
Yours,

BAPU
MISS R AIHANA TYABJI
S OUTH WOOD
MUSSOORIE
From a photostat: S.N. 9602

492. LETTER TO SECRETARY, A.I.S.A.
NANDI HILLS,

June 3, 1927
THE S ECRETARY
ALL-INDIA S PINNERS’ ASSOCIATION
MIRZAPUR
AHMEDABAD
DEAR SIR,

Whilst there remains any uncertainty about the legality of the
resolution about Jamnalalji being officiating Chairman of the Council,
the process I suggest in my capacity as President is that anything that
is required to be done should first receive the approval of Jamnalalji
as if he was legally the officiating Chairman and then his decision
should be submitted to me for formal and final approval. That will
save me from my having to critically examine the merits of each
matter.
With reference to the ten thousand rupees supplied to the
Maharashtra Agency in anticipation of sanction, I entirely approve.
And so do I approve the proposal to pay the Karnatak Agency the
collections already made by me at Nipani, Belgaum and elsewhere.
I think it is quite the proper thing to hold a meeting of the
Council in Bangalore at the time of the forthcoming Exhibition or
earlier, whichever date may suit you, Jamnalalji and others.
I descend to Bangalore on Sunday. I understand that there is
very ample accommodation in the State House placed at my disposal.
Yours faithfully,
From a microfilm: S.N. 19778

492

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

493. LETTER TO DR. M. S. KELKAR
NANDI HILLS,

June 3, 1927
DEAR DOCTOR,

Your letters are always interesting and instructive. Do I gather
that you would prefer my giving up wheat-meal or oatmeal, salt, soda
and vegetables altogether and confine myself to milk, water and fruit?
Am I right in thinking that you consider raw milk better than boiled
milk?
Yes, I well remember your talk about sterile eggs and their
culture. I shall enquire here myself; but if you have any literature on
the subject, I would like to study it. Without further consideration I am
prepared to say that I would put sterile eggs, as you have described
them to be, under the same category as milk. I am therefore open to
receive further instruction about them and their culture.
You must some day try to convince me about the value of
astrology; for, I do not deny the possibility of its being a true science.
But I do not regard the investigation and use of every science as
beneficial to mankind.
Yours sincerely,
From a photostat: S.N. 14145

494. LETTER TO GANGUBEHN
June 3, 1927
Brahmacharya, etc., can be practised only by an inner urge and
by cultivating spiritual energy. This energy again can only be
cultivated by constant application. There are two means of such
application. One, discriminating and meditative study of good books,
and two, efforts to practise the noble principles one has learnt.
Learning without practice goes waste and serves only to turn one’s
head. Whatever therefore one has learnt one should immediately
reduce to action. Therefore, a woman wanting to practise brahmacharya should take to non-violence, truth, non-possession, etc. She
should thus zealously guard herself against the slightest untruth,
against violence in thought, word or deed and should strive to give up
all possessions. The scriptures tell us that courage and contentment are
also to be cultivated. Courage should mean both inward and outward
courage and it should be practised as soon as its implications are
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

493

clearly understood. So is the case with contentment. We should not be
upset if someone abuses us, maligns us or calls us fools. This is a sign
of contentment. We should remain contented even if we do not get
food when hungry or we do not get clothes when we shiver. And as
long as we do not practise what we have learnt we should not take a
new lesson. We must apply ourselves to a greater understanding of
what we have learnt, and think of nothing else. This also is a part of
the dharma of brahmacharya because the latter is the high watermark
of discipline.
[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

495. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVALEKAR
June 3, 1927
I have almost finished reading the current issue of Vaidika
Dharma. I wish to make some comments about the article on
brahmacharya in the issue. You have interpreted brahmacharya only
as preservation of the vital fluid and mentioned manly pursuits like
hunting and so on in that context. Visiting foreign lands and
founding colonies have also been mentioned. In my humble view this
involves unsound logic. The first fallacy consists of narrow definition.
The brahmacharya which you have explained by first quoting a
mantra from the Atharva-Veda, viz., the gods overcame death by the
strength of brahmacharya, and by practising it man also can
overcome death, cannot be restricted to mere preservation of the vital
fluid. The other is the fallacy of too wide definition. Brahmacharya
need not be associated with acts of valour, etc. We see this in the world
today. If the mere preservation of semen is the object of
brahmacharya, it can be attained, as I have said in one of my letters,
in a few minutes by a surgical operation. This operation does not
make a man impotent; but allows him to indulge in sexual pleasures
without losing his vital fluid. Such a man does not lose by way of
manly adventures either. I am sure, however, that you will not call this
brahmacharya.
The brahmacharya which you seek is attainable only by the
subjugation of sexual and other desires. The preservation of the vital
fluid, although important, is only a bye-product. Its direct and
primary objective is nothing less than communion with the Brahman.
This is the only desirable and legitimate adventure on the path of
494

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

brahmacharya. Why should a man take to the uphill task of
conquering desires for the sake of brahmacharya, when manly
adventures like vanquishing the enemy or undertaking foreign
expeditions can be achieved by thousands of people without
practising brahmacharya? And nobody does it, as I can vouchsafe
from my fairly wide experience. Where can we find braver warriors
than the German and the English soldiers? They are regularly
provided with prostitutes. Hundreds, if not thousands, of innocent girls
are sacrificed to the sexual hunger of these soldiers. No one despises
these brave Kshatriyas who defend the country; on the other hand,
educated and civilized men and women dote on these soldiers. I am
not employing epithets like Kshatriyas, etc., on my own or to explain
my meaning. In my view they are no warriors at all. I do not consider
them defenders of the country. Dharma declines when we sing praises
of these men. But under modern civilization there is nothing but
praise for these people.
Now let us come to the Indian scene. Pathans, Sikhs and
Gorkhas are the three acknowledged martial races. There is a similar
provision of prostitutes for them as in the case of the German and
other soldiers. They have an honoured place, you know, in the
Empire. If you look at the ancient lores, adultery has been tolerated in
the case of Kshatriyas. I write all this because I wish that the people
should derive full benefit from your profound studies of the Vedas
and other ancient scriptures. This will be possible by putting the
scriptures in the crucible of modern conditions, by objective
observation and intense churning. I can write a lot on this subject, but
this should do to indicate to you the burden of my theme. Another
reason for my brevity is that I have little energy. I have great respect
for your learning and truthfulness, which has impelled me r`to write so
much.
[From Hindi]
From the manuscript of Mahadev Desai’s Diary. Courtesy: Narayan Desai

VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

495

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
EXTRACTS FROM SHAPURJI SAKLATVALA’S OPEN LETTER
DEAR COMRADE GANDHI,

We are both erratic enough to permit each other to be rude in order to freely
express oneself correctly instead of getting lost in artificiality of phraseology....
During my conversation with you at certain periods you did not seem to take a
definite attitude with regard to the value of organization of labour and peasants. You
emphatically argued that the charkha movement was making organization. I
emphatically deny it.... For centuries together, millions of men and women in India
have been boiling rice, utilizing similar quantities of rice and water and conducting
cooking operations.... All these operations surely have not produced any
organization and the work of spinning can never do so any more than the work of
cooking....
Before 1900, leaders who . . . worked to build up hopes of salvation . . . were
popular leaders as Gladstone was to the British, Bismarck to the Germans, or Parnell
to the Irish or Dadabhai or Pherozeshah and Surendranath to the Indians. By the year
1900 the masses of men got tired and sick and their hearts began to burn with fire.
The change came on very rapidly and universally and only such individuals as
expressed the burning fire of the heart and the revolt of the suffering human beings
were taken as leaders. The first task of these was to express boldly and fearlessly the
unexpressed voice of the people. The second task of these leaders was . . . to make it
absolutely impossible for the old order to continue to function. The third task was to
reconstruct and arduously and slowly to build up a new life. Ireland produced a De
Valera. He did No. I and 2 and his people are now bravely carrying on his task No. 3.
Russia has produced Lenin. He did No. 1 and 2 and though his life was short, he led his
people on the right path regarding No. 3. Turkey produced Kemal. He did No. I and 2
and is fortunate enough to be kicking and vigorous to carry on his task No. 3. China
produced Sun-Yat-Sen. He completed No. I and 2 and after his death his well-organized
and well-disciplined followers are carrying on task No. 3. In Italy, though in contrary
direction, Mussolini plays the same individual part, India at that moment announced
to the world her leader to be Gandhi. You performed No. 1 but you abandoned task No.
2 and so task No. 3 is out of the question and we are so overwhelmed with the
disastrous defect at the second stage of your struggle that our lot today is harder than
before. . . .
You have created an influence over our countrymen in the lowest strata of
society wider and deeper than anybody else. However, what is your real object? If your
purpose is to give your share in the national and political work, your approach to the
people should be on terms of absolute equality and your task must be to inspire

496

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

confidence into them. From this point of view you must stop allowing people to
address you as a Mahatma.
Then there is one thing that I witnessed at Yeotmeal which has hurt me greatly
and I had some slight evidence of it before. Your work regarding the removal of
untouchability is grand in its aspiration and is not bad in its success as it is generally
carried on. However I strongly object to your permitting my countrymen and
countrywomen to touch your feet and put their fingers to their eyes. Such touchability
appears to be more damnable than untouchability. You are ruining the mentality and
the psychology of these villagers for another generation or two. You are preparing
the country not for mass civil disobedience but for servile obedience and for a belief
that there are superior persons on earth and Mahatmas in this life at a time when in
this country the white man’s prestige is already a dangerous obstacle in our way.
Politically this career of yours is ruinous and from a humanitarian point of view its
degenerating influence appears to me to be a moral plague....
What I want of you is that you be a good old Gandhi, put an ordinary pair of
khaddar trousers and coat and come out and work with us in the ordinary way. Come
and organize with us (as you alone by yourself have failed) our workers, our peasants
and our youths, not with a metaphysical sentimentality but with a set purpose a
clear-cut and well-defined object and by methods such as by experiment are making
success for all human beings.
Therefore before I go, I should like you to get up one morning as from a dream
and to say “Yes” and many of us can soon be put together in a good team and set about
putting an end to so many deplorable conditions of life in India about which none of
us has any doubt.
I remain,
Yours fraternally,
SHAPURJI SAKLATVALA
The Hindustan Times, 17-3-1927

APPENDIX II
SHRADDHANAND MEMORIAL
An appeal signed by Pandit Malaviyaji and Lala Lajpat Rai says:
It is decided that, except the appeal for 2_ lakhs for the Gurukul Kangri which
had already been issued by the Punjab Arya Pratinidhi Sabha, only one appeal should
be issued on behalf of the Hindu community as a whole for Rs. 10 lakhs, 5 1akhs of
which should be kept as a permanent endowment and 5 lakhs should be used
immediately as follows: 1_ lakhs for the uplift of the depressed classes
(achhutoddhar); 1 _ for carrying on the work of shuddhi and 1 _ for promoting Hindu
sangathan. The Trustees shall select such agencies of the Hindu Mahasabha, Sanatan
Dharma Sabha and the Arya Samaj, including the Bharatiya Shuddhi Sabha and the
Dalitoddhar Sabha of Delhi to carry out the objects of the Trust as they may consider
fit from time to time, subject to such general conditions for the submission and audit
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

497

of accounts as they may lay down; but the work of sangathan shall be carried out
through the Hindu Mahasabha alone. The interest of the five lakhs of the permanent
fund will also be spent on the three objects named above in the proportion stated. It
has also been decided that at least half the total amount raised in a province shall be
spent within that province, and this applies to the interest of the permanent
endowment fund also.
It has been also resolved that steps be taken to acquire the house in which
Swami Shraddhanandji was murdered with the object of converting it into Swami
Shraddhanand Memorial Bhavan.
Every donor is free to earmark his donation for any of the purposes named
above. The donations will be strictly used for that purpose or purposes only for which
a donor has given it.
All donations should be remitted to the Manager, The Punjab National Bank
Ltd., Delhi, to be credited to the Shraddhanand Memorial Fund. When remitting
money, remitters are requested to send to the Bank a complete statement of the names
and addresses of donors, and the amounts subscribed by each donor and also his
instructions, if any. They are also requested to send a copy of such statements to the
Secretary, Shraddhanand Memorial Fund, Delhi.
To ensure that all subscriptions are duly credited to the Fund, a formal receipt
for the amount subscribed will be sent to the donors by the Secretary, Shraddhanand
Memorial Fund. If such a receipt is not received by a donor within fifteen days of
payment, it is requested that the donor should inform the Secretary of the fact.
We owe it to the memory of the revered Swamiji that the sum of ten lakhs for
which the appeal has been issued by the Hindu Mahasabha, should be fully subscribed
at the latest by the 30th of April next,
We are of opinion that all efforts should be concentrated on raising the
All-India Memorial and that all movements for local or sectional memorials should be
deferred until the All-India Memorial Fund is fully subscribed.1
The division of the Fund into three parts enables everyone to make his own
choice and contribute freely to the object he may have most at heart. It is to be hoped
that the subscribers will bear in mind the date before which the memorial committee
expects to finish the collections.
Young India, 3-3-1927

APPENDIX III
MEDICAL OPINIONS2
Mr. Gandhi has had a mild stroke of apoplexy. He must not be allowed his
usual correspondence for a week. His speaking and travelling programmes should be
indefinitely postponed. Absolute rest and freedom from his regular activities should
1
2

498

The appeal ends here. The concluding paragraph is editorial comment.
These were published under the title “What Doctors Say”.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be enjoined for an indefinite period. Mr. Gandhi is advised to cancel his travelling
and speaking programmes during the hot weather.
W. J. W ANLESS
Mahatma Gandhi is now threatened with an impending danger of apoplexy due
to high blood-pressure condition as a result of continuous overwork. He must have
absolute rest in a cool climate for some time to come. He is also advised to cancel all
his present programmes till his condition decidedly improves.
G. V. ANKLIKER , M.D. A ND C. R. K OKATNUR , M.D.
The Bombay Chronicle, 29-3-1927

APPENDIX IV
WHOM KHADI STANDS FOR
‘THE MAN WITH THE HOE ’
Bowed by the weight of centuries he leans
Upon his hoe and gazes on the ground,
The emptiness of ages in his face,
And on his back the burden of the world.
Who made him dead to rapture and despair,
A thing that grieves not and that never hopes,
Staid and stunned, a brother to the Ox?
Who loosened and let down this brutal jaw?
Whose was the hand that slanted back his brow,
Whose breath blew out the light within his brain?

*

*

*

Oh, masters, lords and rulers in all lands,
Is this the handiwork you give to God,
This monstrous thing distorted and soul-quenched?
How will you ever straighten up this shape,
Touch it again with immortality,
Give it the upward looking and the light:
Rebuild in it the music and the dream?
—Edward Markham
Young India, 31-3-1927

APPENDIX V
FROM THE PREFACE TO “BAPU’S LETTERS TO MIRA”
In order that the reader may have a clearer background, I will explain briefly
the outline of events in my life which led me to Bapu. Having been brought up in an
English country home, I was familiar with rural life, besides which there was,
inherent in me from the beginning, a profound love of Nature. At the age of 15, I first
VOL. 38 : 2 JANUARY, 1927 - 3 JUNE, 1927

499

heard the music of Beethoven. Forthwith my spirit within was awakened to a living
sense of the Divine Power, and prayer to God became a reality. Through Beethoven’s
music I was led to Romain Rolland, and through Romain Rolland to Bapu. These were
not just easy stages. On the contrary, turmoil, darkness, hope, despair—all had to be
passed through before the pure Light of Truth broke in upon my troubled soul and led
me to my destination.
All along a power was impelling me. I did not understand it for a long while,
but, by the time I came to know of Romain Rolland, this force was becoming
apparent to me, and from the time of our first meetings at Villeneuve, an
extraordinary sense of mellow happiness possessed me. I felt something was coming.
I had not the slightest idea what. I only knew that all would be well. Even when
Romain Rolland talked to me about Bapu, and said a little book he had written about
him was in the Press, I did not realize more than that I must read the book. Then the
day came when the book was published. I went to the publisher’s shop in the Latin
Quarter of Paris, where I was then staying. The whole shop window was full of a little
book with an orange coloured cover on which was printed in black ‘Mahatma
Gandhi’. I bought a copy, took my lodging and began to read. I could not put it down.
I read and read, and as I read the dawn in my heart glowed brighter and brighter, and by
the time I had finished, the Sun of Truth was pouring his rays into my soul. From that
moment I knew that my life was dedicated to Bapu. That for which I had been waiting
had come, and it was this.
I straightaway went to London and booked a passage to India at the P. & O.
office. I also sought out and devoured all the literature I could; writings of Bapu,
writings of Tagore, English and French translations of the Bhagavad Gita; and even
the Upanishads and Vedas I peeped into. But very soon I began to realize that I was a
fool to think that I could rush to Bapu like this. I was wholly unfit spiritually and
physically, and I must first put myself through a severe training. I accordingly went
back to the P. & O. office and changed my reserved berth for one a year later.
I now set about things in a thorough and systematic way. First I studied the
rules and regulations of the Sabarmati Ashram in every detail. Then I began changing
my diet item by item, until I reached pure vegetarian food. I started sitting
cross-legged on the floor. Ten minutes at a stretch was all I could do in the beginning,
but with steady practice I became perfectly at ease. I commenced lessons in Urdu and
of course learnt carding, spinning and weaving. This had to be in wool, but gave me
good practice. At the same time study of the literature continued. In the midst of this
training news came in the papers that Bapu had gone on a 21 days’ fast for
Hindu-Muslim unity. As the days went by, the papers began saying that Bapu would
probably not survive. I prayed to God in anguish. The days dragged on. But I never
slackened in my training because, even if Bapu were to pass away in his physical
form, I knew I must go to India to serve his cause. It seemed an eternity, but at last the
21 days were over and the news came that the fast had been safely broken.
Up to now I had not written a word to Bapu. But on the successful completion
of the fast, my heart was so full of thankful joy that I just had to write.
Bapu’s Letters to Mira, pp. 3-5

500

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

