1. LETTER TO BAIJNATH MAHODAYA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 2, 1944
BHAI BAIJNATH,

I read your long letter. Do whatever you think right in the
matter. It is beyond my understanding.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI BAIJNATH MAHODAYA
179 R AMBAGH
INDORE (C. I.)
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

2. INTERVIEW TO “ THE HINDU”
October 2, 1944
When I approached him this morning and asked him whether he had any
particular message to give to the country on this auspicious day, Gandhiji said:

I am not accustomed to giving messages on such occasions.
Gandhiji amidst laughter added:

I want life for 125 years. But Malaviyaji cut it down by 25 years
when he wired to me in Poona at Parnakuti that I must live for a
hundred years.
Bernard Shaw’s message arrived here today . . . that he would not send birthday
messages to Gandhiji. Gandhiji laughed aloud and said:

There you are. I did not know until a few years ago that I have a
birthday.
The Hindu, 4-10-1944

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

1

3. SPEECH AT KASTURBA MEMORIAL TRUST MEETING1
S EVAGRAM ,

October 2, 1944
Gandhiji reminded them that the day’s gathering was not a public meeting.
There was an order prohibiting general meetings without previous Government
permission throughout the Wardha district. They all knew that he was a confirmed
civil resister. But this was not the occasion for civil disobedience. Disobedience to
be civil implies a certain procedure. This was a meeting of the trustees and collectors
of the Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Fund for presentation of the collection.
Referring to the large number of people from Wardha and outside that had
gathered there, he remarked that the reason for their presence on that occasion was
that, for years, people all over India had got into the habit of celebrating his birthday
according to both the Indian and the Christian calendar. The intervening period
between the two dates was also included in the observance. This time, it had become
known long before that he intended coming to Sevagram for receiving the purse on
October 2.
The Secretary, in his report, had told them how the idea of the Fund had
originated. They might like to know how he had come to be the President of the Trust.
The collections were started when he was in jail. The trustees had asked for his
consent to nominate him as their President. After his accidental release 2 , owing to
illness, they were able to consult him and he had become President for the purpose of
guiding the trustees as to how the money collected should be spent in a manner
befitting the memory of the late Smt. Kasturba. The responsibility primarily rested
on the trustees, but it rested on him most of all.
The money had to be spent in villages, which were not part of the cities. The
poorer and farther away from the cities, the better. The Fund had to be spent for
education and welfare of women and children only. At first, the age limit for male
children had been fixed at twelve years. He himself had thought of raising it to
sixteen. But it was pointed out to him that in that case boys would get a
disproportionate share, leaving the girls at a disadvantage and so their age limit was
reduced to seven years. As he had already remarked, the money was to be spent for
education of women and children. So long as he had any voice in the matter, the
education would be of the basic education type. The scope of basic education included
the education of the entire society, beginning with the children and going up to adults
and old men and women. It had to be imparted through the practice of handicrafts,
village sanitation and medical relief, preventive and curative, especially with regard
to deficiency diseases.

1

Gandhiji addressed the trustees and collectors of the Kasturba Gandhi National
Memorial Fund in Hindustani. On behalf of the trustees Sarojini Naidu presented him a
purse of Rs. 80 lakhs, This report of the speech was issued to the Press by Pyarelal.
2
On May 6, 1944

2

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

It was a tremendous work to carry out these reforms in the seven lakhs of
India’s villages. A sum of rupees seventy-five lakhs or even of rupees one crore was a
trifle, compared to the vastness of the task. Seventy-five per cent of the money
collected from a particular area would be spent in that area, not being towns or cities,
and the remaining twenty-five per cent would go to the Central Fund. But the money
collected from big cities would all go to the Central Fund and nothing out of it would
be spent in the cities. In place of collection committees new committees would have
to be formed to ensure proper spending of the money. These committees might
include some members of the collecting committees, but new names should be added.
If in any place ways and means of spending the money satisfactorily in accordance
with the aims and objects of the Fund could not be found, the money would remain
with the Central Fund. On the other hand, if in any place suitable workers in adequate
number could be found to carry out bigger plans satisfactorily, they would be given
more money.
It was his wish that, as far as possible, money should be spent through the
agency of women workers. It was a matter of regret that women workers with suitable
qualifications were not forthcoming in sufficient numbers. The fault lay with the men
who had kept the women enslaved in domestic drudgery. They had to draw them out
and push them to the fore. After all men were not born efficient as a special creation.
It rested on them to produce more and efficient women workers. Men, before they
became efficient workers, were prone to make mistakes. Therefore, they must not
expect efficiency from women without giving them responsible work. The Fund was
collected in commemoration of an old illiterate village-minded woman. It would give
peace to her departed soul if women, and especially old women, took a leading part in
the execution of the object of the Memorial. The collection had been made out of an
overflow of enthusiasm and affection towards the memory of the departed soul. He
wanted them to see that it was spent in a way commensurate with that sentiment. That
was not a task merely for the twenty-six trustees; hundreds of workers would be needed
for it. He had already said that to spend money properly was much more difficult than
to collect it, unless they showed as much aptness in the former, as they had done in
the latter. So long as he was with them in the flesh, he would, of course, argue with
them and fight with them, but it was for them to see that their work was so carried on
as to give to the departed soul no cause for dissatisfaction.1

The Hindu, 4-10-1944

1

At one of the meetings of the Trust the question of Kasturba’s outlook on life
was raised during the discussion. Gandhiji was reported to have said: “Kasturba’s
outlook on life means the outlook represented by Kasturba Gandhi, not Mohandas
Karamchand Gandhi.”

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

3

4. LETTER TO J. SIVASHANMUGAM PILLAI
October 4, 1944
DEAR PILLAI,

Many thanks for your letter 1 . Am sorry for the delay in
replying.
My own opinion is that you should do what you think will best
serve the ‘Depressed Classes’.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 9257. Also C.W. 5065. Courtesy: J. S. Pillai

5. LETTER TO SHUAIB QURESHI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 4, 1944
MY DEAR SHWAIB,

I have done the best I could 2 . Now you have to take up the
thread, unless you think I have made a mess of the whole thing. If I
have, I know you will be frank enough to tell me so.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal

6. A LETTER
S EVAGRAM

Octoer 4, 1944
DEAR NAWAB SAHEB,

This is to seek your intervention in this communal tangle. Show
me please where I have erred if at all. I did the best I was capable of.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy : Pyarelal
1

In his letter dated July 27, 1944, the addressee, a Depressed Class M.L.A.,
had sought Gandhiji’s permission for forming a ministry in Madras at the initiative
of the Depressed Class legislators and with the support of the non-Depressed Class
Congress legislators and some others.
2
The reference is to the talks with M. A. Jinnah.

4

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

7. LETTER TO ZAKIR HUSAIN
S EVAGRAM ,

October 4, 1944
MY DEAR ZAKIR,

The friends you sent will give you full report of the doings here.
Tell me of your reactions to the talks with the Quaid-e-Azam.
What do you think of my extension of the meaning of Nayee Talim?
You ought to take an active interest in the Kasturba Trust. Bapa
and others were complaining that you had not attended a single
meeting.
Lastly, how are you?
Love.
BAPU
DR . ZAKIR HUSAIN
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

8. NOTE TO DR. GOPICHAND BHARGAVA
October 4, 1944
I wish I had come in greater contact with Laxmidevi than I have
been able to. I hope she has benefited by her stay here. You will
judge. Krishna Gopal Dutt has written a biting letter against you. I
have repudiated all the allegations as unworthy. But he sticks to them.
If you have anything to say please do. What has made him so bitter ?
What is the charge about some iron having been bought ? I hope you
are progressing. Let me know you future plans.
BAPU
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

5

9. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 4, 1944
CHI. SHARMA,

I wanted to write to you. In the mean time Gadodiaji 1 arrived.
He is not at all satisfied with your work. He says that nothing gets
done. I told him it couldn’t be so. What is the truth? Come here for a
few days if you can.
Blessings from

BAPU
H. L. S HARMA
KHURJA R OAD , U. P. 2
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh,
between pp. 324 and 325

10. LETTER TO TEJWANTI DHIR
S EVAGRAM ,

October 4, 1944
CHI. TEJWANTI,

I have your letter. It is all right that you went away. Come when
you feel like it. Let your elder son go his own way. He will do as God
prompts him. If you want you may work among the tribals or render
service by taking up residence in the Bhangi Nivas. Do what you think
best. Does this answer your letter?
Nothing has yet been decided about the Ashram.
TEJWANTI DHIR
P. O. NAKODAR , D ISTT. J ULLUNDER
(PUNJAB)
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
Lakshminarayan Gadodia, Treasurer and Trustee of the Surya Chikitsalaya,
Dadhichi Seva Sangh, an institution run by the addressee
2
The address is from Pyarelal Papers.

6

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

11. LETTER TO POTTY SRIRAMULU
S EVAGRAM ,

October 5, 1944
DEAR SRIRAMULU,

Carry on propaganda by all means but [no]1 fast as yet.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 110

12. LETTER TO RAMESHWARI NEHRU
S EVAGRAM ,

October 5, 1944
DEAR SISTER,

I am quite sure that I sent from Panchgani a reply to your
letter. 2 I do not keep copies of such letters. However I do remember
one thing. Do not rush to break free of your bonds. It is your duty to
look after Father.
Hope you are in good health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 8006. Also C.W. 3103. Courtesy:
Rameshwari Nehru

13. CABLE TO HORACE ALEXANDER
WARDHAGANJ ,

October 6, 1944
HORACE ALEXANDER
144 OAK THULANE
BIRMINGHAM 29
AGATHA3

YOU

MURIEL. 4 WELCOME.

LOVE.

GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 1439

1

The source has ‘as’.
Gandhiji had written to the addressee from Poona on June 16; vide “Letter to
C. Rajagopalachari”, 19-11-1944
3
Agatha Harrison
4
Muriel Lester
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

7

14. LETTER TO DR. SHYAMA PRASAD MUKHERJEE
S EVAGRAM ,

October 6, 1944
DEAR DR. MUKHERJEE,

As desired by Gandhiji I am herewith sending you a letter from Smt. Sachi
Rani Sinha Roy of village Gobindapur, District Tippera.
It seems to be a genuine case of distress calling for aid. Gandhiji feels that you
ought to be able to do something for it. Kindly drop a line in reply and oblige.
Yours sincerely,
PYARELAL

DR. S HYAMA P RASAD MUKHERJEE
77 A SUTOSH MUKHERJEE R OAD
C ALCUTTA
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

15. LETTER TO B. DAS
S EVAGRAM ,

October 6, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji desires me to thank you for your letter of the 19th September and the
kind sentiments expressed in it.
It was good of you to have sent all the news about the members of Shri
Gopabandhu Chaudhury’s family.
He would like you to keep him posted about the doings in Orissa.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI B. D AS, M.L.A. (CENTRAL )
C HANDNI C HOWK
C UTTACK
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

8

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

16. LETTER TO YUVARAJA OF PITHAPURAM
S EVAGRAM ,

October 6, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji has your letter of the 3rd inst. and the enclosed
statement.
He does not feel like putting you to the inconvenience of
coming here. Moroever, at present every moment of his is premortgaged.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,

THE YUVARAJA OF P ITHAPURAM
VASANTASOBHA
TEYNAMPET P. O.
MADRAS
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy
: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

17. LETTER TO J. R. D. TATA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 7, 1944
DEAR JEHANGIRJI,

In order that I may be understood by you as fully as possible I
write this in English, though I should love to write to you in Gujarati.
For similar reason this will be typed.
Thank you for your cordial letter of greetings. I would like you
to make the cordiality concrete by attending the next meeting of the
Trustees 1 to be held at Wardha on Saturday the 4th November.
Saturday has been specially chosen in order to enable the original
Trustees to attend with minimum of inconvenience. That you have
already accepted the additional names proposed by me for the Board
of Trustees and for the small Executive ought not to bear the meaning
that the original trustees are to be sleeping members.2
1
2

Of the Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Fund
Vide “A Circular”, 21-9-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

9

I know I am guilty of having given currency to the thought that
the administration of trust funds should in practice be left to the
Trustees of my choice. I discovered my mistake before any mischief
was done. The more I think about it, the more I feel the narrowness
underlying such a conception. The whole board is a very happy
combination and if most of the Trustees take an active interest in the
administration of the Fund, we may expect even unthought of
beneficial results. An active combination and co-operation of top city
men and simple village-minded men and women is not an everyday
experience. I trust therefore that you will make it convenient to attend
the forthcoming meeting and even persuade the Trustees to do
likewise, if indeed they need any persuading.
M. K. GANDHI
J. R. D. T ATA
BOMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

18. DISCUSSION WITH SHRIKRISHNADAS JAJU 1
October 7, 1944
At the outset Jajuji read out the resolution submitted by Gandhiji before the
workers of the A. I. S. A. in the September meeting. There was a suggestion in that
draft2 that the A. I. V. I. A. and the Hindustani Talimi Sangh be also consulted while
drawing the future plan of work of the A. I. S. A.
J. Should the Harijan Sevak Sangh, Goseva Sangh and Kasturba Trust be also
included in this list?
G. Of course, inasmuch as they are as intimately connected with
the programme of village reconstruction as the A. I. S. A., and have
an economic background and outlook, not a political one. The idea
behind the merging of the Sanghs is only that of co-orclinated service
of the villages. But the Kasturba Trust may well be kept out.
J. Keeping the Trust out would mean paralysing an organ of the united body.
Out of the six Sanghs we can easily form a united executive of one or more
representatives from each Sangh.
1

This and the subsequent discussions in Hindi with Shrikrishnadas Jaju,
Secretary, All-India Spinners’ Association, were reported by Swami Anand. This
translation is reproduced with alterations to bring it into conformity with the Hindi
version appearing in Charkha Sanghka Navasamskaran.
2
Vide “Speech at A.I.S.A. Meeting-II”, 2-9-1944.

10

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

G. We can get our work done through the institutions of the
Kasturba Trust, for their work is not anything different from village
service. Yet we should not include the Trust in it. When I placed that
resolution before the Charkha Sangh the Kasturba Trust was not in
my mind. I had only the A.I.V.I.A. and the Hindustani Talimi Sangh
in view. My idea was that the heads of these Sanghs should meet
together and co-ordinate their activities from the point of view of
all-round village service, and influence one another morally without
any of them disturbing any of the others in its day-to-day work.
The only work of the Central Office of the A. I. S. A. should be
to watch and give moral guidance. It is quite possible that like
Euclid’s point we might not be able to reach the ideal. Decentralization consists in bothering little about the practical details of the
various centres but regulating the over-all work on moral lines. I know
that I may not be able to get the Goseva Sangh, the Harijan Sevak
Sangh and others to carry out this policy of decentralization. But as
service and total uplift of villages is the basis of all their activity I hope
and trust the heads and workers of these Sanghs would of their own
accord meet and think jointly how best to organize their work. They
would also have to consider, for example, why the work of the A. I.
S.A. had to be arrested or modified. One may argue that the work had
not been arrested in any way. The Sangh’s work had expanded to
cover 15,000 villages; 4_ crores of rupees had been distributed among
the poor. All this is no doubt true but we should not rest content with
only this much. Rather it should be a matter of regret for us that we
have as yet accomplished only a hundredth part of our task.
A worker of the A. I. S. A. would hereafter not confine himself
to khadi work alone but regard himself as well a representative of the
A.I.V.I.A., the Goseva Sangh, etc., in the larger sense of the term. And
in so doing the worker should not feel that all this other work was
beyond his sphere and that a new burden was being imposed upon
him. If he did so, it would mean that our policy and outlook were not
really based on non-violence. Our worker should be able to identify
himself with all that requires to be done in the village, that is, with the
entire life of the village and yet feel as light as ever.
J. Like the A. I. S. A., should institutions such as the Goseva Sangh, the A. I.
V. I. A. and the Hindustani Talimi Sangh also depute such workers to the villages?

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

11

G. Exactly so. This is the real meaning of the merging of the
Sanghs and of their having a united policy. It does not mean any
regimentation of work but it simply connotes working with the united
moral strength of all and with a wholesome integrated outlook.
J. Will the A.I.S.A. have to run commercial and welfare departments
separately? I feel that to run all village activities with an all-round outlook and to
give general guidance to the workers will be the special function of the joint body of
all the Sanghs.
G. I do not think so. The joint body of the various Sanghs can
once for all lay down administrative policies. The arrangements so
made must be honoured by all the Sanghs, which would greatly
facilitate their managerial work. My idea of the united body is that its
work will expand like the mighty Krishna river, which starts as a tiny
tickle of ten to twenty drops of water and ends as one vast
Krishnasagar. So also should flow the ceaseless stream of all-sided
work. Such is my conception of the joint body.
J. The real problem is to obtain suitable workers. You suggest various
activities, but we cannot undertake them for want of workers. Then again you insist
that we should reach the seven lakhs of villages.
G. Of course, I do. But when you fail I am there all along with
you to share with you the blame.
J. So we are to take it that good workers are to be trained. For the present we
cannot hope to get thoroughly capable first-grade workers. We shall have to get on
with second-grade workers. From among them we shall obtain first-grade ones later.
G.

Does the A.I.S.A. have about 2,000 workers?

J. About 3,000.
G. Well, then use them. Place upon them the responsibility for
this new type of work. Also allow them greater freedom in their work.
We shall have to decentralize even at some risk.
J. I do not quite understand what you mean by decentralization.
G. We shall have to expand the work so that it covers every
village. This cannot be done by imposition from without. The workers
will have to be allowed to carry on the work themselves, more or less
free of regulation by a central authority. Were they to refuse to bear
this much burden and wish to leave us we shall let them go
ungrudgingly. But we are not going to turn anybody out.
I like your idea of giving khadi cloth in exchange for hanks in
Maharashtra. This is not yet much in vogue. But it is being done
through workers already on our staff. This is the way work will go on

12

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and develop. But workers who create obstructions will have to go. I
will have no hesitation in removing them. If they disobey the policy
of the A. I. S. A. they will have to quit. And the Sangh is authorized
to change its policy from time to time. The plea of the workers that
they were not aware of such changes will not be accepted.
Compulsory wearing of khadi, provident fund contributions, etc.,
were introduced in the course of the running of the Association and
they were made applicable to all. Those who could not accept them
had to go. Workers may leave us in this manner. But we shall not
remove them ourselves. Nay, we shall require them to work along the
new lines I have indicated. On the other hand, we shall require those
who would like to stay under our plan to work extensively on the new
lines, others would naturally quit on their own. Not for a moment did
I think that we would have to disband the existing set of workers and
start on a clean slate. Suppose we have five workers at a centre and we
feel that more work of various kinds can be carried out there, we shall
ask them to take up manufacture of hand-made paper and other
village industries also, and if possible at the same time to produce
more and more khadi and sell it in the neighbouring areas. This is
decentralization.
Khadi: Why and How, pp. 158-61

19. LETTER TO SYED MAHMUD
October 8, 1944
DEAR MAHMUD,

1

Bravo. I hope you are fairly fit. I shall expect you here as soon
as well enough to come.
Love.
BAPU
DR. S YED MAHMUD
BOMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers.Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
The addressee, a member of the Congress Working Committee, was released
on October 6, 1944. Vide also pp. “Letter to Syed Mahmud”, 14-10-1944 and
“Statement to the Press”, 22-10-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

13

20. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
October 8, 1944
BHAI GANSHYAMDAS,

I have talked to Sohanlalji1 and to Devdas also. I think that it
should be easy enough to collect one lakh rupees towards a memorial
for Mahadev. So it doesn’t seem proper to sell Sohanlalji’s book 2 at
higher than its market price for that purpose. The book should be
sold at its market price and on its own merit. In this way the extent of
public response to such a book may be ascertained.
The subject of Mahadev’s memorial should be kept separate.
We shall talk about it when you come here.
Sohanlalji has agreed. Devdas and Shriman have also accepted
my point. I understand, from what Devdas told me, that you feel some
sort of a moral obligation [as you had agreed] that the book would be
published for the Mahadev Memorial Fund. In that case too it only
means that one lakh rupees will be collected for that fund, isn’t that
so? I fail to see any advantage in collecting it through the books when
its impropriety is quite obvious to me.
A written order from you will be required for Parnerkar’s3 3
appointment. These days you hold all the authority. The committee
has been suspended. If it is to be revived it will be done when we meet.
Lakshmanrao, who is the Secretary these days, needs your order; only
then Parnerkar can take charge.
You must have read about my exploits in the newspapers. More
when we meet.
Your health must have improved in Mussoorie.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 8061. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

1

Sohanlal Dwivedi, a Hindi poet who edited the Gandhi Abhinandan Granth, a
felicitation volume in Hindi
2
ibid
3
Yashvant Mahadev Parnerkar, a dairy expert

14

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

21. DISCUSSION WITH SHRIKRISHNADAS JAJU
October 8, 1944
J. Please explain what should be the equipment and qualifications of workers.
G. For the present I shall not deal with other institutions but
answer your question keeping in view the worker of the A. I. S. A.
alone. First, he should know, besides his mother tongue, the language
of the province in which he is working as also the national language. I
do not feel that knowledge of English is essential. He should know
about the economic, social and political condition of the country and
also something about the condition of the world. This is rather
difficult, it is true, but essential. Unless he knows what is happening in
other countries, their political set-up, etc., how can he understand the
relative conditions in India and where we are bound for? He must
have especially detailed knowledge of the conditions prevailing in and
about his place of work.
So much in regard to his general preparation which is only a
preliminary part of his equipment. In regard to khadi, he should not
only have thorough knowledge of the charkha, but he must also be
well acquainted with the takli. Spinning alone will not do. He must
know the entire science of khadi, i.e., evaluating the count, carding,
identifying the variety of cotton, the kind of cotton required for a
specific type of carding, spinning, etc. He must be in touch with the
history of improvements in technique, viz., how carding reached its
present stage, the various improvements effected in the charkha. He
must also be able to repair and put the charkha in order. It was in
Yeravda that I systematically learnt spinning, repairing of the charkha,
etc., and I had no one to help me either. It means that the worker must
know the elements of carpentry as well, for if he is not able to set right
the damaged charkhas of the villagers, spinning will stop in the village
and the cause will suffer.
I have dwelt upon the charkha so much because I regard it as
the centre of village uplift. In addition, the worker will have to see
what other village crafts can prosper in his village. The first in order
among these crafts will be the bullock oil-press. Our worker would
have to know its technique which has now been scientifically
improved at Maganwadi under the supervision of Jhaverbhai Patel.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

15

Another industry which may be introduced is hand-made paper. This
has to be learnt not with the view of supplying paper to the whole
country but in order to make the village self-sufficient and capable of
earning a little income.
J. If the work of hand-made paper develops it will be like running a small
factory.
G.

I am only giving its outline.
Next to oil and hand-made paper we must revive the handchakki
(grinding stone)—a vital thing in every village. Otherwise flour-mills
which have been a source of anxiety to me for several years will be
our fate. Similarly in regard to rice. Unless we inculcate among the
villagers the habit of eating whole rice we shall not be able to solve the
problem of food. We must get our people in the villages to take to
hand-pounding of rice or handchakkis for husking paddy, for it is a
well-established fact that the white polished rice put out by mills and
white sugar are harmful to health. All the top experts are agreed upon
it. We do get enough literature on these subjects from America. There
brown, that is, yellow sugar has come in vogue. So much so that
traders sell the white polished sugar after colouring it with harmful
colours.
Next take agriculture. Our villagers depend on agriculture and
cattle for ploughing. I am rather ignorant in this respect for I have no
personal experience. But there is not a single village where we have no
agriculture or cattle. There is the buffalo, but except in Konkan and a
few other places it is not much used for agriculture. Even then it is not
as if we have boycotted the buffalo. Our worker will have to keep a
careful eye on the cattle wealth of his village. If we cannot use this
wealth properly India is doomed to disaster and we also shall perish.
For these animals will then, as in the West, become an economic
burden to us and we shall have no option before us save killing them.
Our worker, therefore, would have to acquire some knowledge at
any rate about these things, and discover a non-violent way of solving
them. Therein lies the solution to our problem of increasing
population. I do not know whether our non-violent way will succeed
or fail. If it fails it will be our fault, not that of non-violence. It means
that our sacrifice and efforts were insufficient. Nevertheless all of us
will have to make some effort. Again, in the sphere of agriculture
chaos reigns supreme. In regard to agriculture, we must do our utmost
to prevent further fragmentation of land, and to encourage people to
take to co-operative farming. The village worker will fully examine

16

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the circumstances prevailing in his village and induce the villagers to
take up co-operative farming.
Next to land is the question of water, not for agriculture but for
drinking. The worker will go and examine all the wells in the village.
It will be his duty to clean them both inside and around. He will see
how many wells of the village are fit for drinking water, whether the
surroundings are clean, and whether there are any public urinals and
latrines near them. If they are near the wells, he will explain to the
people the dangers involved in having them so near. He will seek their
co-operation in having them removed to a distance. He will thus
attend to the cleanliness of the entire village. Now we know about a
worker’s field of activity. He should have a thorough knowledge of
village sanitation and efficient compost-making. He should convert
this knowledge into practice. Of course there will be division of work
but it should not be like that of the railway porter showing the green
signal or like the woman-worker making soles in a leather factory.
Such people are incapable of doing any other work save their own.
This extreme division of work is degrading. The village worker should
acquire all-round knowledge about building up the whole village.
There will be some sewing work in the village, smithy, carpentry,
leather work, agriculture, etc. The village worker should seek to bring
about co-operation among the workers in these various occupations so
as to make them serve as harmonious parts of one whole and thus
organize the villages. All these activities appear to be too numerous
but in fact they are not. This should not be too difficult for a worker
resolved to employ his body and mind fully.
Now for my last point. If the worker going to the village has no
faith in non-violence, our work must fail. If he concerns himself with
economics alone and disregards ethics and morality, all our efforts are
of no avail. Non-violence is the basis on which our work is to be built.
It will not do to ignore it. In the initial stages people might achieve
something even without it but ultimately the edifice of swaraj will not
be raised without the foundation of ahimsa. Workers must
demonstrate non-violence in everything they do. They must be living
embodiments of non-violence. If they cannot do this, their work will
be but a showy nothing. Our history is full of such instances. Merely
holding classes on non-violence is of little use.
J. Would it not be better to have two workers instead of one in a village? They
could then divide the work between them and one could supplement the other.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

17

G. Many people have asked me this question. I am not going to
lay down any definite rules in this regard. I would prefer a worker to
go alone. He should tackle the situation single-handed and become
fearless in the process. But if one is not enough you may send two.
We shall consider the position if lack of finances comes in the way.
But so far as I am concerned, I am prepared to go to the length of
regarding one worker, if married, as two when both husband and wife
serve in the village.
J. Experience often proves the contrary. The wife of a worker is more a
handicap to him than a support.
G. That is why I am not going to frame any rules or regulations
about it. Do you know that Rajaji insists on workers being married?
J. Some workers will be of higher calibre than others. How do you like the idea
of putting under one good worker five or six ordinary workers working in adjoining
villages?
G. I have had talks about it with several friends. It will not always
be feasible. I asked Timappa Naik to train a large number of workers
as otherwise his work was likely to suffer. He is a very capable and
efficient worker of Karnataka. He maintains himself on about six
rupees. He feels that only local workers could be trained at small
expense. He has trained such and they are working with him.
J. How much should we spend on a worker?
G. These are days of war-made dearness. I am afraid it may last
for a fairly long time. I am prepared to spend rupees fifty on a worker
or even a hundred.
J. Besides food for the worker there is the burden of his family, of the
education of his children, etc.
G.

We shall take the middle way. We shall leave out those with
many burdens. We shall confine ourselves to a family of four,
husband, wife and two children, or at the most five. I think it would be
better not to take a bigger unit.
J. Many workers argue that they have the responsibility of maintaining their
parents, brothers and sisters or other relatives.
G.

We cannot take them.

J. While fixing the allowance of a worker, which was to be considered as of
greater importance, his capacity or his family responsibilities?
G. To Vallabhswami I would give only five, not hundred. But I
would pay the maximum to one with a big family rather than let him
go. That is to say, both should live and neither should be envious of
the other. Nor should any entertain false hopes.

18

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

J. How much response should our workers expect from the villagers? Would it
be proper to impose some conditions on villages at the time of selection of our place
of work? The situation today is that workers who go to the villages are regarded as
moneyed people and villagers think that they should extract from them as much
benefit as possible. Consequently the whole work is reduced to nought when the
worker leaves the village after working for two years.
G. I think we should not impose any conditions. For example, if
we go and settle down for service among the aborigines, what terms
can we lay down for them? If we settle down and work resolutely in
places where we have already gained some experience, our work will
grow and prosper.
In the end everything depends on the worker himself. If he wins
the hearts of the villagers he will be able to get them to work with him.
J. How long may it take for a worker to become self-sufficient? Five years?
G. You yourself say five years. The worker will go to the village
with one month’s allowance in his pocket. He will ask for a piece of
land from the villagers and build his hut on it. In case he obtains a
vacant house he will occupy it. Taking out the takli from his pocket
he will sit under a tree and spin. If the villagers have their
spinning-wheels he will repair them and spin along with them. He will
also gather the children of the village, play with them, tell them stories,
teach them songs and do village cleaning. Apart from his salary I am
not going to give him a pie by way of capital to start an industry or
anything else. He will have to set up things by dint of his
resourcefulness and love. This will put to trial his passion for service
and his ability.
J. It is a very hard test.
G. Yes. We don’t have to take up a sword, have we? The way of
love and service shown by me is the only way. If we have to achieve
swaraj by non-violent means I have no other way.
Khadi: Why and How, pp. 161-5

22. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 9, 1944
BHAI MUNSHI,

I was glad you sent your reply so soon. It has served the
purpose. But can that prohibitory order be defended from the point

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

19

of view of the right of freedom of expression? Do you agree with the
opinion I expressed to Homi1 ?
I read your statement made in Jaipur. I did not like it. Is it not
opposed to the Congress policy? Do you think the policy enunciated
at Jaipur is contrary to the policy that we had jointly adopted at
Nagpur 2 ? I would not think it wrong if it should be so. I want to know
only for my information. Has a difference of opinion arisen between
us in this matter too?3
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7683. courtesy: K. M. Munshi

23. LETTER TO MANGALDAS PAKVASA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 9, 1944
BHAI MANGALDAS,

Amritlal must declare how he got possession of the papers? I
have had a discussion with Bapa. Hope you are in excellent health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4688. Courtesy: Mangaldas Pakvasa

24. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

October 9, 1944
XXX4
BAPA,

I read your letter to Pyarelal. The Trustees were present and
they resolved to meet at Wardha on 4th November. I think you should
have issued a notice to that effect. If you don’t think it is too late now,
you may still issue one. If you want, you may notify through the
1

H. P. Mody
At the Akhil Bharatiya Sahitya Parishad on April 24, 1936; vide “Speech at
Akhil Bharatiya Sahitya Parishad”, 24-4-1936.
3
For the addressee’s reply, vide “Letter from K. M. Munshi”, 12-10-1944.
4
Omission as in the source
2

20

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

newspapers, so that the Trustees are informed without delay. If it is
necessary, you may send telegrams to individuals. Why will only one
lawyer be present out of the three? I can understand Mangaldas’s
inability to attend due to his illness. What about Munshi? And about
Dada 1 ? I have written to Jehangirji,2 and Mridulabehn will show the
letter to you. I admit that all the botheration will be avoided if I go to
Bombay. My unwillingness to go to Bombay is not due to my health,
it is due to political considerations. Hence I feel no shame in putting
all of you to trouble.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

25. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
October 9, 1944
CHI. DINSHAW,

It took me so many days to write to you.
You have to remember this much:
1. You should not rely upon me. I may go to jail or I may die;
or, I might not be able to get away from here. If you do not have
courage to undertake this experiment without me you had better not
start on it.
2. If you have the courage and self-confidence you should find
the required land.
3. After securing the land you should prepare a blueprint
indicating all the proposed arrangements. The halls for treatment and
experiment should be in the centre or in one corner. They should be
surrounded by decent huts for the residence of patients and children
entrusted to our care. The sanatorium should grow fruit, flowers, food
grains and vegetables. It should have cattle sheds and roads good
enough for vehicles. It should also have a gymnasium, a tank for
bathing and other facilities. All this cannot be built in a day. But the
entire project should be completed within five years. Patients should
be admitted right from the beginning. They should be given such
treatment as does not involve the use of electricity, for example, hot
and cold water, steam, earth and sun-rays.
1
2

G. V. Mavalankar
Vide “Letter to J. R. D. Tata”, 7-10-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

21

Think over all this. Recently a nature-cure practitioner from
Andhra had been to me. He has thirty acres of land. And he treats
about ninety patients. I would certainly wish to send you to see his
sanatorium. You should study such institutions.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

26. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
[October 9, 1944] 1
CHI. MRIDU,

After reading Munshi’s letter put it in an envelope and return it.
Read Jehangirji’s letter to Bapa. Accept any date that is
ultimately decided if you approve of the letter. Speak to Ambalalbhai2
about this letter. In that case, I would not be required to write to
anyone else.
If Mahmud 3 is definitely coming, inform me telegraphically and
let me know in detail about his requirerments. We shall put him up
only at Bajajwadi. We shall not trouble him to come to Sevagram. I
shall go to Bajajwadi on that day. If you have understood my
argument, discuss it with Bapa and Mangaldas4 , or if you would rather
keep quiet, then do so. In my view the question is important. Today
there is no one who will hear me in the matter.
Don’t spoil your health by running about too much.
BAPU
From the Gujarati original : C.W. 11119. Courtesy : Sarabhai Foundation

1

From the reference to K. M. Munshi’s and J.R.D. Tata’s letters, it appears
that his letter was written on the same day as the one to Amritlal V. Thakkar, dated
October 9,1944; vide “Letter to K. M. Munshi”, 9-10-1944 and “Letter to Amritlal V.
Thakkar”, 9-10-1944.
2
Ambalal Sarabhai
3
Syed Mahmud
4
Mangaldas Pakvasa

22

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

27. NOTE TO MANU J. GANDHI
October 9, 1944
This is for Manudi or Sushilabehn.
A six-week course in First-Aid.
1. General anatomy, including description of the internal
sub-division in the stomach, the prominent bones, the arteries and the
veins.
2. Descriptions of the ordinary wounds such as are sustained on
the battlefield and the various types of bandages for them: on the
skull, the abdomen, the fingers, the legs and so on.
3. Tourniquet, for arresting bleeding, as part of curriculum and
also extra-curricular improvised techniques, such as with a pebble.
4. The method of treatment in the absence of medical apparatus,
e.g., warm ashes in the absence of boiled water, paper and cotton
ashes; newspaper, etc., that one carries for reading in the absence of
dry cloth or flannel. . . .
5. ‘Primitive’ remedies in the absence of medical aid for
drowning, snake-bite and scorpion sting.
6. Stretcher drill for carrying the wounded or sick persons and
making an emergency stretcher with a gun or a stick and a jacket.
7. Marching by thousands in regular formations and marching
drill according to the rules. Erecting tents on a battlefield within a few
minutes, rules about the use of water, how and when to construct
latrines, kitchens, etc.
It may be that something is being omitted. Most of it is covered
by the book written by Kettle. Many things are also to be found in
“St. John’s Ambulance”. We did have all these books. Had I been
talking I could not have said more. So, you have not lost much.
1

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Ba Bapuni Shili Chhayaman, pp. 218-9

1

Daughter of Jaisukhlal Gandhi

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

23

28. LETTER TO S. G. VAZE
S EVAGRAM ,

October 10, 1944
MY DEAR VAZE,

It was good you wrote. Your letter reached me too late even for
a wire. Do please congratulate the Rajasaheb1 on the liberal measure
he has adopted for the people of his State. Aundh 2 has no reason to
regret the reforms adopted there nor will Phaltan.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI S. G. VAZE
S ERVANTS OF INDIA S OCIETY
P OONA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

29. LETTER TO NAGINDAS T. MASTER
S EVAGRAM ,

October 10, 1944
BHAI NAGINBHAI,

I have your letter. Doesn’t the August Resolution [of 1942]
mean that you should do what you think to be right?3
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
The Raja of Phaltan, Malojirao M. Naik Nimbalkar who had introduced full
responsible government in the State
2
Aundh was the first Deccan State to introduce reforms.
3
According to the Gujarat Samachar, 10-10-1944, the addressee was entrusted
with the task of carrying Gandhiji’s message to the people. The message was to the
effect that “our struggle is definite and every citizen of India has to be prepared to
make his contribution to the fight for independence”.

24

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

30. LETTER TO KANTILAL AND SARASWATI GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 10, 1944
CHI. KANTI AND SARASWATI,

One letter from Kanti is lying before me. It is full of
information. You are doing right. I Will not write more. There is a
good family gathering just now. It Will disperse soon. I keep good
health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7369. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

31. DISCUSSION WITH SHRIKRISHNADAS JAJU
October 10, 1944
J. How will the workers become self-supporting? Villagers can either give
them money or grain, or give them employment. Or they may run an industry and
support the worker with a percentage of the profit.
G. Both courses may be adopted. We shall surely pay the
workers. But apart from it the villagers or the worker himself can take
up a craft for the sake of the village. It may be possible for a good
intelligent worker to work in the village and meet his own expenses as
also those of his entire activities by his own intellectual work and take
nothing from friends. But earning money thus by the use of intellect
alone is, as I have often said, a misuse of the intellect. All such income
must go to the country.
J. If our worker were to live on khadi production alone, it would not be
possible for him to become self-sufficient. He would have to produce commercial
khadi; and to earn profit, he must sell it, send it outside and do various other things.
G. This is not what I had visualized in my scheme. I agree of
course that if a village has to be made self-supporting through the
production of khadi alone, the surplus will have to be sent outside.
Once somebody explained that if we did not produce, in
addition to self-sufficient khadi, some amount of other khadi also, and
our villagers had no other means of subsistence like land, etc.,
self-sufficient khadi alone would not suffice to provide all their needs.
My idea of self-sufficiency is that villages must be self-sufficient in

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

25

regard to food, cloth and other basic necessities. But even this can be
overdone. Therefore you must grasp my idea properly.
Self-sufficiency does not mean narrowness. To be self-sufficient is not
to be altogether self-contained. In no circumstances would we be able
to produce all the things we need nor do we aim at doing so. So
though our aim is complete self-sufficiency, we shall have to get from
outside the village what we cannot produce in the village; we shall
have to produce more of what we can in order thereby to obtain in
exchange what we are unable to produce. Only nothing of our extra
produce would be sent to Bombay or far off cities. Nor would we
produce things with an eye to export to those cities. That would run
counter to my conception of swadeshi. Swadeshi means serving my
immediate neighbour rather than those far away.
Our outlook must be that we would serve the village first, then
the neighbourhood, then the district and thereafter the province.
Working on these lines the A.I.S.A. must function only as the central
protector of this policy. We should not get involved in all sorts of
complications. We have three thousand workers and a large number of
sales depots. We shall not do away with them today. But I am simply
telling you of our new line of approach.
J. What should be the extent of a worker’s field of work? Should it be an area of
about five miles around his centre?
G. Yes, sometimes even less. In Bengal and Bihar an area of five
miles around the centre would cover many villages.
J. Why should we not define his field of activity as the area which he can cover
if he left his centre in the morning, and returned to it after having a round by the
evening?
G.

Yes, we can do so.

J. Would the A.I.S.A. have to take up this work first?
G. Certainly, because the charkha is the sun round which other
industries revolve like planets. They would revolve rightly only when
the sun’s movements are all right. Today the village industries are
behaving like comets.
J. The work against untouchability sometimes involves the worker in all
kinds of difficulties. How far may our worker entangle himself in them?
G. He should not involve himself in such troubles as would stop
his work. But there should be no place at all for untouchability in his
personal life. Our worker will draw water from the same well which the
Harijans use. He will clean up their wells and take all sanitary steps
possible for proper drainage.

26

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

J. Then there is the political issue. Suppose my self-respect is wounded in the
course of performance of my duties or my freedom is restricted, would it then be
proper for me to offer civil disobedience? It may be that I may keep aloof from other
political disturbances, but in case of a general civil disobedience movement the
worker cannot remain unconcerned. What should he do under such circumstances?
G. General civil disobedience means a sort of anarchy in which
everybody is a leader. People start talking in terms of fighting. But
ordinarily we must follow the orders of the chief or the commander in
charge of that movement. Surely none can remain unconcerned in a
movement of that nature. Yet the worker would have to explain his
position to the President of the A. I. S. A. who would give his opinion
after taking all the pros and cons into consideration. However, I am
not thinking of general civil disobedience today.
Khadi: Why and How, pp. 166-8

32. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
WARDHA ,

October 11, 1944
Numerous messages of birthday greetings from all over have
been received and are still being received. It is impossible for me to
send individual acknowledgement. I take this opportunity through the
courtesy of the Press of thanking all the senders for their kind wishes.
The Bombay Chronicle, 12-10-1944

33. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

October 11, 1944
DEAR BAPA,

We can do nothing about Chandvani.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

27

34. LETTER TO KUNDAR DIWAN
October 11, 1944
BHAI KUNDAR,

The spinning-wheel is the symbol of non-violence for those who
project non-violence in the spinning-wheel. What I said was only to
explain this. There should be no difficulty in understanding this.
BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

35. LETTER TO RAMKRISHNA DALMIA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 11, 1944
BHAI DALMIA,

I have your letter. I think what I did was right. I know your
letter was prompted by love. Do keep writing like this.
Blessings from

BAPU
DALMIA - JAIN NIVAS
NEW DELHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

36. DISCUSSION WITH SHRIKRISHNADAS JAJU
October 11, 1944
J. I could not quite follow your views about decentralization. Will you kindly
throw more light on it?
G. My view is that we should let as many provinces as wish to be
free to develop their work as they desire. I would very much like them
to take the entire responsibility on their own shoulders and recognize
our authority only in the moral realm. I would allow them to work
with complete freedom if they follow my lines, are personally of
sparkling character, and are prepared to take risk in honestly
implementing our policy. My only condition will be that they should
sell all the khadi they produce in the villages near about the centre of
production, the tehsil, the district or at the most the province. They

28

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should not, like the people of Chicacole, produce everything for
Bombay and use nothing at home.
J. Chicacole is an exception, and is the only production centre in the country
for fine khadi.
G. Yes, even in that case I would ask the producers and sellers to
wear what they produce or sell. They may send their articles outside
but they must also wear them. In case they go on producing fine
khadi for Bombay but use only mill-cloth themselves, their centre
must cease to be run by the A. I. S. A. I would even insist that it be
closed altogether.
J. Deducting something from the income of the craftsmen or women towards
supply of khadi to them, we do make them wear some khadi. But this seems to be a
sort of imposition. They do not take to it voluntarily.
G. I may put up with such a situation for a short period. I do not
expect people to take to khadi immediately and to accept
non-violence. We must educate them in true economics and in
non-violence. If we succeed in doveloping a true economic outlook in
them, they would ultimately understand non-violence as well. An
economics which runs counter to morality cannot be called true
economics. Our workers can develop an outlook of true economics in
the villages only if they work under the inspiration of non-violence
and morality.
Their personal conduct should be of the purest nature and they
should not be a party to any exploitation of the people. If we try to
cover India with khadi but ignore the miseries of the craftsmen, do not
pay them living wages, do not share their weal and woe, or worry little
if they are drunkards, it will not do at all. It is better to burn all khadi
to ashes than to pretend to work for the good of the country in this
manner. I would keep the drunkard and give him work, but I would
befriend him and sweetly urge upon him daily to abstain from drink.
My aim is not to do the work of khadi only but to enter into the entire
life of the villager.
I know that Chicacole khadi is very popular and that it fetches a
good sale in far off provinces; but this pains me very much. If we
want to do khadi work successfully on the new lines in any province,
district, taluk or village, we must not make one district lean on any
other, or enter into competition with it. All districts must meet their
requirements themselves. This would relieve us of our worries about
sales. It is quite possible that implementation of this new policy may

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

29

for the present reduce a centre to zero. But later on the work is bound
to progress. Of course I cannot submit data and figures to prove what
I say as I know nothing about them. But you can of course supply
them to me. What I know, however, is that if khadi is to disseminate
non-violence, we shall have to follow this new policy, come what may.
J. Do you mean to say that the work of the A. I. S. A. will hereafter be
entrusted to separate boards of trustees to be newly formed in each province?
G. I cannot say immediately what exactly would have to be
done. I know, however, that to promote decentralization such as I
want, we would have to do away with the central control now
dominating our every activity. Today our machinery is top-heavy.
Our approach and method being what they have been hitherto, this
was inevitable. It could have been avoided had I followed and insisted
from the very beginning on our doing the right thing. It is not that I
was not aware that the work was not going on the right lines. But I
succumbed to the temptation of doing some work and let the work
develop itself, resulting in the present centralization.
J. Yet we shall have to evolve some sort of constitution. . . If the work of the
provinces is to be entrusted to some body, registered societies with at least seven
trustees for each would have to be set up.
If you allow me I shall soon bring about decentralization in sales. Today khadi
is such a profitable business and so full of opportunities for expansion that dealers
and tradesmen are ready to take it up. I am flooded with letters asking me for the
transfer of one bhandar or the other. But as a clear picture of the coming
decentralization is not yet before my eyes I am not able to go ahead. And even were
we to entrust khadi work to some individual, trust or institution we shall have to
insist on three things: (a) Purity of khadi, (b) Living wage and (c) Non-profiteering.
If we are not able to control these three things the whole business will be reduced to a
farce. Whatever is to be done has to be done very carefully. For example, take the case
of the A. I. S. A. Every now and then we issue circulars to our branches to raise the
wages and to impress upon the workers not to put the spinners to any difficulty
whatsoever. Nevertheless, our experience is that it is well-nigh impossible to keep
every worker of each centre in full control regarding such matters as accurate
determination of the count of the yarn, correct payment of wages without adding or
subtracting a pice or two here and there, and many little things of such nature. And
this happens even though our worker has no axe of his own to grind. We appealed to
purchasers of khadi to pay a higher price but those engaged in the craft did not receive
an adequate wage. This is as regards the conduct of workers and centres even when run
under the direct supervision of the A. I. S. A. If however we introduce decentralization
and the control slackens or is almost withdrawn, one cannot say what a fearful mess
the certified dealers might not make of it. Whether it is an individual or an

30

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

institution, there is acute rivalry among all those engaged in khadi work. Even
institutions indulge in a lot of profit-making. Under these circumstances if the A. I.
S. A. keeps away from commercial sales, it would be a problem as to who should be
entrusted with this responsibility or what sort of conditions or limitations should be
imposed on them. Again, if the provinces are to be left free to look after themselves,
they do not have enough workers with the proper khadi outlook to be entrusted with
the work.
G.

Is there no way out of this difficulty?

J. The issue of provincial freedom will not be so difficult in some of the
provinces, but it is bound to lead to complications in most of them. For the present, I
think, it would be wise to confine decentralization to the district, and not to extend it
to the province. The change should not be effected all at once.
G.

For the present we may introduce decentralization in
production only. It should be binding on the producers to sell in their
neighbourhood what they produce. And it must be insisted that the
central office should be consulted in case of distant sales.
J. What is the harm if we limit the sales-area of a centre to its tehsil?
G.

We may, but we must see that the producers or those who live
in that village or in its neighbourhood wear the khadi produced. We
do of course recognize that khadi may be required to be produced for
other places also.
J. We would ask workers to go to the centres that are well developed and to
extend the work on the new lines as far as possible. The A.I.S.A. will withdraw from
those places where such workers take up work. Thus decentralization will grow. But
one thing is important. We shall ask the workers to sell khadi where they produce it,
or in the tehsil or at the most in the district. The A.I.S.A. will help in disposing of
the surplus. There is no loss in this work at present, as we know. Today all the khadi
that may be produced can easily be sold. There is no worry as regards sales but only
about transport.
G.

Is the khadi sold in those centres where it is produced?

J. No, not even in the neighbourhood. Today we have our bhandars in the
headquarters of the district and sometimes at tehsils also. We have also agents for
taking khadi from the district bhandar and distributing it in other places in the
district. To those engaged in the craft we supply khadi after deducting two annas, four
annas, or even eight annas in the rupee. But apart from it, most of the khadi is sold in
the cities.
G. As against this, I want the worker to go to his centre and
produce only as much khadi as he can make the people there wear.
He must not produce for outsiders. He should not rest content with
training people in khadi production alone but should impart

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

31

instruction in other crafts also. The earnings from these crafts will also
go to the villagers and add to their meagre resources. We shall take the
unused or surplus khadi only if the villagers there tell us: ‘We are
producing khadi in a larger quantity than we can ourselves consume
as we want cash for our other needs. Please, therefore, buy our surplus
khadi.’ It is quite possible that such villages as produce more khadi
than they use will develop into centres of khadi production. But I am
not thinking now of them. I have in mind only those villages where
production of khadi will be carried on as a supplementary industry
and so where the people will not depend for their living only on khadi
but also on other industries. That is how most of the villages will have
to be organized. This is decentralization in the true sense of the term.
J. Agriculture is the main occupation in the countryside. The bullock oil-press
can also be run but it can provide a livelihood only to a few. It is khadi alone that can
in a large measure relieve unemployment among the poor. But there is little scope for
earning money through khadi produced for self-sufficiency. Should we desire to add a
few pice to the coffers of the villagers, we shall have to encourage production of
khadi for sale outside and we shall have to make arrangements for it. Otherwise we
cannot succeed in providing relief to those underemployed villagers who have work
only for part of the year.
G. The trouble is that such khadi will continue to provide
occupation to a few people only without spreading everywhere.
J. Spinning, I hope, will become universal. Weaving of course will be a
skilled craft carried on by a few as it is even today. The fact is that so long as there are
mills khadi production cannot be carried on on a large scale. We began cloth
self-sufficiency work in Surgaon. Ours was a five-year programme. Vallabhswami’s
experience is that people do take to khadi but not intelligently. Once we withdraw
from the centre, khadi also disappears. Unless the people grasp the place of khadi in
the entire economy of the village they will not stick to it. The benefits derived from
self-sufficient khadi are so little that it offers hardly any attraction.
G. That also worries me. Vallabhswami’s words resound in my
ears. Party feeling developed in his village. Fasting had to be resorted
to. I feel that behind it all there was a mistake in approach somewhere.
We offered inducements to the people, gave them facilities, but these
do not serve our purpose. We have to discover to what length khadi,
by its own inherent strength, can carry India forward. So far in our
quest we have found that khadi is saleable in the cities but not in the
villages. We have not yet succeeded in making it acceptable to the
villagers. If we have been defeated we must confess our defeat. We
should learn from our past experience and adopt new methods of

32

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

work if needed. That is why I say that we should stop producing khadi
for the cities. Today about a crore of rupees worth of khadi is sold in
the cities. We should hereafter make it clear to the cities that we cannot
any more supply them ready-made khadi but will teach them how to
produce it, leaving them the option of either producing it themselves
or getting it from the producer. I am not enamoured of the sales of
one crore of rupees worth of khadi in the cities. We should put into
khadi work not money but brain and heart. In other words we shall
now have ruthlessly to investigate the value of khadi in terms of its
real potentialities. In case we find it does not carry us as far as we
claimed, let us give it up or lower our claim or let us take up some
other basic occupation such as agriculture.
From the very beginning it has been my firm conviction that
agriculture provides the only unfailing and perennial support to the
people of this country. We should take it up and see how far we can
go with it as basis. I would not at all mind if some of our young men
serve the country by training themselves as experts in agriculture in
place of khadi. I have come to realize that we have yet to overcome a
lot of difficulties. The time has now come for us to pay attention to
agriculture. Till now I believed that improvement in agriculture was
impossible unless we had the administration of the State in our own
hands. My views on this are now undergoing modification. I feel that
we can bring about improvements even under the present conditions,
so that the cultivator may be able to make some income for himself
from the land even after paying his taxes. Jawaharlal says that any
extra income to the peasant through the improvement of agriculture
will be swallowed up under one pretext or the other by the alien
Government. But I feel that even if it were so, it should not hinder us
from acquiring and spreading as much knowledge about agriculture
as possible. It may be that the Government will take away any
additional income that may come to the villagers through
improvements in agriculture. If they do, we can protest and teach the
people to resist and make it clear to the Government that it cannot loot
us in this manner. This is only by way of an illustration. I therefore
hold that we must hereafter find workers who will interest themselves
in agriculture.
J. From the very beginning the question of agriculture as the main problem of
the peasantry was before our eyes. But we did not take it up because we thought it too
difficult and also because we had to keep in view our own limitations. Besides, in
agriculture the peasant is today dependent on external factors altogether beyond his

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

33

control. Supposing, for instance, we taught him better methods and he succeeded in
producing more, his lot would still continue to be as bad as it always was if in the
mean while the prices of cotton were reduced by half, a contingency which he can do
nothing to prevent. This is the terrible situation confronting him.
G. There is remedy for this also. We did not train him on the
right lines. The capitalists induced him to sow commercial crops that
would yield them money, so food crops became scarce.
J. This is inevitable where economics is subservient to the ruler or the
capitalist.
G. The same is the condition in the field of cattle farming and
dairying. The cow and the bullock are intimately tied up with
agriculture. In this field also we have failed to play our part.
Therefore, our workers going to the villages will hereafter have to be
alert and acquire the necessary knowledge to render effective service
along all such lines. God alone knows how far they would be able to
accomplish all this. But I have said what I had in my mind and what I
thought fit.
Khadi: Why and How, pp. 168-74

37. LETTER TO V. A. SUNDARAM
S EVAGRAM ,

October 12, 1944
CHI. SUNDARAM, 1

Your letter and booklet. Come when you want to.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 3179

38. LETTER TO A. N. SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 12, 1944
MY DEAR SHARMA,

Are you so devoid of sense of humour? I had no evil thought
about your visit to Nagpur. Indeed I thought (and rightly as it has
1

34

The superscription is in both the Devanagari and the Tamil scripts.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

turned out) that you had gone to render assistance to some friend.
You had utilized my day of silence for that purpose. I was interested
in you and so asked questions about your work. I paid you a
compliment by summing up your life as of a homeless wanderer. I
connected you with ‘aniketa’1 of the Gita and envied you. Your home
was nowhere and everywhere. How could you mistake all this for a
reflection on you. It shows what a sorry thing foreign speech is. What
is to be done? Must I cease to use the English idiom to my
countrymen? Or are you specially touchy? Anyway I hope you
understand the language of this letter.
Yours,

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

39. LETTER TO HERBERT G. WOOD
S EVAGRAM ,

October 12, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I hope you remember your letter to me of 21st July, 1942. You
rightly say that if your suggestion is right I would not be deterred
from accepting it. As I see it, it is not right even after two years. How
can a captive people help other oppressed people except by being
free ?
Your letter was given to me on my accidental release in the early
part of this year.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
HERBERT G. W OOD , E SQ.
WOODBROOKE ,
S ELLY OAK , B IRMINGHAM 29
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

One without a home; Xll. 19

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

35

40. LETTER TO A. V. THAKKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

October 12, 1944
BAPA,

I got your letters. By all means engage one or two paid men.
You will of course have to pay a handsome salary. Shatikumarbhai
will take your place, and whatever services are assigned by
Vaikunthbhai and Swami Anand should be accepted. This will be
besides [the work of] the paid man. The latter shall not indulge in
politics.
I understand about the Bank. If you wish you may deposit some
more money in the Bank.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1194

41. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 12, 1944
CHI. SUSHILA,

I have your letter. Sita did stay here, but she wants to soar high
up in the sky. Most probably she will attend school in Akola. She is a
fine girl. She has become quite friendly with me. I am fine. I think
you can come over here only when Manilal returns there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4938

42. LETTER TO NIRMALA GANDHI
[SEVAGRAM , “V IA ” WARDHA , (C.P.,)]1

October 12, 1944
CHI. NIMU,

How did Usha fall ill? If no milk or soup is given while the fever
1

36

As on the letterhead

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

is on, it will come down sooner. That is how we here begin the
treatment in all cases of fever. This applies to all, young or old.
Nobody fears fever. Sometimes, it may be necessary to give an enema.
Give as much water as she can drink. Warm water will be better. You
may add salt and soda to it, also some lemon juice. If Kanam really
wants to come here, send him over. Or, bring him along at Diwali time,
that is, if you can come. Will not Ramdas also have holidays then?
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI R AMDAS GANDHI
TORNCO S ALES DEPT.
KINGSWAY, N AGPUR, C.P.
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

43. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
October 12, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

You do not want a reply to your letter, do you? Live and act as
though you were just a cipher.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4448

44. DISCUSSION WITH SHRIKRISHNADAS JAJU
October 12, 1944
J. Before discussing the idea of decentralization further, I would like to place
before you the present position of khadi work. It will help us in our discourse. Khadi
work has been carried on along two lines:
(i) Production and sale of commercial khadi to the utmost extent.
(ii) Extending cloth self-sufficiency as much as possible. Today the A.I.S.A.
is blamed for not discharging fully its responsibilities in both these respects.
G. May I interrupt? Have we carried on sufficient research in
regard to the self-sufficiency programme to be able to prove that
self-sufficient khadi is cheaper than mill-cloth? In case we are not able
to prove it, our villagers will not take to self-sufficiency and the
workers will have to face despair. Now you may proceed.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

37

J. There will be no cause for despair if we once grasp properly the limitations
under which khadi work has to be carried on, whether it is commercial khadi or
self-sufficient khadi. For instance, in spite of having made great progress as regards
commercial khadi, it cannot be speeded up all of a sudden, for so long as there are
textile mills khadi can develop only on public goodwill. Besides, there are other
difficulties. Today, for instance, we produce one crore rupees worth of khadi. Last year
we discussed a scheme to increase it to five crores. This meant that ignoring all other
considerations, we had to make use of whatever workers were available, irrespective
of their quality in order to push through our programme. After careful calculation we
reached the conclusion that even after our utmost efforts we shall not be able to
produce more than one and a half times our maximum production, and that it would be
quite impossible to increase production to two to four times. Besides, there are other
dangers in so recklessly increasing the work. For then we shall have to recruit all
sorts of workers who are neither conversant with khadi work nor observe truth and
non-violence. This will not only injure the basic policy of the A.I.S.A. but also
bring a bad name to it since the behaviour of the new workers may not always be
becoming and clean. I am, therefore, not in favour of developing work on such lines.
So also there are limitations in regard to cloth self-sufficiency. Even if the
various processes from cotton-cultivation to ginning, carding and spinning are
carried out by the villagers in their own homes, weaving charges are so high that
their net saving as compared with the price of mill-cloth is very little, so little that
the villager is not easily inclined to put himself to all the trouble involved. Besides,
mill-cloth seems more attractive to him than khadi.
Moreover the reasons underlying our self-sufficiency programme require to be
explained to the villagers in a manner which will appeal to them. They must see that
only through working for self-sufficiency the entire money of the village will remain
in the village, that they can control the factors that make for their well-being, that
idle time will be profitably utilized and that the people of the village will become
industrious. In other words, self-sufficiency khadi work can begin to have permanent
effect only when carried out as part and parcel of the wider programme of non-violent
village uplift or village reconstruction. A programme, which aims at making a certain
number of villages self-sufficient in cloth within a specific period, does not appeal to
me. We can succeed only to the extent to which we learn to work intelligently and
with the backing of educated public opinion. Work based on momentary sentiment or
emotion does not endure.
The same is true about other village industries as well. For the present the
bullock oil-press is running well in the countryside. But there are serious misgivings
as to whether it will continue always to do so. The fact is that our village economic
organization of which khadi, chakki and other village industries were the various
main organs has collapsed. Further, on account of mill competition, village-made
cloth, flour, rice, oil and everything else have become costlier. Should we desire to
reinstate them in their proper place, we should have to tackle the entire village
economy and build it up anew. Concentration and research on any single aspect will

38

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be of little avail. Inertia has seized our people. Progress cannot be by leaps and
bounds but very gradual. The problem is very intricate indeed.
G. I would like to go even a step further. I accept all that you
say. That is why for three days I opened my heart before the A.I.S.A,1
and raised all these issues.
Now we have to do the work anew with the objective of
all-round village uplift. Let us see how far we can go. Even if our
present activities have to be slackened or reduced to nought for some
time on account of these changes, it does not matter. We have created
some sentiment about khadi among the people. But if there is some
error in what we told the people about the significance of khadi we
must pause. If ours was a wrong claim we must declare our error
openly and withdraw our claim.
I would ask city-dwellers to produce their own khadi. I would
forgo the temptation to supply khadi to them. We shall go and settle
in the villages. In case workers want to leave us on account of this
change we shall let them go. Unless our head and heart are converted
to this extent we cannot achieve the desired result. We of the A. I. S.
A. will merely direct policy. By decentralizing our work as much as
possible we shall free ourselves from day to day khadi work
completely. Thereafter we shall concentrate our energy and attention
on the other activities or crafts carried out in the vicinity of the village
we settle in. Only then will the real substance of our work be realized.
All these years I remained under the delusion that we had made good
job of it in that we had put four and a half crores of rupees in the
pockets of the poor. I became anxious to increase it to sixty crores,
and I claimed swaraj would be in our hands if we produced sixty
crores worth of khadi in a year. Had I persisted along that line, I
might perhaps have succeeded. But now I realize that even if I had
succeeded what was done in a year might possibly have been undone
in the next. Today our main concern should be to lay the foundation
for this work as deep as possible.
J. It means that the city workers should curtail their present work (which is
mainly concerned with pushing up sales in the commercial way) and start selling
khadi in lieu of yarn. They should also participate in the programme for the revival of
other village industries.

1

Vide “Speech at A. I. S. A. Meeting-I”, 1-9-1944 and “Speech at A. I. S. A.
Meeting-III”, 3-9-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

39

G. Exactly. In case we do not do it we shall be betraying
ourselves and the world. Today we rejoice in having sold khadi worth
several thousand rupees in one day in the Kalbadevi Bhandar at
Bombay.
J. If we arrange to give khadi in lieu of yarn, and the A.I.S.A. does not do it,
private dealers would come forward and say that they would willingly take up the
work, asking us merely to give them certificates. If we agree to it we shall have to
look into their accounts, their procedure, their work, etc., and we shall get engulfed in
a maze of difficulties from which it would be hard to extricate ourselves.
G.

Satis Babu says that we should give them freedom in this

matter.
J. He holds that the entire production and sales work should be handed over to
the people, and the A.I.S.A. should keep aloof.
G.

It is essential for us to consider his proposal in detail.

J. In matters of money even good men have been found to have
failed in resisting the temptations of earning extra profit . . . Human nature being
thus what it is, it is very dangerous to hand over khadi work to private persons.
G.

I have my answer. I do not know what exactly Satis Babu’s
proposal means. But in the picture before me there is no question of
handing over khadi work to anybody. We shall say only this much to
city-dwellers that if they want to put on khadi they cannot do so save
according to the principle we have laid down. It is not merely a
principle of economics but also invariably of morals and ethics.
According to it everyone has to prepare his or her own khadi. If there
is no weaving arrangement in the city, weavers can be domiciled in the
cities, or somewhere in the neighbourhood in colonies. Weaving can
be carried on there. There need be no rivalry. We shall explain to the
city people that the khadi we are at present giving to them is of no use,
as they are not able to know the extent of relief that the poor obtain
thereby, and that therefore they should get khadi woven before their
own eyes. Thus we shall change our policy. Today we ask the city
people to take to khadi on the plea that it supports lakhs of people.
But this compels the A. I. S. A. to resort to trade and commerce. Well,
if the Sangh were to carry on commerce alone, it could easily support
many people by doing so.
Hence we are not going to lend to khadi dealers the prestige of
the A. I. S. A. We shall withdraw from that field of work so that the
certificates will cease to have any meaning. The only limitation that we
shall observe is that if there is some extra khadi left over in a village or

40

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

locality after meeting the local need, and if that khadi is useful to the
city people we shall permit it to be sold in the cities. But the khadi
should not be produced specially for export to the cities. If this means
a reduction in our work it matters little. I am sure I am not providing
true work relief to the people from the way in which I am doing khadi
work today. What I am doing is tempting them by the handsome
wages of the A. I. S. A. This is not the way to make the work
permanent. If the poor want employment we must provide it. But it
must be in such a manner that they can secure earnings from their
own neighbourhood instead of depending on distant cities .
J. I would like you to throw more light on this point.
G. Today we are not really able to help the villagers. By offering
the spinners three, four, six or eight annas I comfort myself with the
belief that I have given them a livelihood. But it amounts to nothing
more than a dole, for the work that I am providing them is not of a
permanent nature. In case we get control of the State in our hands and
by that means close all mills, it may perhaps then be possible to
provide them permanent work. But today I cannot hide from them the
truth that I have been only trying to fill their idle hours. If I have to
provide them with some money I shall teach them other crafts also. I
shall fully acquaint them with the present economic situation and
educate them in this regard. No doubt I would wish to give work to
every spinner who comes seeking it. But I shall not send the khadi
thus produced to Bombay. I shall ask the workers to sell it in the
neighbouring villages. But this is not enough. I must investigate what
work other than spinning can be provided to them in the village. Only
by revising the entire economic life of the village can our work
become permanent. Whether for villagers or for us, I agree, cities will
always have some sort of attraction. Nevertheless we shall be free from
our present day city life. We shall show how in contrast to the cities
more amenities can be provided in the villages. But if we merely go
on sending to Bombay the khadi produced in the village, this object
can never be accomplished, however high a wage we may pay to the
village spinners.
I allotted an hour every day for discussion with you because I
believed that through such discussion my own thinking would be
clarified. I am convinced that we shall have to introduce fundamental
changes in our mode of work. If we are destined to fail we shall face
it; we shall do so with full knowledge and alertness, not in our

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

41

ignorance or folly. Even then If people laugh at me I shall bear it.
They might say: ‘Gandhi wasted a crore of rupees. But of course no
one pocketed it.’ I need your help in deciding whether what I am
saying is correct. I would like to know your opinion.
J. When we send to the cities the khadi produced in the villages we provide
immediate economic benefit to the villagers. But if we stop doing so what else can we
give them?
G. If I had my way I would say to those whom I have been
supporting through khadi so far that they should get out of this rut
and take to some other work. We shall have to find other work for
them, as we are doing in Sevagram where the majority of the
population consists of Harijans.
J. The situation here in Sevagram is exceptional. There are so many
institutions here. Guests are always coming in, new houses are under construction
and various other activities are going on. All this provides work to the people.
G. Everywhere I would try to create a similar situation. We shall
have to apply our mind and energy to discover new avenues of work.
J. What you say about agriculture, cattle-breeding, etc., is perfectly correct.
But we should also consider how to provide permanent economic benefit to the
villagers through khadi. Had mill-cloth not been there, it would have been easy. But
the question is what are we to do when we have the mills.
G.

I would explain to the people that they could not get khadi
like mill-cloth. I would try to bring it home to them that if khadi is
dearer the extra money goes to the villager, his family and to the
village, and that this provides security to the economy of the village. I
would explain to them the moral aspect as well. Besides, I would teach
them other methods of earning in the village. I have now given up the
idea that villagers can earn their living through doing khadi work
alone.
J. It means that we have to set them to work by bringing home to them the
moral and social value of khadi and other village industries.
G.

Yes, I do not want to confine myself to khadi alone now. I
am, therefore, thinking of ways and means of improving the condition
of the people through a rehabilitation of agriculture, cattle-breeding
and all other village industries. My problem will be solved if I succeed
even in half a dozen villages, for “as is the part so is the whole”.
J. That means we shall have to develop the villages keeping their allround
progress in view. We should emphasize not only the economic aspect of khadi but
explain its moral and social aspect also.

42

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

G. From this point of view even Vallabhswami’s method does
not appeal to me, for he emphasizes only khadi and promises to make
the entire village khadi-clad within a certain period. There was a time
when this idea appealed to me immensely, but now I feel that khadi
alone cannot revive the villages. Village uplift is possible only when
we rejuvenate village life as a whole, revive all village industries and
make the entire village industrious.
Khadi: Why and How, pp. 175-81

45. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
S EVAGRAM ASHRAM,

7a.m., October 13, 19441
Those who will look only to God shall cease to look to persons
dead or alive.
If you digest this well you will never grieve.
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

46. LETTER TO P. T. RAJAN
SEVAGRAM,

October 13, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

It was an act of self-denial for the students to have given out [of]
their pocket money Rs. 133 to the K. B. M. Fund.
Thank you.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI P. T. R AJAN
INDIAN S TUDENTS ’ HOSTEL
KANDY , C EYLON
From a photostat: G.N. 797

1

As noted by the addressee

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

43

47. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
October 13, 1944
MY DEAR C. R.,

Here are the insurance papers. I would like you to put them
before Sir Alladi1 or whomsoever you like and secure his opinion. I
think a representation should be sent to the Central Government about
the fine.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2097

48. DISCUSSION WITH SHRIKRISHNADAS JAJU
October 13, 1944
J. Today I would request you to throw more light on decentralization. Narrowly
viewed, there is even now decentralization in production because production centres
are distributed all over the country. But of course all capital is centralized in the Head
Office. I believe that the central control existing today is merely a control exercised
by the A.I.S.A. in regard to policy.
Looking at the matter from the point of view of capital we must consider under
whose initiative the work is to be carried on in the villages hereafter and who is to
bear the profit or loss in the end. Now there are three ways of doing this.
Our worker on the spot can carry on all the work. Or, we may work through a
committee of villagers interested in khadi work who may themselves raise shares,
subscriptions, etc. Or as a third course the artisans of khadi can form their own
societies and carry on the work as their own. If the worker remains solely in charge
we shall have to hand over to him all the assets, money, property, etc. Should he then
be regarded as a trustee or should some condition be imposed upon him? If the worker
carries on his activities with an eye to personal profit there is every likelihood of
undesirable developments. I think the best way, therefore, would be to form
co-operative societies. Selfish interests may lead to some mismanagement but this
fear should not deter us. We may have co-operative societies not only for khadi but
also for oil-pressing, hand-paper, etc. In course of time these bodies in the various
villages may, if necessary, merge into a union.

1

44

A. Krishnaswami Iyer

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

G. I do not have much to say on this point. Wherever we can get
reliable workers work should be started. There is no harm in
beginning simultaneously the three types of experiments you have
enumerated. But, as we had discussed yesterday, we can get rid of
many worries if we do not hold ourselves responsible for khadi sales.
So long as khadi remains a saleable commodity, these worries are
bound to be there. I also realize that we cannot entirely get rid of
them today. But so long as we believe that khadi, like bread, must be
made at home and that we should not maintain ourselves on
bazar-made biscuits even if cheaper, we shall have to explain to the
people that to use bazar-made goods is to court disaster. If the people
grasp the idea, we shall have to devise an easy method of khadi
manufacture at home. Our slogan will be ‘cloth even like bread’. All
difficulties will then disappear. The co-operative bodies will then have
their own shape and form which need not now be anticipated.
When you said that there was decentralization in khadi
production, I was about to contradict you. Even in Lancashire some
cloth is made at home, not for the use of the home but for the use of
the masters. It would be outrageous to call this decentralization. So
also in Japan everything is made at home; but it is not for the use of
the home; it is all for the Government which has centralized the whole
business. Though things are made at home, and made in a better
manner than in England, yet the producers cannot keep any of it for
their home consumption. The work is done at the behest of the
Government which supplies ships and does everything else to carry
such goods to the different markets of the world and thus draw wealth
from other countries. The same is happening in Lancashire. Though
millions of dhotis are made there, yet not a single one is available to
any purchaser on the spot. They are exported to the country for
which they are scheduled, be it India, Africa or any other. I would
certainly not call this decentralization.
So also with khadi. Our artisans produce not for themselves but
for the A. I. S. A. to which they give their finished material for wages
paid. They were happy when we raised their wages. But this is not
decentralization. What I mean by decentralization is that the artisan
must produce for his own or his neighbour’s use and not for sale.
When we realize that khadi is not a commodity for sale but for
self-consumption only then we shall have grasped the message of
khadi and understood the scope of its potentialities. We may be

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

45

expected to clothe the whole country with khadi after getting political
power. Should we not therefore make such an arrangement from
today so that we may be able to make the country self-sufficient in
clothing in case the future government of free India were to provide
the requisite facilities to the A. I. S. A. and ask it, as an expert body, to
do this task? But if the government of the day were to close all its
mills, and to charge us with this responsibility, we are apt to fail as
things are today. We should, therefore, know the extent to which khadi
can take us. I myself cannot say that I know it for certain. But what I
am quite clear about is that khadi should not be for sale but for
self-consumption. Hence the necessity of changing the present policy
of khadi work. We have before us the task of reconstructing our whole
country, and in this khadi is an important item. So also there are
oil-pressing and other industries. It is only if we look at the problem
from the point of view of production for use rather than for sale that
the country has everything to gain by Our work, and we shall be able
to meet the situation squarely without withdrawing a single step when
we obtain control over the reins of Government.
J. I presume what you mean is that we should direct all our efforts towards cloth
self-sufficiency, i.e., towards spinning for one’s own consumption.
G. Exactly so. But as I have no personal experience about it I
cannot insist on it. I first introduced khadi and only later studied its
implications and experimented with it. I find that I have been
deceiving myself. What I gave to the people was money in the form of
wages and assured them that it contained swaraj. People took me at
my word and believed me, and continue to believe me. But I have now
my own misgivings as to how far such khadi can lead to swaraj. I am
afraid that khadi has no future if we continue it as today.
J. Do you visualize a stage in which the khadi bhandars running presently in
the cities will be closed down?
G.

Of course I do.

J. We shall then have to supply khadi to the people in lieu of yarn alone.
G.

When we saw that we could not proceed without spinning we
learnt spinning. But we did not take to weaving. However, now we feel
that weavers will also have to be trained in the same manner. Whatever
changes we want to introduce we must introduce intelligently and with
discrimination.
I may recall what we did about living wages in spinning. We
went along certain lines. Slowly it dawned upon us that khadi so

46

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

produced was no philanthropy but an exploitation of spinners. We
then raised the wages. I pleaded for eight annas. The rest of you
insisted on three annas. I agreed to your three annas. Then you raised
it to four annas. Similarly we may proceed in our new attempt. First
you must accept the principle, later we shall proceed in the light of
our experience. You have pointed out three possible ways of
reorganizing the work on the new basis. Think over them. We have
got our machinery in every province. Provincial organizers are
already there. Call some of the workers and discuss the matter in detail
with them. True, it will mean some curtailment of our present work.
But that will not deter me. Even if nobody else spins I shall go on
spinning alone. When we started khadi production I was told that
khadi dhoti was impossible to produce. I replied that I would put on
sack cloth or a blanket but would not wear a mill dhoti. And hardly a
month passed when Maganlal produced a dhoti; Gangabehn
Majmudar also sent me one and asked me to place an order for any
number of them.
J. It means we shall have to stop the large-scale sale of khadi in the cities and
instead ask the people to take up spinning for themselves. Consequently, at least for
some time a lot of our work will come to a stop.
G. I agree that there is practical consideration behind what you
say. Today people have become paupers. Therefore if you provide
them with bread they will do whatever you ask them to do. But if we
carry on our work thoughtlessly we shall be deceiving them as well as
ourselves. The livelihood we provide them today is nothing but a sort
of dole as is usually handed out during the time Of famine to the
people who are offered work on the roads or quarries. It does not
have a lasting value.
J. Before asking khadi consumers to spin their own yarn we should consider
how much we ourselves are devoted to spinning. Let me take the instance of the
A.I.S.A. workers. Our rule requires every worker to spin at least 7_ hanks in a month.
But we have not had a satisfactory response. Further, the number of spinners among
the khadi customers is quite small. Most of the spinners in the countryside spin only
for wages, scarcely for their own use. This is the situation. I wonder how far the
experiment you suggest can succeed under these circumstances.
G. At least this much should be clear to all that khadi is not an
occupation or a craft merely for earning a livelihood. None of us
should harbour this idea. For, if khadi is an industry it would have to
be run purely on business lines. The difference between khadi and
mill-cloth would then be that while a mill provides employment to a

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

47

few thousand people in a city, khadi brings a crore of rupees to those
scattered about in fifteen thousand villages. Both must then be
classified as industries, and we would hardly be justified in asking
anybody to put on khadi and boycott mill-cloth. Nor can such khadi
claim to be the herald of swaraj. On the other hand we have claimed
that the real significance of khadi is that it is a means for uplifting the
villages and thereby generating in the people the spontaneous strength
for swaraj. Such a claim cannot then be sustained. It will not do to
continue to help the villagers by appealing to the philanthropic
sentiments of city-dwellers. What is required is that the villagers
should be made strong to face life’s problems and march ahead. If
we encouraged mills, the nation might get sufficient cloth. And if
mills are nationalized cloth prices may also come down, people may
not be exploited and may earn adequate wages. But our reason for
putting forward khadi is that it is the only way to redeem the people
from the disease of inertia and indifference, the only way to generate
in them the strength for freedom. If other crafts are also thus
revitalized, our villages could be made self-sufficient and self-reliant.
They would prepare their own soap from sajji clay. That soap will not
have the luring fragrance of soaps turned out in the factories of Tata
and Godrej. Its packing also will not be so attractive. But it will have
the quality of self-sufficiency even like khadi. But this grand picture
of khadi as the means of all-round uplift of the villages, which I have
been putting forward for so long, is not being realized. The talks I
have had with the workers have led me to believe that I must now
retrace my steps. As the founder of khadi, I must not grudge doing
so. That is the call of truth. I retrace my steps consciously or
intelligently, and not in a mood of defeatism or of cowardice. If there
was any exaggeration in my claims for khadi it is but right that I must
own it publicly and rectify it.
J. Our chief claim was that khadi was a craft whereby those who were forced to
remain idle for a few months in the year could have some supplementary earning.
G. No, I did not stop at that. I went further and claimed that it
had the capacity to bring swaraj.
J. That is true, but you did not stress so much its life-giving capacity as you
are doing today. About three lakhs of people are employed in khadi work. They
cannot quickly develop the manifold virtues (other than those of self-sufficiency) that
you desire. They may do so in course of time. What you want to do today is to stop
khadi sales and make people spin for their own needs, do you not?
G.

48

You are right.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

J. But a closure of the sales would mean a suspension of spinning for wages.
G. Of course. But the little amount of spinning we may then
have would positively be such as can yield swaraj. For basically that
strength is inherent in spinning.
J. Today we are in contact with about three lakhs of people through khadi
work. Requiring people to spin for self-sufficiency, we would reduce it to no more
than thirty thousand.
G. These thirty thousand would later grow into three crores. Be it
as it may, I at least will not be guilty of betraying the cause. Further,
we shall then not have to cajole or coax the villagers and artisans to
spin. What we do today is to go to the villagers with a money-bag like
bankers and promise four or six annas for spinning. Instead, we would
enter into the life of the villagers. The workers and the villagers would
freely lay bare their hearts before each other. We would raise the wage
of the (woman) spinner. I would pay her as much as to a man. But I
would tell her clearly that I am not interested in her spinning merely
for a wage. I would ask her to spin for herself. I would promise to get
her yarn woven, her children educated and trained in one craft or
another. I would enquire into her budget and promise every
assistance. I would try and relieve her of her woes. Had we done this
from the beginning and taken the right type of workers with us, we
would have assuredly secured freedom by now. But I have no regret
for the past.
J. Do you think that you can get a large number of workers of this type? If so,
it is easy sailing.
G. The mistake was undoubtedly ours. We did not keep this
point of view ever before us. Nor did we train workers for it. Also we
were in too much hurry. Had we devoted ourselves to the task
intelligently, we would have got the needed workers.
J. You have said many a time that good workers should go and settle in the
villages.
G. Yes, in order that they may make khadi the emblem of
non-violence. If we fail, our claim for khadi will lose all force.
J. After all we shall have to get our workers from the material that we have in
our country today.
G.

If that is our attitude there can be no swaraj through
non-violence. In other words, people are not ready for my conception
of swaraj.
I would then go my own way even if I have to work all alone. I

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

49

would be happy if any of the A. I. S. A., A. I. V. I. A., Hindustani
Talimi Sangh or other bodies co-operate with me. It is quite possible
that people may not follow us. It would then show that we are full of
violence and that the non-violence we talk about is not non-violence
but cowardice.
J. That is all right. But the question is one of implementation.
G. We should then renounce the tall claim we have made.
We must stick to the truth. Without hesitation, without flattering
ourselves we must declare that we are weak like everybody else and
that we are in no way better. It would then be clear that swaraj, if and
when obtained, will not be due to any special strength of ours.
Khadi: Why and How, pp. 181-7

49. TELEGRAM TO NAGENDRA BIJOY BHATTACHARJI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 14, 1944
NAGENDRABIJOY BHATTACHARJI
P RESIDENT , C ONGRESS
BARISAL
ASK

CONGRESS

OFFICIALS.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

50. LETTER TO SYED MAHMUD
October 14, 1944
MY DEAR MAHMUD,

I see quite clearly what you have to do. Your letter must be
given to the Press with an explanation. You have to send a wire to the
Government asking for permission to release the letter.
You have to make a Press statement pending publication. “ I
have seen Press paragraphs making baseless suggestions against me. I
have asked for permission to publish my letter which was intended to
be private and confidential. I ask the public to suspend judgment
pending publication of my said letter. I can say this however that I
have neither broken with the Congress nor Gandhi with whom I am

50

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

now staying and under whose advice I am acting.’’1
I suggest the following wire to the P.S.V.2
“As many innuendoes have appeared in the Press about my
release may I publish my letter to H. E. dated . . . I should have no
objection to Government releasing same at my request.”
More when we meet. I see I cannot come to you before 4.15. I
must attend to some of the work in front of me. I hope you had a
restful night. Don’t worry. Everything will be well.
Love.
Yours,
BAPU

From a photostat: G.N. 5068

51. LETTER TO A. KALESWARA RAO
October 14, 1944
DEAR KALESWARA RAO,

Bapu was very glad to have your letter of the 8th inst.
He is sorry about Shri Narayanarayu’s demise. We shall have to make such
sacrifices before the battle of freedom is won.
Thanks for your suggestions which have been duly taken note of by Gandhiji.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
S HRI A. KALESWARA R AO
S ANTIKUTIR
NANDI GRAM
KRISHNA DISTT
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
2

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 22-10-1944.
Private Secretary to the Viceroy

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

51

52. LETTER TO ABDUL QAIYUM
October 14, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji has your letter of the 6th instant.
In regard to your question Gandhiji desires me to say that if the party members
are in favour of attending the session of the Assembly he is not going to interfere.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
JANAB ABDUL QAIYUM
M. L. A. (CENTRAL )
ABIGUZAR
S RINAGAR
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

53. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 14, 1944
Do you know the poem ‘Try Again’? No giving in permitted.
All other trust is vain. Only trust in God. That is the lesson of Vidya’s
death. Your love is on trial.
This for today.
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

54. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAMDAS TANDON
October 14, 1944
BHAI TANDONJI,

Is this Rashtrabhasha?1
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

The letter is written on a printed circular of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan,
Allahabad, issued in English.

52

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

55. DISCUSSION WITH SHRIKRISHNADAS JAJU
October 14, 1944
J. If your programme of village reconstruction as a whole is to be taken up, we
must select and train efficient workers. . . .
Then there will be the question of training workers for which we would have to
start vidyalayas in every province and frame syllabi for them. There is a great dearth
of able teachers. Our first-grade workers have confined themselves to their particular
areas—to their village, tehsil or district. . . .
I do not quite see how the new work can be accomplished unless we divert some
of these workers from their field to the training centres. Who else can impart the right
attitude and approach to village workers?
G. Khadi work started in the beginning from a single centre. So
also now we may begin with only one training centre. We shall
prepare graduates there and send them to other centres. They will
produce other workers who will start yet more centres.
J. It may involve a lot of time, from five to even ten years.
G. Possibly, but I do not think so. Our first batch will consist of
those who have already enough prior preparation, and so they will not
take long to go out as full-fledged workers. Again, as soon as they
have acquired a certain amount of efficiency we shall ask them to go
out to the villages and add to their store of knowledge by dint of
actual experience in the field. I do not, therefore, feel that a large
amount of time will have to be spent on training. But even if it is, we
should not worry. If we do not get workers of the highest quality it
does not matter. We will try to obtain the finest material, but be ready
to do with what we can get at present.
J. The workers we got in 1920 proved their worth. Thereafter we did not secure
that high type of workers in so large a measure. Some did come indeed, and do come,
but in very small numbers.
G. The fact is our method was defective and there was little in
our programme to attract the better type. There seemed to be little
scope for intellectual development in our work. Hence a large number
of people did not feel attracted to it. Besides the remunerative
attraction present in other fields was not there. But what was worse, a
sort of ignorance and inertia characterized the khadi workers, which
made others look down on them. People felt that khadi workers did
not dress properly, looked dirty and were quite often devoid of
common sense. The workers did not have adequate knowledge of the
science of khadi and so did little to explain it to the people. They were

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

53

often not in a position to answer the simple questions of those who
wanted to know.
We did settle in the villages where we provided work to the
villagers. But the intellectual among us did not, to any large extent.
The few who worked did not have the attitude of an anxious and
earnest devotee eager to explain his viewpoint to the people.1 If we
had we would have become such experts in our work that we would
have been in a position to declare before economists, “We know all
that you know. But you lack the practical knowledge that we have.
This you can learn from us.”
J. True. Our knowledge is incomplete and we have very many defects. But our
scale of measuring values is also different.
G. May be, but we must have the capacity to tell them that their
scale is not right.
J. But how to compare moral values with material values?
G. Then you could at least place those moral values before them
and prove their worth. If I come to realize today that khadi alone is
not going to last I shall have to proclaim it to the world. So far as the
material value of khadi goes, even Government records show that
there is a place for the spinning-wheel as a means of relief, like
stone-breaking, road-making, etc. You also can establish this much
that khadi has an invariable place as a relief measure. But what we are
required to prove above all is the need for khadi to establish a strong,
non-violent village economy.
We shall see what difficulties we come across in working the
programme of self-sufficiency. Commercial khadi may continue for a
time, but the essential programme of the A.I.S.A. hereafter must be
that of self-sufficiency, and workers should concentrate all their
thought and energy on it.
Khadi: Why and How, pp. 187-9

1
The Hindi here has: “But a sufficient number of intelligent workers did not
come forward from amongst us to work in the villages and those who did so did not
learn the art of explaining their viewpoint to an anxious or earnest enquirer.”

54

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

56. LETTER TO GLADYS OWEN
S EVAGRAM ,

October 15, 1944
MY DEAR GLADYS,

This is just to thank you for your letter and to say you must
take care of yourself.
Love.
BAPU
MISS GLADYS OWEN
NUR MANZIL
LAL BAGH
LUCKNOW
U.P.
From a photostat : C. W. 11282. Courtesy : Dr. Priyamvada Mathur

57. LETTER TO AGATHA HARRISON
Sevagra me yesterday. First about Henry1 . If I had received any
letter from him I would have answered immediately. But I have
nothing from him. I have enquired of both Pyarelal and Kanu and no
letter from him can be found. I have registered my complaint. I don’t
want to ruffle him by repeating the complaint. Everybody I have met
is sore at heart about his doings in U.S.A. Please give my love to
Henry and Millie.2
About the developments here you know enough. I can add
nothing except this that I am still trying. My trust in the God of Truth
or better still in Truth which is God cannot be shaken under any
conceivable circumstance. That for me is the rock of ages.
I hope Horace received my cable welcoming you, Muriel and
him or any of you. I am in touch with the Metropolitan of Calcutta
and now with the Bishop of Rangoon. This is only by the way to tell
you of the company I keep and cultivate.
I am keeping as well as I can.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
2

H. S. L. Polak
Millie Graham Polak, wife of H. S. L. Polak

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

55

58. LETTER TO MAGANLAL P. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 15, 1944
CHI. MAGAN,

All of you may come over whenever you wish. The reason
for my writing is a letter from Bhai Mayashankar. He writes about
his dues. I think the matter should be settled. Jyotilal writes about
Champa1 and says that she wishes to come here. I think all these
matters can soon be settled.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI MAGANLAL P RANJIVAN MEHTA , B ARRISTER
82 GHODBUNDAR R OAD
ANDHERI , B OMBAY, B.B. & C.I. RLY .
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1030. Courtesy: Manjula M. Mehta

59. LETTER TO PRABHUDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 15, 1944
CHI. PRABHUDAS,

I read your letter written on the Rentia Baras day and also read
the one written by Chi. Amba2 alias Sujata. Why should we fear death
when we know that wherever we are we are dancing in the jaws of
death and they may close any moment to swallow us? Why should we
worry about it? One day we have to leave this world, then why not
today? We are also aware that death is not the end of the atman.
What Tulsiramji says is true but we should not regard it as a
rigid law. In the prevailing circumstances your taking a lawyer’s help
or writing yourself whatever you wish to write is certainly proper. It
may also be your duty.
I was glad to read your syllabus. You should not give up [your
study of] Urdu. You will progress even if you devote half an hour or
15 minutes to it every day.
Take care of your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Chhaganlal Gandhi Papers. Courtesy: Sabarmati
Sangrahalaya
1
2

56

Wife of Ratilal P. Mehta, addressee’s eldest brother
Addressee’s wife

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

60. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 15, 1944
CHI. RAMDAS,

I have had no letter from you. I hope you are quite well and I
need never be worried that I do not have a letter from you. May you
be happy and remain so.
Bhai Mahmud’s reply is enclosed.
May the New Year prove happy for you!
Kanam is absorbed in his play and is bubbling over with joy.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

61. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 15, 1944
God’s grace descends on those who do His work. You have to
do God’s work. Do you ever ply the charkha? Plying the charkha
constitutes the greatest yajna. You should ply it even while weeping.
Meditate over this today.
Do as Pandit Shiv Sharma has directed. He has prescribed
harmless remedies.
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

57

62. FOREWORD
S EVAGRAM ,

October 16, 1944
Acharya Shriman Narayan Agrawal is one of those young men
who have sacrificed a prosperous, perhaps even brilliant, career for the
service of the Motherland. Moreover, he happens to be in full
sympathy with the way of life for which I stand. This brochure is an
attempt to interpret it in terms of modern political science. Acharya
Agrawal seems to have made an earnest study of modern literature on
the subject. I am sorry to have to say that I have not gone through the
treatise with the attention it deserves. Nevertheless I have read enough
of it to be able to say that he has not misrepresented me in any place.
There is no pretence at an exhaustive presentation of the implications
of the charkha economics. It claims to be a comparative study of the
charkha economics based on non-violence and the industrial
economics which to be paying must be based on violence, i.e.,
exploitation of the non-industrialized countries. Let me not anticipate
the author’s argument. I commend the treatise to the careful attention
of every student of the present deplorable condition of the country.
The Gandhian Plan of Economic Development for India

63. A FOREWORD
S EVAGRAM ,

October 16, 1944
Mrs. Vijayalaxmi Pandit has asked me to pen a few words about
the late Ranjit Pandit’s unfinished rendering of Ritusanhar. I consider
myself wholly unfit to do justice to the author’s effort nor does
Vijayalaxmi expect me to attempt the impossible. But the touching
circumstances under which Ranjit Pandit made the effort need
emphasising. It is remakable how much India owes to political
imprisonments. Lokmanya’s celebrated work on the Gita would not
have seen the light of day but for his imprisonment nor Jawaharlal
Nehru’s world-known works. Ranjit Pandit’s Rajtarangini and his
labours on Ritusanhar might not have been but for his imprisonments. And he was ailing in the prison. His literary labours made him
forget his pain. Instead of a preface the author’s introductory notes

58

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

are deeply interesting and instructive. It reveals to us Ranjit Pandit as a
patriot and scholar. Having known him intimately I know what talents
he had. It is a sad thought that such a son of India should have died in
the prime of life. I congratulate Vijayalaxmi on giving to India and
the world her husband’s last labour of love.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

64. LETTER TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN
Silence Day, October 16, 1944
CHI. SHRIMAN,

Herewith my foreword 1 or whatever it may be called. Let me
know if you want something besides this. However much I tried I
could not read the whole book. It requires at least four hours; how can
I spare that?
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 301

65. LETTER TO P. H. GADRE
S EVAGRAM

October 16, 1944
MY DEAR GADRE,

Incidents like what you describe will happen. You must not
mind them. You have to continue to invite visitors. The Managing
Committee members may be told to be careful and tactful. If you
must come, you may come any Sunday. It is Divali today. For
financial strain, I would like you to keep yourself in touch with Bapa.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI P. H. GADRE
NASIK
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

Vide “Foreword”, 16-10-1944

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

59

66. LETTER TO RAMNARAYAN PATHAK
October 16, 1944
BHAI RAMNARAYAN1 ,

I have the letter signed by you and Bhai Umashankar 2 . I was
surprised to find that you two made a common cause. The inquiry is
now on under Jajuji’s supervision. Hence I will not express any clear
opinion at the moment. I will write again within three or four days.
Blessings from

BAPU
ACHARYA R AMNARAYAN P ATHAK
BHARATI NIWAS
ELLISBRIDGE , A HMEDABAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

67. LETTER TO MANGALDAS PAKVASA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 16, 1944
BHAI MANGALDAS,

It was of course my fault that I misunderstood what you said. I
beg your forgiveness for that. However, though my misunderstanding
you two may be pardonable, whose forgiveness am I to ask for having
taken interest in your story of a theft and the remarks I made on
hearing the report? It has relieved me somewhat to know that Jinnah
Saheb has punished me fairly well for that. But for me this
punishment is not enough.
The alternating improvement and worsening in your health is
not a good sign. Please do take care.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4689. Courtesy: Mangaldas Pakvasa

1
2

60

(1887-1955); Gujarati scholar and man of letters
Umashankar J. Joshi, Gujarati poet and man of letters

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

68. LETTER TO JETHALAL G. SAMPAT
S EVAGRAM ,

October 16, 1944
CHI. JETHALAL,

Jajuji has investigated the matter. He had passed on [the relevant
things] for me to peruse. He also gave me the letter addressed to you
which I have read. I find that no office-bearer has made any
allegation against you. Bhai Dhotre 1 never had any suspicion. And
why should he? You are not asking for the return of some money that
had been given away. You have only asked for the substantiation of
any charges against you. There is no allegation, however. But I don’t
like your rejoinder to Jajuji. It reads like a lawyer’s reply. It is not
worthy of a votary of non-violence. Jajuji had asked the questions
only to refresh his memory and you ought to have answered them. I
want you to answer them even now.
Do you really have any khadi activity there these days? What do
you do nowadays? How far have you merged yourself in the life of
the people of Anantapur?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

69. LETTER TO V. L. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 16, 1944
BHAI VAIKUNTH,

I read your letter to Pyarelal. We ought to raise a memorial to
Mahadev. It is worth considering when and in what way it can be
done. I for one have been thinking over it now and then. When you
come here for the 4th of November please arrange things so as to
have a spare day which you can spend here. We shall then talk it over.
Blessings from

BAPU
VAIKUNTH MEHTA
P OST BOX 422
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

Raghunath Shridhar Dhotre, Secretary, Gandhi Seva Sangh

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

61

70. LETTER TO VIYOGI HARI
October 16, 1944
BHAI VIYOGI HARI,

I had your telegram and today I received your letter. It is quite
all right. Subsequently I came to know that this Harijan had come to
you. He is a good man; sort of a labourer and a little moody. He
insulted a lady and on being scolded he ran away the day before
yesterday. He was given the fare and sent home. I think so long as
such Harijans are willing to abide by our rules we should have a place
for them. Such a situation is the consequence of the sins of Hindu
society. I can however understand your difficulties. The student who
arrived here must have spoken to you. I don’t recall his name.
Blessings from

BAPU
VIYOGI HARI
HARIJAN NIVAS
KINGSWAY, D ELHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1100

71. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 16, 1944
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I am herewith sending a booklet about Higginbottom1 . Professor
Joshi had been here to get my signature on it. I declined to sign but
agreed to write about it to some friends. You might have perhaps seen
his farm. Maybe, you can help it a little if you approve of it and ask
others to support it. I thought of writing to Singhania also but I shall
drop the idea for the moment and be content with this one.
You must have received my letter of yesterday.
Blessings from

BAPU

Encl. Pamphlet
From the Hindi original: C.W. 8062. Courtesy: G. D. Birla
1

62

Sam Higginbottom, Principal, Allahabad Agricultural Institute

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

72. LETTER TO SOHANLAL DWIVEDI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 16, 1944
BHAI SOHANLALJI,

I have gone through both your letters. I had a vague impression
that you liked my idea. It was this: It is a bad practice to over-price a
book to secure donations. And associating a name with such a
price-rise is worse. I have conveyed the same view to
Ghanshyamdasji.1
What shall I say about the merits and demerits of your work? I
have no capacity to judge poetry. How can I speak about poems
written in my own praise? Of course I can say you have put in a lot of
labour and no worthy labour is ever wasted.2
If you sell your work at market price we would at least know its
comparative value. No special effort should be made to sponsor the
sale. Many books sell on their own merit without any effort. You may
realize your own expenses from the amount you have collected and,
with the permission of the donors, send the balance to me for Harijan
work or donate it for some altruistic work.
You can make public use of this letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide “Letter to G. D. Birla”, 8-10-1944.
This paragraph is from a facsimile of the Hindi in Gandhi Abhinandan
Granth, p. iii.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

63

73. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 16, 1944
One can do anything when one is peaceful and happy. But the
charkha is the support and solace of the unhappy and the hungry.
You must not abandon it when you are in grief. I shall write to
Kewalramani 1 . Get me to do so in the afternoon.
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

74. LETTER TO K. B. KEWALRAMANI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 16, 1944
MY DEAR KEWALRAMANI,

I have your note. Vidya was a priceless girl with her thoughts
always turned towards God. I miss her probably as much as you do.
But Anand is simply disconsolate. I tell him, in being so he fails to be
true to Vidya. Her soul is surely not at peace when she knows that her
dear ones grieve over the dissolution of her perishable body, instead
of copying her godliness and doing the work of God. Anand is trying
to be peaceful and useful.
Yours,
From a copy. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T. Hingorani

75. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
7 a.m., October 17, 1944
You should make your time-table so as not to leave a moment
free. That is the real love for the departed. Look at the Englishmen.
They also love their dear ones. But they devote themselves to service
all the more when they lose their dear ones.
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

1

64

Addressee’s father-in-law; vide the following item.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

76. LETTER TO AMRITA LAL CHATTERJEE
S EVAGRAM ,

October 17, 1944
BHAI AMRITLAL,

I saw your letters written to Sailen 1 . You should not have
assumed that I would let the marriage2 take place without informing
you. But you have of course given your consent for it. They wanted
to marry even while I was in jail. Then I did not consent to it. But now
even if I tried Abha would not agree to postpone it. They have come
very close to each other. They do observe the proprieties, but their
mutual affection is growing. I would like the marriage ceremony to
take place in Sevagram around the 5th of November.3 I would expect
your blessings for them. Do come if you can.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 10356. Courtesy: Amrita Lal Chatterjee

77. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
S EVAGRAM ,

October 17, 1944
DAUGHTER AMTUL SALAAM,

Received your letter. It is good. Your health is good. Well done.
The more you improve your health the better will be the work you do.
I can send all the money that is needed. If you send a certificate from
Bhagirathji I can even send it from Ba’s fund. But in that case a
certain procedure will have to be followed. Budget sanction will be
required. Satis Babu may himself write about the cow, he can also
advise regarding khadi. He is a trustee as well.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS]
Akbar4 has gone to a village in Gujarat. Zohra5 will join him after
having had training in nursing at the Ashram.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 485
1

Addressee’s son
Of the addressee’s daughter Abha with Kanu Gandhi
3
The marriage took place on November 7.
4
Akbarbhai Chavda and his wife
5
ibid
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

65

78. LETTER TO ARUNCHANDRA GUPTA
October 18, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Your letter of October 2nd as also your letter of 27-7-1944 have been duly
received by Gandhiji. Thanks for your good wishes.
What you say about Bengal is true. The matter is deeply exercising Gandhiji’s
mind. But at present the scope for effective action seems to be very limited indeed. He
feels the handicap and the limitation galls him. He is therefore waiting upon God to
show him the way.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
S HRI ARUNCHANDRA GUPTA
S ECURITY P RISONER, S PECIAL R ESERVE JAIL
P. O . BUNA DUAR
JALPAIGURI DIST. (BENGAL )
From a photostat: G.N. 8670

79. A LETTER
S EVAGRAM ,

October 18, 1944
DEAR SISTER,

You need not transfer the money as proposed by you. Keep it
with you or transfer it to the V. 1 Ashram and use it under Sastri’s
guidance or his nominees.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

66

Vinaya

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

80. LETTER TO VITHTHALDAS JERAJANI
October 18, 1944
CHI. VITHTHALDAS,

I have your detailed letter. My partiality for you is well known
by now. You would think carefully before starting work anywhere.
You need not insist on spinning at places where it cannot be easily
popularized. If people agree either to card or spin or weave or get
cloth woven for their own needs, let them do so. Jajuji will send you a
note explaining my views1 in this matter. Read it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9806

81. LETTER TO INDU PAREKH
Kartak Sud 1 [October 18, 1944] 2
CHI. INDU,

New Year’s blessings to you all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Expressed during discussions with Shrikrishnadas Jaju; vide “Discussion with
Shrikrishnadas Jaju”, 7-10-1944, “Discussion with Shrikrishnadas Jaju”, 8-10-1944,
“Discussion with Shrikrishnadas Jaju”, 10-10-1944, “Discussion with
Shrikrishnadas Jaju”, 11-10-1944, “Discussion with Shrikrishnadas Jaju”, 12-101944, “Discussion with Shrikrishnadas Jaju”, 13-10-1944 and “Discussion with
Shrikrishnadas Jaju”, 14-10-1944.
2
The letter has been included among those of 1944 in which year Kartak Sud 1
fell on this date.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

67

82. LETTER TO NRISIMHAPRASAD K. BHATT
Kartak Sud 1, 2001 [October 18, 1944]
BHAI NANABHAI,

I am sure your son’s operation will be smooth and successful.
Normally this kind of surgery does not involve any risk. You must
pay me a visit before you return. Even if you have no questions to ask
I have some. You may send Manubhai1 and Vijaya2 whenever you can.
They may stay on as long as they like. In the mean while who will
look after the work at Ambla? Blessings to Hiralal and Ponchibehn.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

83. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 18, 1944
We do not know if the dead send anything to the living; but the
living do. Hence we should never weep after their death.
God’s grace is gained by doing His work. This is done by
serving the afflicted—in thought, word and deed.
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

84. LETTER TO DAHYABHAI PATEL
S EVAGRAM ,

October 19, 1944
CHI. DAHYABHAI3 ,

I have your letter. I feel that we cannot submit to a search. If we
are permitted to go only on condition of submitting to a search, we
should give up that desire. I think that you may go if they have
imposed no such condition and if later they want to make a search,
1

Manubhai and Vijaya Pancholi
ibid
3
Son and daughter of Vallabhbhai Patel
2

68

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you should refuse to submit to it.
God will protect Manibehn1 .
I am writing this in great hurry.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI DAHYABHAI P ATEL
68 M ARINE DRIVE
BOMBAY

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro-4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 162

85. LETTER TO B. G. KHER
S EVAGRAM ,

October 19, 1944
BHAI BALASAHEB,

I wished to but could not reply to your letter by return of post.
There is no need to issue a rejoinder to The Free Press [Journal]. It
will be enough if you give an interview to some paper or to a Press
agency. I consider your reply to the Government perfectly harmless
and complete in itself. Your health will improve at the Kaivalyadham3.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Kishorelal is keeping well.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2773

1

A yoga institute of Bombay

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

69

86. LETTER TO DADUBHAI DESAI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 19, 1944
BHAI DADUBHAI,

I have your letter. We should have only women workers for
women’s institutions. Let them make mistakes, if they will, and learn
in the process. Does not the Government tell us that we shall have
swaraj when we have gained experience? Let us learn from them that
women who have all along been oppressed by us must have a right to
make mistakes if we want to help them become independent.
Blessings from

BAPU
DADUBHAI DESAI
NADIAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

87. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
October 19, 1944
CHI. DINSHAW,

I have your letter. I am dictating this to Kanu for fear that my
handwriting may not be legible.
I enclose the name and address of the nature-cure specialist in
Andhra. I shall have a list prepared of other names and addresses for
you.
With regard to Kamubehn my advice is that if she says she is not
able to pay, we should leave it to her. I understand that she depends on
the income of her husband. It seems her father too is in reduced
circumstances. I cannot say for certain. Ardeshir1 must be growing up.
He should become an embodiment of nature in every way.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

70

Addressee’s son

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

88. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 19, 1944
Consider what a poor man would do in your situation. He would
labour twice as much if he lost his wife. He too is a devotee of God.
The inner joy comes from doing God’s work. We should place
ourselves in the position of the poor. You should look upon your
deafness as a gift from God. Even a moment’s idleness should be
looked upon as theft of God’s treasure. I know no other way to inner
or outer happiness.
Do you follow all this? Or would you like me to write in
English?1
*

*

*

The best way to celebrate the date is for you to devote yourself
wholly to spinning or some ashram labour of your choice and
connect Ramanama with it.
*

*

*

Wholly unnecessary.2 You may give something for those who
are in real need.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

89. LETTER TO ANASUYA AND SHANKERLAL BANKER
S EVAGRAM ,

October 20, 1944
CHI. ANASUYABEHN AND SHANKERLAL,

I have letters from both of you. May you both enjoy good
health—mental and physical.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: G.N. 11565
1

The following two paragraphs and the subscription are in English.
The addressee had asked whether he could continue the practice of distributing fruits and sweets on the 20th of every month.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

71

90. LETTER TO S. P. PATWARDHAN
S EVAGRAM ,

October 20, 1944
CHI. APPA,

I have your letter. Let us not gloat over the pleasant nor brood
over the unpleasant. It is therefore well and good that you
experienced pleasure and pain simultaneously. There is no need to
quit the Congress, or to give up the office that might come your way
as a result of the election. Maybe, it is your dharma to cling to the
office. Dharma to quit can arise if there is risk of being left behind.
We must not frantically pursue an elective office so as to lose our
senses. You have to decide for yourself which of the two
above-mentioned dharmas holds in your case.
Blessings from

BAPU
APPA P ATWARDHAN
R ATNAGIRI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

91. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 20, 1944
Today is an auspicious day for you. I had often made Vidya
cry. She would weep like you and implore me to give her God’s
vision. I chided her and told her to see God in the charkha and not
expect to see Him merely by sitting near me. She understood it in the
end.
We are machines as well as mechanics. The body is the machine
and the soul the mechanic. Today you have to take machine-like work
from your body and render an account to me.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

72

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

92. LETTER TO G. C. SONDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 21, 1944
DEAR SONDHI,

This is in reply to yours of 6th.
My blessings you have. Have they any value apart from your
own effort?
Yours,

BAPU
S HRI G. C. S ONDHI
LAHORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

93. LETTER TO SHUAIB QURESHI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 21, 1944
MY DEAR SHWAIB,

Your letter in your usual style. I must await your arrival in
patience. The Nawab Saheb’s telegram quite becomes him. Let us see
what happens.
I hope all is well on your side.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

94. LETTER TO V. VENKATAKRISHNAIAH
S EVAGRAM ,

October 21, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I would like you to make your experiment in Sevagram but I
lack the faith you want to inspire in me. Your intention is wholly
good, your execution is defective. Nevertheless you shall come to see

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

73

me, if I feel settled down. You will know when I am.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI V. V ENKATAKRISHNAIAH
KHADDAR S AMSTHANAM
BEZWADA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

95. LETTER TO GOVINDLAL
S EVAGRAM ,

October 21, 1944
DEAR GOVINDLALJI,

This is in reply to your kind letter of 13th.
I never had any faith in the parliamentary programme. I have
tolerated it as I tolerate many things. You know where my faith lies.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI GOVINDLALJI
15 L ANDS END R OAD , M ALABAR HILL
BOMBAY
From a copy: File No. 3001/H/P 297. Commissioner of Police, Bombay

96. LETTER TO ATMARAM BHATT
S EVAGRAM ,

October 21, 1944
BHAI ATMARAM,

I have just heard that in the name of non-violence you have
given up milk and milk-products as also medicines. I do not at all
approve of this. After all am I not the sole source of these beliefs? You
know that I do take milk although not cow’s or buffalo’s. Hence there
is now no point in my having given up milk. We shall all give up milk
when there is someone among us who will guide us towards
intelligently giving up all milk as such. Understand that the same

74

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

applies to medicines. You can be said to have truly given up medicines
if you ate all your food regarding it as medicine. Know it to be your
dharma to preserve your body which is to be utilized for public good.
Blessings from

BAPU
ATMARAM BHATT
BHAVNAGAR1
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

97. LETTER TO BALVANTSINHA
October 21, 1944
By all means study Sanskrit. The effort made for learning
correct pronunciation will not be wasted. Chaste pronunciation is a
requisite for [learning] any language. But perhaps for Sanskrit
accuracy of pronunciation is imperative. It is not at all necessary for
you to study English. Assimilate the knowledge you already have and
add to it.
My blessings of course are with you .
BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Chhayamen, p. 358

98. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 21, 1944
A man can positively see God through the object of his
meditation. The charkha is the best symbol and it produces tangible
results too.
Institutions like the Ashram, etc., thrive because one needs the
support of others. Physical nearness is not always necessary for such
support. Some find it through correspondence, some through
meditation and still others through the noble words of the dead, just as
we meet Tulsidas every day.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

1

The letter was dispatched through Sarvashri Jadavji, Rasiklal and Jethalal

Joshi.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

75

99. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
S EVAGRAM ,

October 22, 1944
Congressmen should read without passion Dr. Mahmud’s letters
to the Viceroy and his statement to the Press releasing those letters.
The motive in writing the letters was undoubtedly pure. He did not
want his release before that of his colleagues of the Working
Committee and yet the Government could not, consistently with their
declaration, detain Dr. Mahmud after his unequivocal dissociation
from the very start with the civil resistance clause of the A. I. C. C.
Resolution1 of 8th August 1942.
Where Dr. Mahmud erred was in not informing his fellow
detenus of the letters. If he suppressed himself for so long he could
not, without consultation and without authority from them, write to the
Government what his mind was at the time the Resolution was passed.
The practical question for Congressmen is whether they are to make
use of Dr. Mahmud’s services or ostracize him for the ‘impropriety’
he admits having committed. I have no doubt whatsoever that they
should make the best use possible of the services for which his long
and unbroken connection with the Congress makes him eminently fit.
For me, in spite of his indiscretion, he remains the same dear friend he
has been since the Khilafat and before. The public know my
connection with the father-in-law, the late Maulana Mazharul Haque2 .
The Hindu, 24-10-1944

1

Vide Appendix “Resolution passed by All-India Congress Committee”, 8-8-

1942.
2
A nationalist leader from Bihar; one of the founders and, later, President of
the Muslim League. He supported Gandhiji during the Champaran and Civil
Disobedience movements.

76

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

100. HINTS FOR CONSTRUCTIVE WORKERS1
Workers should definitely realize that the constructive
programme is the non-violent and truthful way of winning purna
swaraj. Its wholesale fulfilment is complete independence. Imagine all
the forty crores of people engaged in the constructive programme
which is designed to build up the nation from the very bottom
upward. Can anybody dispute the proposition that it must mean
complete independence in every sense of the expression, including the
ousting of foreign domination? When the critics laugh at the
proposition, what they mean is that forty crores of people will never
co-operate in the effort to fulfil the programme. No doubt there is
considerable truth in the scoff. My answer is, it is worth the attempt.
Given an indomitable will on the part of a band of earnest workers, the
programme is as workable as any other and more so than most.
Anyway, I have no substitute for it, if it is to be based on
non-violence.
Civil disobedience, mass or individual, is an aid to constructive
effort and is a full substitute for armed revolt. Just as military training
is necessary for armed revolt, training in constructive effort is equally
necessary for civil resistance. And just as the use of arms becomes
necessary only when an occasion demands it, even so is the use of civil
resistance only occasional. Therefore workers will never be on the
look-out for civil resistance. They will hold themselves in readiness, if
the constructive effort is sought to be defeated. To take one or two
illustrations, effort for communal friendship cannot be defeated,
political pacts can.
But political pacts are required because of the previous lack of
friendship. Similarly khadi manufacture and its use cannot be
defeated if both become fairly universal. The manufacture and use are
not to be brought about by imposing them upon the people, but they
have to be intelligently accepted by them as some of the necessary
items of the freedom movement, when it is worked from the villages as
units. Pioneers even in such programmes are likely to be obstructed.
They have had to go through the fire of suffering throughout the
1
This was sent to the Workers’ Conference held in Bombay on October 28 and
29 under the presidentship of N. V. Gadgil. Congressmen from Maharashtra, Gujarat
and Karnataka also participated in the Conference.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

77

world. There is no swaraj without suffering. In violence truth is the
greatest sufferer; in non-violence truth is ever triumphant.
If this preliminary observation has gone home to the reader he
will find the constructive programme to be full of deep interest. It
should prove as absorbing as politics so-called and platform oratory.
The detailed constructive programme is to be found in my
pamphlet1 on it, and Dr. Rajendra Prasad’s 2 which is a running
commentary on it. It should be remembered that it is illustrative, not
exhaustive. Local circumstances may suggest many more items not
touched in the printed programme. These are beyond the scope of a
treatise on an all-India programme. They are necessarily for local
workers to find out and do the needful.
In these hints I have singled out some items for fuller emphasis
in the light of experience gained since the publication of the
programme.
The kisan or the peasant, whether as a landless labourer or a
labouring proprietor, comes first. He is the son of the soil which
rightly belongs or should belong to him, not to the absentee landlord
or zamindar. But in the non-violent way the labourer cannot forcibly
eject the absentee landlord. He has so to work as to make it impossible
for the landlord to exploit him. Closest co-operation amongst the
peasants is absolutely necessary. To this end, special organizing bodies
or committees should be formed where there are none and those
already in existence should be reformed where necessary. The kisans
are for the most part illiterate. Both adults and young persons of
school-going age should be educated. This applies to men as well as
women. Where they are landless labourers their wages should be
brought to a level that would ensure a decent living which should
mean balanced food, dwelling-houses and clothing, which should
satisfy health requirements.
Land laws should be examined. The peasant indebtedness offers
a limitless field for research. The problem of cattle too is an integral
part of agriculture in India and therefore requires the attention of
workers skilled in this very intricate and somewhat baffling problem.
Closely allied to the kisan work is labour. Here labour means
industrial labour and, therefore, concentrated and centralized and
1
2

78

Vide “Constructive Programme: Its Meaning and Place;” 13-12-1941.
ibid

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

much more limited in scope. Moreover, it lends itself readily to
political handling; being necessarily confined to the cities it attracts
workers more easily than kisan work. As part of constructive
programme its primary aim is elevation of labour to its deserved
status. Therefore a labour worker’s aim should be to raise the moral
and intellectual height of labour and thus by sheer merit to make him
or her capable not merely of bettering his or her material condition
but making labour master of the means of production instead of
being the slave that it is. Capital should be labour’s servant, not its
master.
Labour should be able to support itself during strikes. (Labour
should be taught the science of conducting a successful non-violent
Labour should be made conscious of its duty from whose
performance rights follow as a matter of course.
In a concrete form:
(a) Labour should have its own unions.
(b) Education, both general and scientific, of both men and
women should be regularly undertaken through night-schools.
(c) Children of labourers should be educated after the Basic
Education style.
(d) There should be a hospital, a creche and a maternity home
attached to every centre.
(e) Labour strike.)
All the work I have mentioned could be only done through
unions mentioned in (a). To my knowledge the Ahmedabad Union is
the best managed union. This does not mean that it has reached my
ideal. It is trying to. If all the unions worked in the same direction, the
lot of labour would be infinitely better than it is today. Labour united
and morally and intellectually trained would any day be superior to
capital. 1
Next in importance is the student class above the age of 12.
Indeed if we had enough workers of the right type, I would go so far
as to say that we should work among them as soon as they begin
learning as infants. For they have to be taken in hand from the
school-going age. Indeed, I need not say that I have not in mind their
political use. For the present the schools are largely under
Government control or are influenced by them. Hence the students’
education is defective in a vital matter. They are untouched by the
political condition of the country save what they learn from the
newspapers or platform orators. They should have in a systematic
1

This sentence is from The Bombay Chronicle, 28-10-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

79

manner their present education supplemented by Congress workers.
How this can be fitted into the present system of education is a serious
question. But it has to be tackled. Up to the matriculation standard cooperation of parents is necessary.
I adhere to the view often expressed by me that the student
world should be aloof from the political turmoil. It would be different
if there was mass civil disobedience. But at any rate for the time being
that is out of the question. But they should have education in national
consciousness. It is the duty of an independent State to teach its
citizens to be patriotic. The education is imparted by a foreign
agency. It runs contrary to the national aspirations. There should,
therefore, be a body of workers whose duty it would be to undertake
the big task of taking in hand the work mentioned above. In this sense
it is a new field and it is of vital importance to us. We must recognize
the fact that the students are not to be weaned from schools and
colleges. The rapidly increasing number of entrants is proof positive
of it. The best course, therefore, is to supplement their studies in an
orderly manner. Deliverance lies through national effort in this
direction showing marked superiority over the foreign method.
M. K. GANDHI

SEVAGRAM, October 22, 1944
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

101. LETTER TO UMIA AGRAWAL
S EVAGRAM ,

October 22, 1944
CHI. UMIA,

Why do you reprimand me ? I wanted to give you a good
husband. Have I not given you one ? I can arrange for divorce if you
do not like him. There are always ups and downs in life. They temper
us. You will make me feel ashamed by feeling defeated like that. You
will hurt the spirit of Jamnalalji and also make Jaya feel ashamed.
Why are you becoming a coward ? I have imagined you to be brave.
May the New Year be fruitful to both of you.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

80

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

102. LETTER TO HIRALAL SHASTRI
October 22, 1944
BHAI HIRALAL SHASTRI,

Why should you need anyone’s blessings for your function?
Even then you have mine. For people like you, however, your work
itself ought to be the blessing. I have heard a lot in praise of your
work. It would have been fine if you could have come. But why
should anyone, immersed in his own work, waste his time going
places?
Blessings from

BAPU
BANASTHALI (JAIPUR)
From a copy. of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

103. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI1
October 22, 1944
Hope is eternal. Devotion to it never goes in vain.
BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuke Ashirvad, p. VI

104. TALK WITH FRIENDS
[On or after October 22, 1944] 2
Friends and co-workers tried to argue with him. He had just presented to them
his enlarged and revitalized programme of constructive work. Would not the great
wave of emotion, which his fast would set up, disturb the “peace and tranquillity” in
which many of them were settling down to work? Gandhiji replied:

But that is just what I want. I do not want you or anybody else
“to settle down” to anything. In the midst of this frightful triple do
so because I know the joy of dying. Because I know that joy and
amazing thing is that I still survive and can feel the joy of living. I can
grief are the obverse and reverse of the same coin, I remain unaffected
1
According to the addressee this “was written on a picture entitled ‘Hopes’
which Vidya used to cherish so much”.
2
From the reference to the “Hints for Constructive Workers”, 22-10-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

81

by either and act as God bids me.
Must you speak through the pangs of hunger? Is there no other method?

There are many. They are for you to adopt. I must use mine,
which I hold as a special gift from God to appeal to the heart and soul
of the people.
a result, it would not let loose a storm with none left to control it?

That may happen. I do not want it. But I would face that risk if
the upshot of living a conscious life of truth and non-violence for
over half a century is that India, too, has to go through a blood-bath.
“Why should you not in that case invite the risk of chaos in
pursuit of non-violence The slaughter of soldiers, civilians and truth, it
is impossible to settle down to anything. One has ceaselessly to be on
the march body and soul. My business is to stir up myself and my
surroundings and shake us out of our complacency.
What reason had he to think that his fast would compel the people to think
instead of paralysing their thinking?
While it might be presumptuous on the part of a puny individual like himself
to think, he replied, that his fast would galvanize the people, it was his faith that he
had not striven all those years in vain to live a life of truth and non-violence, that
gave him the right to speak through his fast.

Today millions are experiencing the pangs of hunger in passive
helplessness. Even a small fraction of this suffering undergone
willingly and with knowledge could change the face of the situation.
How can I speak to these millions, or identify myself with them,
without [under]taking this fast and knowing myself what pangs of
hunger mean?
He could not point to any single thing in explanation of his urge to fast, he
said, but the whole situation in its totality overwhelmed him.

The friends were not satisfied. What guarantee was there that if
anything happened to him as while you are there in the flesh to
control it?” the friends returned to the charge.
Because I do not want anarchy or chaos. I must work for
orderliness, not anarchy. But if in that attempt anarchy comes in my
way, I would not be deterred by it. The world is thrilled by the
reckless bravery of the Japanese. Far greater courage and bravery are
expected of non-violence at this juncture if the law of the Jungle is to
be replaced by the law of love.
Mahatma Gandhi —The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book I, pp. 98-9

82

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

105. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
WARDHA ,

October 23, 1944
Mr. Horniman1 thoughtfully sent the following wire to Mr.
Pyarelal on the 19th:
Can you confirm or deny the Allahabad report that Gandhiji is
contemplating a fast to achieve communal unity?

Pyarelal sent the following reply:
Thanks. Report without foundation.

The reply is accurate, in that I do not contemplate any fast to
achieve communal unity or any particular end. Yet the reply is not
complete.
Ever since my premature discharge, I have been saying to
myself and some friends that yet another fast is in store for me. Of
late what was vaguely felt has been taking a concrete shape, and so I
have been sharing the feeling with a larger circle of friends. The
report has now crept into the Press. It is as well for the public,
therefore, to have a correct version of the talks I have been having
with friends.
Fasting has a definite place in the scheme of satyagraha. It is the
last weapon in the armoury of non-violence. It is taken by way of
penance, purification, protest. If I am at fault, I must do penance. My
non-violence rebels against the organized violence that surrounds me.
It takes many shapes. Lying is as much violence as doing physical
harm to a person. I do not here refer only to the violence of the
rulers. I know this, that non-violence has to be most active in the face
of what may seem to be invincible violence.
But nothing is clear, nothing is certain. What seems to me to be a
call may be no call at all. I am, therefore, testing myself, discussing the
pros and cons with friends, and allowing myself to be acted upon. I
have never made fasting a fad.
I have never looked forward to it and yet it has often brought
solace to the agonized soul, for real fasting puts the soul in tune with
the Maker. It puts life into one’s prayer. All the while, I am discussing
the feeling with friends. I am praying for light and guidance, without
1

B. G. Horniman of The Bombay Chronicle

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

83

which there will be no fast. I ask for the co-operation of friends
throughout the world in my search for light.
The Hindu, 25-10-1944

106. LETTER TO MRS. HIGGINBOTTOM
October 23, 1944
DEAR SISTER,

I have your very kind letter. I have very few English-knowing
girls. I would like you to be able to give me a fairly full course to
village-minded Hindi-knowing girls for village maternity work. Must
it take four years? I confess I am in the dark and so are my medical
friends, not having worked in the villages. You won’t think in terms of
America. How can the village midwife be trained in the first
principles?
My loving regards to both of you.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
MRS. S AM HIGGINBOTTOM
HOME-MAKING DEPT.
ALLAHABAD AGRICULTURE INSTITUTE
ALLAIIABAD
From a photostat: C.W. 10498. Courtesy: Mrs. Sam Higginbottom

107. LETTER TO MANGALDAS PAKVASA
23 S EVAGRAM ,

October, 1944
BHAI MANGALDAS,

I have your letter. You are needlessly alarmed. There is no
question of my doing anything. However, Bapa and you may try to
convince me that I have done nothing wrong. For my part, I see my
error clearly enough. But I will be glad if it can be proved an illusion.
May not your sensitive heart be the cause of the repeated set-backs in
your health? Harden your heart.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4690. Courtesy: Mangaldas Pakvasa

84

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

108. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 23, 1944
CHI. DINSHAW,

I have your detailed letter. I expect you are going ahead with
the trust-deed. Devdas is rather slow but I won’t let him forget about
it.
I don’t worry about the difficulties you mention because God is
there to take care of both of us. We don’t want to do anything for
ourselves, do we? I am writing to Rameshwardas regarding the land
and travelling facilities.
I hope you had my previous letter1 .
I am sure Ardeshir2 is making some progress day by day.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Do you want anything to be added to the medicines for our
treatment? We shall get it if it is necessary. Your Gujarati is all right.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

109. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 23, 1944
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I gather from Dilip’s letter to Swami that your health has
deteriorated once again. It says you have had influenza and so forth.
What is this ? Why has it happened ? I want detailed information. If
you cannot write, let Dilip do so. I am deeply immersed in work.
Dilip must be quiet.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
2

Vide “Letter to Dinshaw Mehta”, 9-10-1944.
Addressee’s son

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

85

110. LETTER TO PARIKSHITLAL MAJMUDAR
S EVAGRAM ,

October 23, 1944
CHI. PARIKSHITLAL,

As usual with me I am not well informed about the parents and
families of my co-workers. I learnt that your father was alive only on
hearing that he had [recently] passed away. If I had known about it I
have forgotten it. Do I have to condole with you? Some day or other
we are sure to lose our near and dear ones and we too are bound to go
the same way. There can be no exception to this rule. I expect,
therefore, that you have resumed your work after performing the last
rites.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

111. LETTER TO GANGA PATEL
S EVAGRAM ,

October 23, 1944
DEAR GANGABEHN,

I came to know only through Gokulbhai’s letter that your
public spirited son has passed away. I don’t think you are distraught.
Are you? You have as many sons as you like. All the men and women
workers are for you sons and daughters. I would therefore ask you
not to go on grieving only to frighten everybody else. Life and death
are and will ever be inseparable twins.
Blessings from

BAPU
GANGABEHN P ATEL
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

86

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

112. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS BIRLA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 23, 1944
BHAI RAMESHWARDAS,

Is the land belonging to the Godrej Farm available? How does
Jivanlalji help? Dinshaw’s search is going on. These days it is difficult
to obtain a vehicle for travelling. Can you do anything about it?
It has been proposed that the Birla House at Sevagram be used
for the Maternity Home. Is there any difficulty about it?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

113. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 23, 1944
There is no harm in sitting near me but on such occasions do
ply the takli as Mahadev and Kripalani used to do. Then you will not
be stealing from God’s time. The takli is our silent companion.
Without making any noise it keeps turning out yarn which the world
needs. While plying the takli we can see and hear everything. I would
go so far as to believe that with God’s grace, being absorbed in this
sacrificial activity even your hearing may be restored to you. But if
you become such a karmayogi1 , you would hardly care for your ears.
The guru in the form of a monkey shuts his ears deliberately since the
surrounding noise comes in his way.2
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

1
2

One who performs action without attachment
The reference is to the Chinese figurine of three monkeys.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

87

114. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
S EVAGRAM , “ VIA ” WARDHA ,

October 24, 1944
DEAR RAJAJI,

Herewith is a letter from Shri Joseph Victoria, a leper. Can you
do anything for this unfortunate ?
Yours sincerely,

S HRI C. R AJAGOPALACHARIAR
48 B AZLULLAH R OAD
MADRAS
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

115. LETTER TO JAMILUDDIN AHMED1
S EVAGRAM ,

October 24, 1944
2

BROTHER JAMIL SAHEB ,

Your letter dated October 7, 1944. The book which Quaid-eAzam gave me contains better arguments than your writings. It
produced no effect on me. What to do? How will you be able to do
what Quaid-e-Azam could not do? Who does not know his influence
over the Mussalmans?
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI

The Hindu, 13-11-1944

116. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 24, 1944
The secret of my peace and sense of humour lies in my
unflinching faith in God, that is, Truth. I know that by myself I can do
1
2

88

The Urdu original is not available.
Convener of the Committee of Writers of the All-India Muslim League

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

nothing. How can I be unhappy when God dwelling within me impels
my every act? I know too that whatever He makes me do, is ultimately
for my own good. I should be happy in this awareness. If God has
taken away Ba, it is for her good as well as mine. Hence Ba’s loss
should not cause me grief.
And so also you should consider it a sin to grieve over Vidya’s
death.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

117. LETTER TO T. B. SAPRU1
October 25, 1944
DEAR SIR TEJ,

The Press cuttings on the breakdown of the talks2 between
Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah and me show that for the most part the criticism
is unhelpful and in some cases even regrettable. In the circumstances
if a representative conference is held it might prove profitable.
Anyway it can do no harm. No one is better able than your good self
to take the lead in this matter.3 This conference should confine itself
to an examination of the Pakistan issue in the light of the

1

This was sent through Dr. Beni Prasad.
Which were held from September 9 to September 27, 1944
3
In his letter dated October 14,1944, the addressee had written: “Mrs. Pandit
conveyed to me your message about the possibility of my calling a conference. I have
for a long time been thinking over it and I have come to the conclusion that not only
have I no locus standi to call such a conference but that such a conference will not do
any good. In the first place I doubt very much whether Mr. Jinnah or the Hindu Sabha
men will make any response as they can very easily dispose of me by saying that I
have got no goods to deliver and I have got no party behind me. Secondly—and this
is more important—I fear that in a conference like this where people will be actuated
by party feeling and will be afraid of criticism from their own following if they take
an independent line, no solid results can be achieved and indeed what I fear is that our
differences will come to the surface. It is for this reason that I think that if you and
Mr. Jinnah can appoint such a committee and that committee can submit a report, it
may pave the way for a larger conference at that stage. I am, therefore, definitely of
the opinion that a conference should not be called at this stage.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

89

correspondence mentioned above.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S IR TEJ BAHADUR S APRU
19 ALBERT R OAD
ALLAHABAD
Gandhi-Sapru Papers. Courtesy: National Library, Calcutta. Also G.N. 7574

118. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI M. PATEL
S EVAGRAM ,

October 25, 1944
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

I have your letter. About sadhana do as I have suggested.
Valjibhai2 is here and he also says that he has checked up everything
with Indian Opinion. My information therefore must be correct. You
will however not be able to render me any personal service. Besides
the sword of a fast is hanging over my head. I cannot say when the
Ashram will go to pieces. Hence, I think it is best for you to continue
to work among the Baraiyas 3 . I am convinced about what you say
regarding education. They should therefore have the training that is
offered at present.
Blessings from

BAPU
R AOJIBHAI M . P ATEL
NADIAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

119. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 25, 1944
Be engaged in more physical work. By all means carry on your
studies and teaching but work a lot on the takli and charkha. Clean the
vegetables. Participate in the work of the Ashram and see God in
whatever you do, since God is omnipresent.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani
1

In his reply dated October 29, 1944, the addressee assured Gandhiji that he
would try his utmost to promote the latter’s desire in this matter.
2
Valjibhai G. Desai
3
A community in Gujarat

90

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

120. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 26, 1944
From yesterday’s experience learn the lesson that you are not to
go anywhere alone.1 Take someone along with you—maybe a boy or,
say, a girl. And keep yourself absorbed in a lot of physical work.
Weeping is no good. Be cheerful like Nandini2 .
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

121. TALK WITH MRIDULA SARABHAI 3
S EVAGRAM ,

October 26, 1944
The unbearable forces of injustice, exploitation and falsehood
prevailing in this country and the world stifle me. Government
subsists on falsehood, but amongst us the number of people, who
subsist on this falsehood and who have made injustice and
exploitation the principles of their lives, is not small. In the presence
of this, good elements of life are entirely suppressed and appear
helpless. There is nothing left like moral public opinion.
On the one hand, there is a combination of violence effected on
an unprecedented scale while, on the other, I have laid a claim that
non-violence has strength enough to oppose any amount of
well-organized and banded violence, and how to achieve it is the
question. There are too good elements in India and the world, but how
to awaken them? How can it be done? Fast is the last resort of
satyagraha. When people cannot be made to do anything it is the right
of a lone satyagrahi to resort to this final measure. If my fast comes
about it is possible that it will be the complaining voice of the
exploited humanity before the world.
1

The addressee had broken down while taking a walk alone.
Daughter of Mohanlal Nayyar
3
The report in Gujarati was released to the Press by Mridula Sarabhai but
subsequently she withdrew it on being informed that Gandhiji intended to issue a
statement on the subject, which however is not available. While sending this
translation to the Home Department, the Deputy Director of the Intelligence Bureau
inter alia wrote: “These notes are of interest as they furnish some indications of the
working of Gandhi’s mind.”
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

91

Those who can foresee the possibility of mass movement,
against the prevailing falsehood, they are at liberty to do it. But the
individual or the individuals who do it must shoulder its complete
responsibility. I cannot give my blessings to it. Today, the
circumstances are not favourable for it. Besides, the public is full of
resentment, and therefore the mass satyagraha would result in
violence. Our little violence will be met by hundredfold violence by
Government. We should not expect merciful treatment from them.
This does not mean that we should be a mute spectator of it, or
that we should continue to suffer it. Those who consider the present
condition as oppressive, and find the laws encouraging injustice and
exploitation and depriving of one’s liberty, they can definitely resort
to satyagraha. Only that it should be done individually and it should
not be devoid of politeness. It can only be done with absolute
non-violence. There are good many forces contained in it. If a crore
of people were to do individual satyagraha it would baffle
Government. Then Government would either be helpless or resort to
use of guns. You cannot sit silent after saying that individual
satyagraha can be offered. It is one’s duty to do it. If the public has
any stamina, it can oppose thus the looting going on under its nose.
Leaving aside the question of a crore of people, if all (local) people
do so at one place, it is enough.
If individual satyagraha is not approved, the prevailing
falsehood of the present day should be opposed in any other way.
Today our own people are depriving the public of their food grains.
If they do not do it, people will not starve. The cultivator, who
produces food, does not get it to eat in spite of its being there. We
have no political power, otherwise its remedy would have been found.
This condition is terrible. I cannot tolerate our people behaving thus,
and collecting vast fortunes at the cost of people’s starvation. If we
can rid our people of falsehood and roguery, Government’s
falsehood cannot work. Let us remove the corruption prevailing
everywhere. It is already there in the Government, but it has increased
to a very great extent among those middlemen who live on brokerage.
If these people improve by themselves, others would do so. Today the
chain of violence is made up thus. Against this we have to work nonviolently. Fast is the last weapon of non-violence.
Corruption—It is both in the Government and other quarters. If
non-Governmental corruption stops, the Government corruption

92

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

cannot go on. Non-violence has to bring about the union of good
elements. Violence brings about unity among wicked elements. This is
the first exhibition of violence.
The second is untouchability. Hindu religion must understand
that it is a sin. If untouchability endures, Hindu religion will not
survive. If the former is removed, the latter is safe. In the removal of
untouchability and in trying to live as brethren Government cannot
interfere.
The third exhibition is communal bitterness. Political settlement
may be effected or not. As long as the present Government remains, it
will not be possible; it would not be allowed. But we can develop good
relations between us. We should not give any cause of complaint with
regard to matters which are in our hands. The conduct of
Congressmen in Allahabad Municipality has grieved me much. In
short, we should develop good relations amongst us in the removal of
untouchability and securing communal unity. Government cannot
interfere in such attempts.
Refer to the supplementary note to the previous suggestions on
the constructive programme and ponder over them. The meaning of
your turning to me every moment for small things is that you do not
want to use your intelligence. Everyone should be his leader. No harm
if you commit a mistake. I shall point it out. You mend it and it
should be considered as atonement. By making mistakes we shall find
the real path. This does not mean that I would not guide you. As long
as I can do so, I shall continue to do it.
When Gandhiji was requested to take the public into confidence with regard to
all that is troubling his mind and to postpone his fast until then, he said:

I am neither in a hurry for the fast nor have a desire for it, but I
think I will have to undertake it. I neither know the time nor the
duration of the fast. I am trying to check that idea. How could I be a
mute witness of the terrible looting and falsehood going on in India
and the world? Then, what should I do? Should I start mass
satyagraha? Or a revolution? That is possible. I can bring it about. But
I do not want to do it. Non-violence cannot remain in it. I will not take
that risk. There is no atmosphere for it. I can foresee it. Therefore the
satyagrahi has only one weapon left and it is the fast. If I can move
my forces thereby, I would do so. But nothing is certain yet. No
decision has been taken on this fast question. Every time the public
knew it after the decision was taken. This time I have been putting it

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

93

before my companions for discussion and consideration, and now this
has been declared to the whole country. If they and the public desire,
they might contribute towards its prevention by lessening its causes.
From File No. 51/4/44. Courtesy: National Archives of India

122. DISCUSSION WITH REPRESENTATIVES OF
HINDUSTANI TALIMI SANGH
S EVAGRAM ,

[Before October 27, 1944] 1
The first question that arose was one bearing on the suggestion that the word
‘basic education’ might be incorporated in the Trust-Deed, so as to make it clear to all
concerned that the education contemplated under the Fund2 would be only of the basic
type. Gandhiji did not approve of it. He did not wish to put any restraint upon the
trustees. If any unit did not want to adopt basic education, he would leave it free to
follow any other system approved by the Board.

But the Talimi Sangh should have the confidence that no one
will be able to find a better system than theirs.
Basic education would forge ahead through its intrinsic merit. He knew that the
reform would not come by mere argumentation. It would come by ocular
demonstration. If they could carry their experiment to a successful end even in one
village, the battle would be half won. He was, therefore, content to go slow. It was
enough that the trustees had agreed to the money being spent for the education and
welfare of women and children in the villages exclusively.

Your work is going chiefly to be among women. I have always
had a passion to serve womankind. Ever since my arrival in India, the
women have recognized in me their friend and servant. They have
come to look upon me as one of themselves. I hold radical views
about the emancipation of women from their fetters which they
mistake for adornment. If God wills it, I hope one day to place some
of my conclusions before the public when my researches are
completed. My experience has confirmed me in the view that real
advancement of women can come only by and through their own
efforts. I am, therefore, anxious that as many women workers as
possible should be inspired to carry out the Talimi Sangh activities
under the Trust.
The second suggestion put forth by the Talimi Sangh was that the age of the
1
The report, date-lined “Wardha, October 27, 1944”, mentions this discussion
as having taken place “recently”.
2
Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Fund

94

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

boys to be covered by the scheme should be raised from 7 to 12.
Mahatma Gandhi explained why he had agreed to the reduction of the age limit
for boys from 12 to 7 years. It had been brought to his notice that, if there were equal
facilities for the education of boys and girls, the mothers would send the boys to
school but not the girls, as they would be loath to spare them from domestic work.
The result would be that the boys would get a disproportionate share of the benefit and
keep out the girls. But if in any place a sufficient number of girls was not
forthcoming, they could take in boys above the age of seven, on condition that they
would have to make room for the girls as soon as the latter came up and that their
education was paid for. The object was not to shut out boys above seven, but to
prevent them from being a burden upon the Memorial Fund. The Talimi Sangh should
not fall back upon the Fund designed for women. All that he was concerned about was
that the money of the Kasturba Fund should not be diverted to the use of boys over
seven at the expense of girls.
“Is it desirable that there should be basic schools for girls exclusively if there
was not enough room for both?” somebody asked. Mahatma Gandhi said he had no
objection.

Supposing crores of boys come to us for education, are we to
refuse them for lack of accommodation? I tell you I won’t. I will let
them sit under the shade of a tree, if necessary, put bamboo taklis into
their hands and begin to educate them straightway through these.
As to adult education, Gandhiji observed that it had become clear to him that
the scope of basic education had to be extended. It should include the education of
everybody at every stage of life.1

A basic school teacher must consider himself a universal teacher.
As soon as he comes in contact with anybody, man or woman, young
or old, he should say to himself: ‘Now, what can I give to this
person?’
Won’t that be supererogation on his part?

No. Supposing I come across an old man who is dirty and
ignorant. His village is his universe. It would be my job to teach him
cleanliness, to remove his ignorance and widen his mental horizon. I
need not tell him that I am to be his teacher. I will try to establish a
living contact with his mind and win his confidence. He may reject my
1

Earlier, talking to a friend, Gandhiji had said he had been thinking hard
during his detention over the possibilities of the new education. His mind had become
restive. He said: “We must not rest content with our present achievements, we must
penetrate the homes of the children, we must educate their parents; basic education
must become literally education for life.”

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

95

advances. I won’t accept defeat, but continue my effort till I succeed
in making friends with him. Once that is achieved, the rest must
follow.
Again, I must have my eye on the children right from their
birth. I will go a step further and say that the work of the educationist
begins even before that. For instance, if a woman becomes pregnant,
Ashadevi will go to her and tell her: ‘I am a mother as you will be. I
can tell you from my experience what you should do to ensure the
health of your unborn baby and your own.’ She will tell the husband
what his duty towards his wife is and about his share in the care of
their expected baby. Thus the basic school teacher will cover the
entire span of life. Naturally, his activity will cover adult education.
Some work for adult education is being done in many places. It
is mostly concentrated among mill-hands and the like in big cities. No
one has really touched the village. Mere three Rs and lectures on
politics won’t satisfy me. Adult education of my conception must
make men and women better citizens all round. To work out the
syllabus and to organize the work of adult education is a more
difficult task than preparation of the seven years’ course for children.
The common central feature of both will be the imparting of
education through village crafts. Agriculture will play an important
part in adult education under the basic scheme. Literary instruction
must be there.Much information will be given orally. There will be
books more for the teachers than the taught. We must teach the
majority how to behave towards the minority and vice versa. The right
type of adult education should teach good neighbourliness and cut at
the very root of untouchability and communal problem.
The particular industry which is to serve as the medium of
instruction will be determined by local conditions in each place. For
instance, people in a village might tell you that they are interested in
agriculture, but they are not interested in the spinning-wheel. In that
case, you will choose the former as the medium of instruction. You
could make a beginning by taking a census of its cattle. For instance, I
find that almost everyone in Sevagram has a bullock and a
bullock-cart. It seems wasteful. The villagers should be taught
co-operation. Again, we must inculcate in them the right principles of
relationship between men and women. Men get almost double the
women’s wages for identical work. Sometimes men sit lazily at home
and smoke while the women toil the whole day. People should be

96

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

made to realize that this is doubly wrong and ought to go. If you
agree with me that the scope of basic education should be extended,
you might have to change your constitution.
The Hindu, 29-10-1944

123. NOTE TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
October 27, 1944
I don’t consider anybody to be worthless. Everybody has done
his best and I am satisfied. However, my yardstick is rather long and
neither you nor I have come up to it. I am firm in what I said
yesterday. You should make the kitchen an ideal one. Kanchan1 may
be asked to join in that work only if she is sincerely willing to
co-operate, otherwise she will be dispirited. If you get her
co-operation, you two, otherwise you alone with the help of anybody
whom you select, should go on working silently. Consult me whenever
necessary. Everybody must be assigned his or her share of the work,
and I should be informed about the arrangement. Only those who can
become one with the life in this village may stay here, others should
leave and go where they like. I will help them in that. Let us be
truthful and non-violent inwardly as well as outwardly.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5806. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

124. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR N. MORARJEE
October 27, 1944
CHI. SHANTIKUMAR,

I see several difficulties in the way of putting off Abha’s
wedding till December.2 If a fast is ordained for me, it is best that the
wedding should be over before that time. I can understand the love of
you both and of Grandmother. But I am sure all of you will be able to
understand the difficulty I have explained. If Abha’s father does not
attend or if, even though present, he does not insist on giving away the
bride, Sumati and you may certainly do so. But since you have
become so intimate [as to wish to do that], please remember that you
1
2

Addressee’s wife
Vide “Letter to Amrita Lal Chatterjee”, 17-10-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

97

will have to follow the simplicity of Abha and Kanu, otherwise they
also will lose it. Is it not our wish that this inter-caste and interprovincial marriage should prove to be ideal in every respect?1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4803. Courtesy: Shantikumar N.
Morarjee

125. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

October 27, 1944
BAPA,

I have your letter regarding big cities. The question is not how
many will stay at the main centre. The question is about utilizing them
within and for the sake of the villages. We shall therefore thrash it out
at the meeting on the 4th. Please have patience till then.
BAPU
THAKKAR BAPA
DELHI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

126. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 27, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

You must have understood what I said about sadhana. Think
deeply over what I said yesterday. This is what I say: unsteadiness of
mind implies impurity of thought, it cannot be regarded as
brahmacharya. This is quite usual in youth, but he who aspires to be a
brahmachari will grow steadier day by day. Discuss this matter with
Balkoba2 or reach a conclusion by looking within yourself. According
to Munnalal’s list for yesterday perhaps both of you would like to go
to the rural areas of the U. P. You will have my blessings if you take
1
Finally, the ceremony of giving away the bride was performed by the
addressee and his wife, while Ravishankar Maharaj officiated as priest.
2
Balkrishna Bhave

98

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

such a decision. If you decide to stay here then this decision as to the
sort of service you prefer should be made after thoughtful
consideration. Take a decision, whatever it may be.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4449

127. LETTER TO BALVANTSINHA
October 27, 1944
CHI. BALVANTSINHA,

I have your letter. It shows your inadequate understanding. I
have spoiled nothing by setting up here the Khadi Vidyalaya, etc. The
organizations initially started by me had to work in close association
with me. If the people engaged in them could not live together as a
family, then whose fault is it? Mine? Maybe, the fault is his who sees
it. The Sabarmati S[atyagraha] A[shram] was remodelled after
thoughtful consideration. It is my belief that we have lost nothing by
being truthful. Again, after today’s heart-searching we have lost
nothing. We were in a slumber but now we are awake.
It is clear from what happened yesterday that it would not be
right for us to continue as we have been doing. Those who can be of
greater service outside should certainly go. What benefit can one
derive from being near to me if one fails to understand my actions
and the changes I make? No doubt a fire bucket is a very useful thing
but how can one become like a fire bucket just by using it as an
illustration? If you wish to be like a fire bucket then be quiet, be
humble and be a sort of comfort for all, and do it after proper
deliberation. Continue the study of Sanskrit. Your first task is to
correct the wrong notions you have expressed in your letter. Consult
Kishorelal. Ask for time if you wish to have a discussion with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1947

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

99

128. LETTER TO D. D. SATHYE
S EVAGRAM ,

October 27, 1944
BHAI SATHYE,

I have carefully gone through your articles on village
reconstruction. I find that they show lack of experience. I don’t find
in this work the attention to detail that is evident in the book on eyes.
Yet the work of rural uplift calls for much greater perseverance and
thoroughness than is required for the care of the eyes.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
D. D. SATHYE
39 P EDDAR R OAD
C UMBALLA HILL
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

129. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 27, 1944
I have come to the conclusion that in your present state you had
better stay here and try to come out of your shell. You will do justice
to Vidya when you forget her and in so doing your true love for her
will reveal itself. Your ears are connected with your mind. Maybe, if
you devote all your time to service your ears will open up. Take
interest in all the activities of the Ashram and mix with everybody.
BAPU

[PS.]
Get acquainted with Amin.
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

100

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

130. LETTER TO SHANTIKUMAR N. MORARJEE
S EVAGRAM ,

October 28, 1944
CHI. SHANTIKUMAR,

You must have received my wire1 . Bhai Amrita Lal, his daughter
and his younger son have arrived. The whole family is pleased.
Amrita Lal is perfectly willing that you should give away the bride.
This simplifies everything. I will accommodate you, Jehangirji 2 and
any other people whom you may bring along in this very place.
Grandmother should not be put to any trouble. Get her operated
upon. Her blessings will be enough.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 4804. Courtesy: Shantikumar N.
Morarjee

131. LETTER TO GOKULBHAI BHATT
S EVAGRAM ,

October 28, 1944
I read your letter to Kishorelal. I don’t remember having invited
you in my letter. I might have asked you to come whenever you
chose. I might have also written that you should yourself decide
matters concerning your State. How can I make categorical statements
about things which I have not seen with my own eyes? However, you
may come now if you choose and if your coming is necessary.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

This is not available.
Jehangir Patel

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

101

132. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
October 28, 1944
CHI. MRIDU,

I am not sending those letters to you. I see that they cannot be
published. More when you come.
Blessings from

BAPU
[MRIDULA ] S ARABHAI
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

133. LETTER TO VIJAYALAKSHMI PANDIT
October 28, 1944
CHI. SARUP,

I got your letter. I again went through my article. Personally I
was satisfied with it. But if you send me a sample I shall know what
you want. This is what I had asked Jawaharlal to do. You might have
heard about it.
Blessings from

BAPU
2 M UKHERJI R OAD
ALLAHABAD
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

134. NOTE TO SWAMI ANANDANAND
[Before October 29, 1944] 1
The tussle you had with Thakkar Bapa 2 concerning the official
work of the Kasturba Smarak Nidhi involved a matter of principle.
There was nothing personal about it.
As a public worker and colleague, your attitude cannot be called
1
2

102

Presumably written before the item that follows.
Amritlal V. Thakkar

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

objectionable. Your protest was within the limits of discipline and was
expressed in private.
Bapa levelled charges against you out of desperation. You had
and still have a right to ask from him a fair deal. If you do ask for it, I
shall grant it to you.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

135. LETTER TO SWAMI ANANDANAND
Sunday, 9.15 p.m. [On or before October 29, 1944] 1
BHA I SWA MI,

I have not forgotten my promise to you. I have been able to
draft the letter only today. I have not talked to Bapa, because my letter
as usual, should have your approval. If you do not like this draft, you
may make one yourself which I can then place before Bapa. If he
refuses to sign it, I am willing to look into your complaint.
Blessings from

BAPU

[Draft]
Bapu tells me that you insist on an open enquiry concerning my
attitude towards you, or a letter of apology from me. I know that I am
quick-tempered. I have no complaints about your work. but I hold
that even though you are my co-secretary, you are still under my
control. Such being my position, whenever you have opposed me, I
have become impatient and lost my temper. I know I ought not to lose
my temper. But I am an ordinary human being. You should forgive
me. I hope you will. You are free to publish this letter of apology
whenever you wish.
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

From the contents it appears that the letter was written before the addressee
resigned from the Joint-Secretaryship of the Kasturba Memorial Trust on November
3, 1944; vide “A Resolution”, 3-11-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

103

136. STATEMENT ON PROPOSED FAST1
October 29, 1944
My heart is heavily grieved by the injustice, exploitation and
falsehood prevailing and increasing, day by day, in the world. The
best remedy for it is to awaken the good elements in the whole world.
Collective civil disobedience is the way for it, but it is not possible
today. It is very likely that such collective activity will result in
violence. If we are able to avoid unofficial falsehood and injustice,
Government falsehood and injustice will be no more. I feel I must do
penance by fasting.
I am asked not to go on fast. I do not know when and for what
duration it will come but let me say that the way to avoid the fast is in
the people’s hands. I desire destruction of exploitation, injustice and
falsehood. If they are destroyed my fast will be unnecessary.
As a satyagrahi I cannot be a silent spectator of all these things.
Revolution or collective civil disobedience is not possible and hence I
must move on my wheels of non-violence through the fast.
I have expressed my views to someone today. I express them to
the whole country. People can give their contribution in the work
which I intend to do.
I cannot see people starve. Their rights are snatched by others.
Nobody must do this. We must avoid falsehood and badmashi. We can
improve those working as middlemen and thus lessen the burden
upon the people. Activities of exploitation are in full swing and have
become unbearable. Government stands firm and is maintaining its
position on falsehood. But injustice and the policy of exploitation
among the people too cannot be ignored2 .
The Bombay Chronicle, 30-10-1944

1

According to the source this is the purport of what Gandhiji said during his
discussions with different individuals.
2
For a statement issued from Sevagram regarding Gandhiji’s contemplated
fast, vide Appendix “A Statement”, 29-10-1944.

104

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

137. LETTER TO RAMLAL VARMA
S EVAGRAM , “ VIA ”

WARDHA,

October 29, 1944
DEA R FRI END,

Your letter of the 25th July has been lying in Gandhiji’s file all this time. He
is very sorry he could not reply to it earlier. He wanted to send you a helpful reply. I
am now to say that he is very sorry he does not know what help he can render in the
matter.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI R AMLAL VARMA
DAILY “TEJ”
S HRADDHANAND BAZAR
DELHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy
: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

138. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA BHAVE
October 29, 1944
CHI. BALKRISHNA,

It is raining today. Detain [him]. Shriram1 may come any day
after the 10th, excepting Monday.
Rameshwardas may accept the agency for ghee, on condition
that there will not be the slightest adulteration and that the ghee is not
sold as ghee from cow and buffalos’ milk and is not used for
adulteration of such ghee.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 213

1

Son of Rameshwardas Poddar.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

105

139. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
October 29, 1944
I have read your letter. Yes, you can take out what you want
from my writings. This work is good but you must do a lot of
physical work. It is very harmful to keep thinking of Vidya and go on
weeping. That remembrance is good which elevates the atman and
awakens it. The nature of atman is sat (truth) chit (awareness from
heart, duly experienced) and ananda (bliss). The test of both lies in
bliss—the inner bliss which finds outward expression. If you do not
get peace here it would be better to go to Andhradesha early. I believe
there you will get satsanga and treatment as well. If you do not, leave
the place.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

140. INTERVIEW TO N. G. RANGA1
October 29, 1944
PROF . RANGA, You say that the earth rightly belongs or should belong to the
peasant 2 . By this, do you mean only that the peasant ought to gain control over the
land he cultivates or that he should also gain effective voice and power in the society
and over the State in which he is obliged to live? If the kisans are to have only land
and not effective political power, their position will be just as bad as in Soviet Russia
where political power has been monopolized by the proletarian dictatorship while
peasants were first allowed to gain some holdings and later were deprived of those
1

The report of this and the other interview with N. G. Ranga on November 28,
1944, was released to the Press by Pyarelal with the following note: “Soon after his
release from prison Prof. Ranga saw Gandhiji at Sevagram. He had two interviews
with him on 29th October, 1944 and 28th November, 1944. It was understood on
both sides that the interviews were not for publication. As, however, parts of those
interviews have already appeared in the Press, I am, under Gandhiji’s instructions,
releasing to the Press my full notes of the talks.” At the first interview Prof. Ranga
presented Gandhiji with a lengthy written questionnaire.
2
For Gandhiji’s statements quoted by N. G. Ranga, vide “Hints for
Constructive Workers”, 22-10-1944.

106

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

holdings in the name of collectivization of land.
GANDHIJI:

I do not know what has happened in Soviet Russia.
But I have no doubt that if we have democratic swaraj, as it must be if
freedom is won through non-violence, the kisan must hold power in
all its phases including political power.
Am I right in interpreting your statement that land should not belong “to the
absentee landlord or zamindar” and that ultimately the zamindari system has to be
abolished, of course through non-violent means?

Yes. But you should remember that I visualize a system of
trusteeship regulated by the State. In other words I do not want to
antagonize the zamindars (and for that matter any class) without
cause.
When you say that a peasant “has so to work as to make it impossible for the
landlord to exploit him” does it include, apart from the satyagrahic campaigns and the
legislative and administrative reforms, that the peasants may oblige the State
through the exercise of their franchise and political influence to improve their
individual and collective conditions and minimize the powers of the landlords?

Civil disobedience and non-co-operation are designed for use
when people, i.e., the tillers of the soil, have no political power. But
immediately they have political power, naturally their grievances,
whatever their character, will be ameliorated through legislative
channels.
‘But he might not have all that political power’, you will
perhaps say. My reply is that if swaraj is attained by the effort of the
whole people, as it must be under non-violence, the kisans must come
into their own and have the uppermost voice. But if it is not so and
there is a sort of a workable compromise between the people and the
Government on the basis of a limited franchise, the interests of the
tiller of the soil will need close watching. If the legislature proves itself
to be incapable of safeguarding kisans’ interests they will of course
always have the sovereign remedy of civil disobedience and
non-co-operation. But as I said as early as in 19211 in connection with
Chirala Perala, ultimately, it is not paper legislation nor brave words or
fiery speeches, but the power of non-violent organization, discipline
and sacrifice that constitutes the real bulwark of the people against
1

The source has 1932. Vide “Chirala-Perala”, 25-8-1921.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

107

injustice or oppression.
You suggest that the existing kisan organizations should be reformed where
necessary. I quite recognize the need for Congressmen who have been working among
kisans to re-orientate the general political attitude of the kisan class organizations so
that they will recognize the need for a united political leadership for winning our
national freedom. I am also convinced that the National Congress provides for us
all—especially for peasants—the most effective weapon and leadership to win
freedom. But is there any harm if we organize peasants into a ‘Kisan Congress’ which
accepts the political leadership of the Congress?

There may be gross self-deception in this presentation. When I
said that the Kisan Sabhas should be reformed, I meant that up till
now Kisan Sabhas have been formed not to wrest power from the
Government, but to capture the Congress. That applies to the student
and labour organizations too.
You are partially right. That was so in the past. But we have now completely
abandoned that idea. Since you made your statement on the subject
in 1938 1 the thing was completely given up. We have adopted the word Congress
not in a spirit of rivalry but because we want to be identified with the Congress. We
will have double membership. Every member of the Kisan Congress will also be
enrolled as a member of the National Congress.

Then why not run the Congress? Why set up an independent
and parallel organization? Don’t you see when Kisan Sabhas are
bona-fide organizations they are the Congress? Today only a fraction
of India’s population is represented on the Congress register. The
Congress aspires to represent the whole nation. It claims by right of
service to speak even for those who are not on its register. When it
becomes a fully national organization, de jure as it is today by moral
right, the bulk of its membership will naturally consist of the kisans
and they will be in a position to dictate its policy.
The trouble is that some of our Congress colleagues think we are ousting them
from their legitimate position of power and privilege. They may not be prepared to
welcome our existence or trust our bona fides. We want to avoid conflicts within the
Congress by willingly accepting the political leadership of the Congress. For
executing our economic programme we want to have a separate class-conscious
organization which will derive power both for itself and the Congress from its
1

The source has 1929. Vide “Discussion with Bengal Congressmen”,
13-4-1938.

108

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

contact with the masses. Unless we do that, others will come and confuse the kisans.

Here you have involved yourself in a fallacy. You should work
to make the Congress fully representative of the kisans. Unless we get
down to this fundamental thing and work from bottom upward, there
will be no swaraj. Every Congressman must make up his mind to
make the Congress an honest organization, and therefore a kisan
organization. As for rights they should follow as a natural corollary
from the performance of service. Otherwise, there is only usurpation.
You have tried for the last twenty-five years to rebuild the Congress
organization and you know the result. I along with others must plead guilty for my
share in the responsibility for failure. I must confess we have not got the confidence
that we shall be able to so behave and act that the Congress will in the end become a
kisan organization. Our fear is that by following your line of action in spite of
ourselves, we shall allow ourselves to be exploited by vested interests. The very fact
that the Birlas and their like are today prepared to give you shelter and you accept it
from them prevents radical reform. Therefore, though I shall feel the wrench, I shall
feel unable to work on your lines.

Then you admit that whilst you will work under the aegis of the
Congress, you will at the same time run a parallel, independent
organization. My mind runs in a straight line. I do not understand this
zigzag. This can only lead to trouble when the Congress becomes an
effective organization. I am thinking of the millions of our
downtrodden countrymen who do not know what to hope and what
not to hope. A parallel organization will only further confuse their
minds. It would be more logical to keep out of the Congress
altogether.
We enter the Congress, but we do not fight for position and power. Can you
not treat us on the same footing as the Ahmedabad Labour Union?

Well, the proof of the pudding is in the eating. It will all depend
on the spirit in which it is done. I have already expressed my
apprehension. It is for you to remove it. You can model your
organization after the Ahmedabad Labour Union. All the Labour
Union members are on the Congress register. They are under the
discipline of the Congress. Yet they are a power in the Congress and
in the Municipality. You should confine yourself to Andhra alone. All
kisans should be automatically on your register. But the purpose of
enrolment should be educative, to make the kisans Congress-minded
and politically conscious.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

109

I am glad you are laying special stress on adequate wages which will assure a
minimum and decent standard of living for the landless peasants. Do you not also
recognize the need for achieving minimum prices for agricultural produce which will
assure labouring proprietors a decent and minimum standard of living?

Of course I do.
The Bombay A. I. C. C. Resolution assures the masses that the power in the
national Government and swaraj India ought to belong to the toilers on the fields, in
the factories and elsewhere.1 Can we say that the spirit of the Resolution means that
the Congress therefore stands for the achievement of democratic-kisan-mazdoor-praja
raj after the attainment of swaraj?

Not only after but before also. The Congress stands for
democratic-kisan-mazdoor-praja raj.
Do not your new instructions envisage the development of kisan
organizations from the village upwards, to provide for peasant leadership and cooperative action, but working in harmony with the local National Congress
Committee and their leadership? I may say that the Haripura session2 of the Congress
has recognized the right of kisans to have their own class organizations. But we are
anxious, in the light of these four years’ experience, that Congressmen shall take the
lead in organizing kisans into their own unions so that there can be real unity and
co-operation between kisan organizations and Congress Committees.

Kisan organization and Congress organization are to me
convertible terms. National Congress organizations to be true have
either to be kisan organizations or nothing else.
Can we organize landless agricultural labour into their separate unions
wherever there are workers to undertake such responsibilities in order to win for them
the barest economic and social justice? I do not envisage such unions in rivalry with
the local peasant unions but as a supplement to them.

Yes, but as part of Congress reorganization work.
Your instructions do not specifically mention the need for awakening and
organizing the Hill Tribes and people of backward areas known as the Excluded or
Partially Excluded Areas. These people number easily thirty million all over India and
they are subject to many disabilities and they need our help very badly. May we take
it that Congressmen have to spare their energies to organize these people into their
unions?

Certainly. The aboriginal is as backward as the Harijan and
more neglected. He calls for all the humanitarian service that
1
2

110

Vide “Resolution Passed at All-India Congress Committee”, 8-8-1942.
In February 1938

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Congressmen are capable of. Unfortunately very few Congressmen
have taken to it.
Can our peasants and their organizations undertake satyagraha campaigns
against any oppressive measures or policies of a landlord or a revenue authority, i.e.,
after all possibilities for settlement by negotiations through the good offices of the
local Congress Committees have failed? We are aware of the 1939 Bombay A. I. C. C.
instructions 1 regarding such campaigns and we accept that when there is a National
Government with which the Congress co-operates, peasants’ unions as well as local
committees have to seek the guidance of the Provincial Congress Committees as to
when and how to start and conduct such satyagraha campaigns.

They would be fools if they did not do that.
What flag do you recommend for peasant unions and handloom weavers’
unions and such other unions which agree to accept the National Congress
leadership? I may inform you that we have decided to drop the Red Flag and adopt the
National Flag, with the typical class or professional emblem such as the plough or
the loom placed in one corner in addition to the charkha which occupies already the
central place.

I don’t mind. To differentiate you can have your class emblem
by the side of the national emblem.
Do you not recognize the need for all the colonial peoples to try to come
nearer to each other, learn from each other’s experience in their fight for freedom and
help each other?

“Colonial people” is a badly chosen expression, “oppressed
races of the earth” expresses the idea better. “Colonial” in the
English language means whites who have migrated to the Colonies.
Are we right in thinking that your stand against world imperialism is intended
to benefit as much the African, Chinese, Red Indians and other non-white masses as
the 400 millions of India?

My correspondence with the Government while under detention
shows that most clearly.
May we have your blessings for our attempt to build up the “Colonial Peoples’
Freedom Front” and thus develop a research, propaganda and ideological platform
with merely advisory and informative functions? I may inform you that several of our
friends and your admirers in England, Africa and the West Indies, such as Mr. Reginald
Reynolds, Miss Stock Kenyatta, Mr. George Padmore, have already been working on
your lines for the emancipation of the colonial and coloured peoples.

1

Vide “A. I. C. C. Resolutions”, 23-6-1939.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

111

I want to say ‘Yes’. But I want to understand its implications.
The greatest social problem of the modern world is the exploitation of the vast
masses of agricultural people by the industrial peoples and countries through the
unequal exchanges imposed upon the former by the latter through their control over
the world markets and finance and imperialist machinery. Are we right in thinking
that you stand for the abolition of this process of exploitation of the producers of
primary commodities and the agricultural masses of the world?

Root and branch.
Are we right in thinking that ours is only a part of the general struggle of
colonial peoples against world capitalism and imperialism and that India is the
vanguard in the world movement of colonial and agricultural masses for freedom,
economic and political?

I hope so.
Is it not our duty to allow Congressmen to join and work in local food councils
and such other quasi-official organizations now that every detail of a person’s life has
come within the price-controls, grain procurement and requisition and acquisition and
rationing activities of Government, provided we feel satisfied that we can render some
effective help to our masses or prevent mischief?

Yes. They ought to be allowed if they can do without loss of
initiative and independence and can really render effective help.
What shall those peasants do whose Gandhi-Irwin salt privileges
have been unjustly withdrawn or curtailed?
They should take the salt if it comes within the clause.
Do you not recognize the need for students and their Students
Congress to understand, popularize and act upon the ideology of the
I.N.C. consistently with their responsibilities as students?
Of course they should study and understand all that. I have set
forth the limitations in my “Hints”.
The Hindu, 23-1-1945

112

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

141. NOTE TO SAILENDRA NATH CHATTERJEE
Silence Day [On or before October 30, 1944] 1
Take the juice of as many oranges or mosambis as possible. You
take dextrose with fruit juice if you feel hungry, not otherwise. It will
be better to live on fruit juice only for two or three days and you will
be all right. You can go to Bombay without any fear.
From a photostat: C.W. 10496. Courtesy: Amrita Lal Chatterjee

142. NOTE TO SAILENDRA NATH CHATTERJEE
Silence Day [On or before October 30, 1944]
Tell him I gave the name3 . Madalasa knows it. I forget now but
she won’t. Sushila too may remember.
2

From a photostat: C.W. 10497. Courtesy: Amrita Lal Chatterjee

143. LETTER TO V. A. SUNDARAM
S EVAGRAM ,

October 30, 1944
CHI. SUNDARAM, 4

Your note. I thought you were definitely coming. From what
fund do you expect me to send you Rs. 1001? You who can
command lacs wanting me to send the University [money] for
building a lowly hut? Does not the incongruity strike you?
As to printing one lac copies of the little booklet, let those who
are interested see to the publication. You have better work to attend to.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 3204

1

According to Amrita Lal Chatterjee, this and the following note were written
at Sevagram in October 1944, on a silence day. October 30 was the last Monday of
the month.
2
Gordhandas Chokhawala
3
Gandhiji had suggested the name ‘Ashok’ for Gordhandas Chokhawala’s son.
4
The superscription is in Devanagari and Tamil scripts.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

113

144. LETTER TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
S EVAGRAM ,

October 30, 1944
DEAR DESHBHAKTA,

Bapa says you are ailing. You cannot afford to do so when all
about you are starving and ailing. Let someone drop me a line about
you. Who is nursing you?
Love.
BAPU
DESHBHAKTA KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
GUNTUR
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

145. A LETTER1
October 30, 1944
DEAR BABY,

You are a baby—as careless as you ever were. You give no
address, the date unfinished, spelling defective. And your letter
received yesterday, the day of the wedding. Well, better late than
never. So you have blessings for X and his wife. Who shall prove
worthy of whom?
Love.
BAPU
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book I, pp. 111-2

1

114

This was addressed to a friend’s daughter.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

146. LETTER TO KULSUM SAYANI
October 30, 1944
CHI. KULSUM,

What a girl you are! You have written to me neither in Gujarati
nor in Urdu, nor even in Hindi, but in English! How queer is our
feeling for our national languages! What help can I offer you? If the
people care, a thousand copies should sell in no time. If the people
don’t care, hold your patience till they feel that strongly.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. K ULSUMBEHN S AYANI
From the Gujarati original: Begum Kulsum Sayani Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

147. LETTER TO DHIRENDRA NATH CHAHATTERJEE
S EVAGRAM ,

October 30, 1944
CHI. DHIREN,

I like your letter very much. You have got a fine job to do.
Serve all and devote yourself to your work. Write to me from time to
time. Improve your health, use a mosquito-net.
DHIREN C HATTERJEE
S ODEPUR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

115

148. LETTER TO ZAINABEHN RAJABALI
[Before October 31, 1944] 1
DEAR SISTER,

Indeed, you have given me happy news. Congratulations to you
and to Chi. Latif. Let us hope Dr. Latif will carry forward the legacy
of his father and earn the blessings of millions.
Blessings from

BAPU
ZAINABEHN R AJABALI
57 C W ARDEN R OAD
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

149. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM K. JERAJANI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 31, 1944
BHAI KUKABHAI,

I carefully read your letter of the 23rd, Jajuji also read it.
He has asked for a clarification, as is his wont, and says that we
five should put our heads together. And I should let you all know the
conclusion that I should draw from our consultations. But at the
moment Jajuji does not propose to trouble any one of you. Hence, if
you three come three days before the meeting of the the A.I.S.A., we
could discuss things at length and also formulate our policy. We can
also bring about a change in the Secretaryship, if it is found
necessary. You will of course press Jajuji to accept the Secretaryship.
After all it was I who had insisted upon it, wasn’t it? By three I mean
Vithaldas, Lakshmidas and you. You will yourself write to the two
friends.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10853. Courtesy: Purushottam K.
Jerajani

1

116

In the source this letter is placed before those of October 31, 1944.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

150. LETTER TO MAHADEV A. HINGORANI
S EVAGRAM ,

October 31, 1944
CHI. MAHADEV1 ,

You do not write yourself but keep asking Anand, “Does Bapu
ever remember me?” I do remember you. Now write to me regularly.
What do you read? Do you take exercise? What do you eat? When do
you go to bed? Write all this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

151. LETTER TO DR. GOPICHAND BHARGAVA
[Before November 1, 1944] 2
BHAI GOPICHAND,

Do I ever add my signature to an appeal, if I have myself not
worked for the cause? My blessings are certainly there. You will get
the money, but do not ask for my signature to be published. Consider
my plight.
DR. G OPICHAND BHARGAVA
LAHORE
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

152. LETTER TO T. B. SAPRU
November 1, 1944
DEAR SIR TEJ BAHADUR,

I appreciate your very affectionate letter of 25th October.3 I
want all the assistance I can get from friends like you for my
guidance. I have never found myself in the condition I am in today.
My ultimate guide is Truth the name by which I know God best. So
far as I know there will be no haste. I am going through the daily
routine as if the fast is not coming at all. Please therefore do not
1

Son of Anand T. Hingorani
In the source this letter is placed before those of November 1, 1944.
3
Vide Appendix “Letter from T. B. Sapru”, 25, 10, 1944.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

117

hesitate to warn me as often as you like. I hope you had my letter 1
through Dr. Beni Prasad2 .
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Sapru Papers. Courtesy: National Library, Calcutta. Also G.N. 7573

153. LETTER TO N. R. JOSHI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 1, 1944
DEAR JOSHI,

It is disgraceful that I should reach only today yours of 2nd
ultimo.3 You know the reason why. As you contemplate coming to
me, I defer action on your appeal pending your arrival. Do please
come whenever you can barring Mondays. If I am away or anything
happens to me you will learn from the papers and act accordingly.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI N. R. J OSHI
S ECRETARY, H IGGINBOTTOM R ECOGNITION F UND
ALLAHABAD AGRICULTURAL INSTITUTE
ALLAHABAD
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide “Letter to T. B. Sapru”, 25-10-1944.
Professor of Political Science, Allahabad University
3
The addressee had sought Gandhiji’s help and guidance for raising the
Higginbottom Recognition Fund which was to be used for the development of the
Allahabad Agricultural Institute. Dr. Sam Higginbottom, who had completed 70 in
October, was retiring from the Institute.
2

118

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

154. LETTER TO A. K. CHANDA
November 1, 1944
DEAR ARUN KUMAR CHANDA,

I hope you are better. I note your advice about fasting.1 I am in
God’s hands. Why do you think that I have not the Eastern Provinces
in mind?
BAPU
S HRI ARUN KUMAR C HANDA
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

155. LETTER TO HARIBHAU PHATAK
S EVAGRAM , “ VIA ” WARDHA ,

November 1, 1944
DEAR SHRI PHATAK,

Shri A. V. Thakkar in a letter dated 16.10.1944 writes to me as follows :
Bapu had transferred Rs. 2,000/- to Shri Haribhau Phatak for Harijan work. But
no work seems to have been done so far. A lot of correspondence has been passing
between Shri Phatak and Shri Barve of Dhulia, the President of the Maharashtra
Sangh. The main point of contention seems to be that Shri Phatak would not agree to
realize Rs. 3/- or Re. 1/- from the Members of the Committee as required by the
Constitution of the Sangh.”
Gandhiji has desired me to draw your attention to it. A line in reply will
oblige.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI HARIBHAU P HATAK
P OONA
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

The addressee, Deputy Leader of the Assam Congress Parliamentary Party, had
invited Gandhiji to pay a visit to Bengal, Bihar and Assam and contact the suffering
humanity there before undertaking another fast “as his life was no less the nation’s
than his own”.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

119

156. LETTER TO NATINDRA NATH DAS
S EVAGRAM , “ VIA ” WARDHA ,

November 1, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji has your letter of the 25th ult. for which he desires me to thank you.
You should seek guidance from Congress leaders. He is unable to advise.
Yours sincerely,

S HRI NATINDRA NATH DAS
C ONTAI P.O.
MIDNAPORE
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

157. LETTER TO KODI NARASIMHAN
S EVAGRAM , “ VIA ” WARDHA ,

November 1, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji has your letter of 24th ult. for which he desires me to thank you.
He has never said to anyone that Communists as such should not be admitted
to the Congress. So far as he knows no one who signs the Congress creed and pays
4 as. can be prevented from becoming a member.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
S HRI KODI NARASIMHAN
NANDYAL
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

158. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 1, 1944
CHI. NARANDAS,

If you had used the wedding at least as an excuse for coming, I
could have met you both. We could have talked about important
matters. But I can understand your not coming. I am not happy that

120

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

all of you keep indifferent health. But, knowing that you are a
thoughtful man, I trust that you must be using your discretion in all
that you do, and so do not worry.
Whether I will fast or not rests with God. He will prompt me to
do what is ordained and nothing else.
Whatever I do about the Kasturba Fund I will do after giving
careful thought. You on your part should go on sending me whatever
ideas occur to you.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS]
You will get Rs. 3,500.
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8618. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

159. LETTER TO T. R. DEVGIRIKAR
November 1, 1944
BHAI DEVGIRIKAR,

What do you want me to write regarding Vasukaka 1 ? We were
alike in many things. How am I to write any more?
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 7914

160. DISCUSSION WITH H. J. KHANDEKAR
[On or before November 2, 1944] 2
Send me your scheme3 immediately and I shall give my thought
to it.
When Mr. Khandekar wanted Gandhiji to attend the next session
of the Depressed Classes League, the Mahatma replied:
If possible.
1

Vasukaka Joshi
The report appeared under the date-line “Nagpur, November 2”.
3
Hemchandra J. Khandekar, M.L.A., Working President of the All-India
Depressed Classes League, had demanded separate Harijan University, schools and
hostels for boys and girls and wanted these institutions to be financed by caste
Hindus.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

121

In reply to another question whether sufficient number of
Harijan members could be co-opted to the Harijan Sevak Sangh so as
to form a Harijan majority, Gandhiji said:
No. It is a body of those who want to undergo prayashchitta1
and this must be done by the caste Hindus only. The touchables
should serve the untouchables and the latter should accept the services
of the former.
To the question when untouchability would be removed, Gandhiji said:

Perhaps both of us may not live to see it. But it is my firm
conviction that untouchability will have to go if the Hindu religion is
to live.
The Hindu, 7-11-1944

161. LETTER TO EMILY KINNAIRD
S EVAGRAM ,

November 2, 1944
DEAR MOTHER,

What is a Christian luncheon table? What distinguishes it from
say a Hindu or a Muslim luncheon table?
You won’t fret about my fast, if it comes. For if it does, it will
come from God and He will be responsible for the result that may
follow.
How can I pay even a pie towards the expenses of a room
named after my wife? You may pay an anna yourself.
Your loving son,

BAPU
MRS. E MILY KINNAIRD
Y. W. C. A.
57 C ANTONMENT R OAD
LUCKNOW
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

122

Atonement

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

162. LETTER TO K. P. CHAKRAVARTY
S EVAGRAM ,

November 2, 1944
DEAR CHAKRAVARTY,

Your touching letter. Treasure your wife’s memory and devote
yourself to the service of afflicted humanity round you. No one really
dies. Bodies are destined to perish; some today, some tomorrow.
BAPU
S HRI K. P. C HAKRAVARTY
TOLLYGUNGE
C ALCUTTA
From a copy Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

163. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
November 2, 1944
I have carefully read your two letters. I will take the last
sentence. I will assuredly not undertake a fast unless it is as clear to me
as daylight [that it is my duty to do so]. Secondly, at whose call?—of
the God of Truth or of the ego? If on the earlier occasion it was that
of the God of Truth, so will it be this time, too. I have answers to all
the other arguments. After declaring my intention to fast, I am
examining myself. If any argument against the fast convinces me
beyond the shadow of a doubt, I would give up my intention, but if
ultimately I get a clear call from the God of Truth, nobody will be
able to dissuade me. You may go on arguing, but please do not worry.
I should certainly be pleased to meet you, but it is not essential for us
to meet over this problem. Leave me to the mercy of God. Get well
completely. . . 1
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 204

1

Omission as in the source

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

123

164. LETTER TO BHAGWANJI P. PANDYA
November 2, 1944
CHI. BHAGWANJI,

Your suggestions regarding the Kasturba Memorial [Fund] are
excellent. We shall succeed only in the measure that they are implemented. I hope you are doing well.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI BHAGWANJI P URUSHOTTAM
HARIJAN ASHRAM
WADHWAN C ITY
KATHIAWAR
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 399. Courtesy: Navajivan Trust

165. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 2, 1944
BHAI SATIS BABU,

I shall of course send Balvantsinha but, so long as a local worker
does not come forward to take up this work on a permanent basis the
difficulty in maintaining the cows is bound to be there, is it not? I do
not like that Dhiren should leave his work and attend to the cows.
However it will be good if he can learn to do that in addition to his
present work. It is quite possible though, that I am mistaken in this
because goseva should be a full-time job.
Blessings from

BAPU

[P.S.]
Why does Arun1 fall ill? Hasn’t he completely recovered yet?
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1639

1

124

Addressee’s son

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

166. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
November 2, 1944
Nandini is living, having been brought up by her grandmother.
Her mother had died after giving birth to her. Therefore it was my
duty to distribute bananas. The memory of Vidya makes you cry and
therefore it will be mere attachment if you distribute bananas. If you
want to do something for Vidya, I should advise you not to buy
bananas but save the amount for those who are really famished. One
has to act keeping in mind the individuals concerned. This is the test
of good behaviour. Give each one according to his deserts.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

167. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
S EVAGRAM ,

November 2, 1944
DAUGHTER A. S.,

I have your two letters. You may have been angry but this I
know that I do what is for your good and what I consider my dharma.
You may work hard all your life, but you don’t know how to keep
accounts. Hence I want someone else to certify [the accounts]. You
will have no difficulty if you understand this. The expenses on your
food are met from here. Chi[manlal] has just confirmed that he sends
money regularly. Do you want it in a lump sum? If you spoil your
health and that too by cutting on your food I shall have to quarrel
with you.
If at all I must undertake a fast it will be at God’s command.
You will stick to your work.
Dr. Mahmud and his two sons are with me. They are nice boys.
There is no difference between shabash1 and dhanyavad. One is
derived from Persian and the other from Sanskrit. The latter I have
already sent.2 Now I send you the former. This is Hindu-Muslim
Unity!
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 486
1
2

Literally, both mean ‘well done’ but dhanyavad means ‘thanks’ also.
Vide letter to the addressee, “Letter to Amtussalaam”, 17-10-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

125

168. LETTER TO GOKHALE
S EVAGRAM ,

November 2, 1944
BHAI GOKHALE,

I read your letter to Pyarelal. Your questions are good. But I do
not wish to be involved in answering them. Please excuse me. If my
fast does not come about, I would like to meet you. Even if it does
materialize and, provided I survive it, you may come over and we shall
have a talk. In the mean time do whatever service you can. Learn
Hindi. Have this letter read out to you. I shall be pleased to have a
reply either in Marathi or Hindi.
Blessings from

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

169. LETTER TO LAKSHMAN PRASAD TIWARI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 2, 1944
SHRI PANDIT LAKSHMANSINGHJI TIWARI,

I have before me your daughter’s heart-rending letter. She
wants that either you should bless her marriage to the boy of her
choice, or, if that is not possible, you should never force her to marry
anybody else. I think you can have no objection to this. How can we
now coerce our daughters?
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
LAKSHMAN P RASAD TIWARI
NARASINGHPUR
HOSHANGABAD
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

126

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

170. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
[After November 2,] 1 1944
CHI. A. S.,

You are right in saying that I have lost faith in your word; how
can I have it? I am not at all angry, my only consideration is my duty
towards you. I cannot share the financial responsibility. Submit your
budget to Jajuji. You are sure to get the amount he sanctions. It is not
proper to trouble Bari Khan2 for your expenses. It would be better if
you can get them from another brother, otherwise take them from the
Ashram. There is always a place for you in the Ashram, and positively
so in my absence. You should give up building castles in the air. Stick
to any job you may take up.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 691

171. LETTER TO BIPINBIHARI CHATPAT
[Before November 3, 1944] 3
BHAI BIPINBIHARI CHATPAT,

Shardabehn has given me a copy of your original letter, which I
have perused.
I like your ideas. It would be better to carry on the work under a
single authority. I had once (before August 1942) made an
unsuccessful attempt. I am going to try again.
What was wrong in Bhai Amritlal writing a reply to you? It was
his effort at saving me the trouble. The work that he is doing is for
putting into practice Kakasaheb’s ideas. Like you he does his work
regarding it as his dharma. The only difference is that I do not know
you, whereas I know him well. Why can’t you all work in unison
although you work independently? From your letter I see that there is
some difference between your way of thinking and mine. I shall not
discuss the point here as I don’t have the time. Tandonji 4 is likely to
come here. Kausalyayanji5 will surely come. I shall have a discussion.
1

From the contents it appears that this letter was written after the letter to the
addressee dated November 2. Vide “Letter to Amtussalaam”, 2-11-1944.
2
Addressee’s brother
3
In the source this letter is placed before those of November 3, 1944.
4
Purushottamdas Tandon
5
Bhadant Anand Kausalyayan
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

127

I shall also try to satisfy you if you happen to come some time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

172. A NOTE
November 3, 1944
It is very good but it does not touch me because I have not been
able fully to devote my mind to it. The entire constructive programme
is the end. Negative non-co-operation is meant to achieve that end.
The example of Christian missionaries would not help because the
way to realizing God as Truth is different. I cannot describe that way.
If someone can see it in my life, let him do so. Here fasting is very
important. Natural death comes even to animals and birds as it comes
to us. If you feel like writing something after reading this, do so. Send
this back to me.
BAPU
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

Museum

and

173. LETTER TO BAL D. KALELKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 3, 1944
CHI. BAL1 ,

I have your very beautiful letter. I can understand that Western
music has claimed you. Does it not mean that you have such a
sensitive ear as to appreciate this music? All I wish is that you should
have all that is to be gained there and come here when your time is up,
and be worthy of your country. I don’t know whether I shall survive
to see you. And what does it avail to know about it beforehand?
Aren’t we all in God’s keeping? I like your letter so much that I
would love to reply to it at length but it cannot be. This too I have
written out soon after the morning prayer.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

128

Sons of D. B. Kalelkar

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

174. LETTER TO SATISH D. KALELKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 3, 1944
CHI. SHANKAR 1 ,

I send you the enclosed letter rather late because I wanted to
send through you the letter to Bal also. Please send Bal’s letter on to
Kaka. Either you or Chandan2 should make a copy from the
aerogramme and send it. I could read it only after I had a copy made.
I hope you are all fine.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

175. TELEGRAM TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
Express

S EVAGRAM , W ARDHA ,

November 3, 1944
R AJAJI
THYAGARAYANAGAR
MADRAS
SORRY.

TELEGRAPH

NATURE

UNSATISFACTORY

HEALTH.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

176. TELEGRAM TO JUGAL KISHORE BIRLA3
November 3, 1944
S HETH JUGALKISHORE
C ARE LUCKY
BENARES
DEPEND

UPON

IT

I

AM

IN

GOD’S

HANDS.

BAPU
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

Sons of D. B. Kalelkar
Addressee’s wife
3
The addressee had wired Gandhiji requesting him not to risk his life by
undertaking a fast.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

129

177. LETTER TO T. B. SAPRU
November 3, 1944
DEAR SIR TEJ BAHADUR

This is written in a hurry.1
I suggest not a tentative public statement but a personal letter to
a few representatives asking whether they favour the idea of calling a
conference.
I have in mind not a centre but a board composed of
representatives of the two States regulating matters of common
concern and enforcing the treaty obligations.
The conference will meet to consider the causes of the failure of
the talks, to find whose fault it was and to suggest an independent
solution, if any. It will inform and educate public opinion. Thus there
is no fear of failure unless the conference does not come to a
unanimous decision or one tantamount to it.2
You must keep well.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Sapru
G.N. 7572

Papers.

Courtesy:

National

Library,

Calcutta.

Also

178. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 3, 1944
CHI. SUSHILA,

Do not get agitated on reading about my fast. What is ordained
will happen. I will do only what God prompts me to do. But this time
everything seems unusual. I don’t worry, though. I am not happy that
you are alone there, but in a way I am happy, too. I am happy because
1

This and the other letter dated November 1 were handed over to the addressee
by Devdas Gandhi at the Wardha station on November 3.
2
For the addressee’s reply, vide Appendix “Letter from T. B. Sapru”, (a). The
Standing Committee of the Non-Party Conference met at Delhi on November 18 and
19 under the chairmanship of the addressee. For the text of the resolution adopted at
the meeting, incorporating certain changes suggested by Gandhiji, vide “Letter from
T. B. Sapru”, (b). For a list of names suggested for the Conciliation Committee, vide
“Letter from T. B. Sapru”, (c).

130

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you are passing through a severe test. I am impatient to send back
Manilal, but his going has become uncertain because of his fear
regarding my fast. How can I send him away against his will? He will
surely leave if he is able to muster courage.
I too would have been happy if Sita had stayed with me. But I
see that her interest lies in going through the modern style of
education . She is a nice girl. She will earn a good name and bring
credit to us.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4939

179. A RESOLUTION1
[After November 3, 1944] 2
While accepting the resignation of Swami Anand from Joint
Secretaryship, this meeting of Trustees thanks him for his industry
and devoted service.
[From Hindi]
Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Trust Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

180. LETTER TO METROPOLITAN OF CALCUTTA
November 5, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Utmost frankness is a sure test of friendship. I therefore
appreciate all your criticism, being that of a true friend.
Gould you tell your audience in Dacca that religious strife
should be impossible especially in a place which is a seat of learning?
The influence of a university should travel beyond its four walls.
Religion should be a binding, not a disruptive force. I need not
elaborate this thought. It came to me as I was reading your letter.
The late Charlie Andrews used to tell me of the good that some
missionaries had done among the Frontier tribes. This was
1

This was drafted by Gandhiji and passed at the Kasturba Gandhi National
Memorial Trust meeting on November 5. Swami Anand’s letter of resignation was
dated November 3, 1944.
2
ibid
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

131

corroborated by Khan Saheb Abdul Ghaffar Khan. Your testimony
therefore does not come upon me as a surprise.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
THE LORD BISHOP OF C ALCUTTA
BISHOP’S HOUSE
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

181. A NOTE1
November 6, 1944
The attempt is good. I can understand the argument. But how
far can reason take you ? Hence even though I give due weight to
reasoning. I depend on prayer. I act in the light of the answer I get
through prayer. I shall be guided by God. It is a difficult task. I am
not worried. There is no hurry at all. I continue working. I do not stop
work fearing imminent death. Take my fast also in the same way. Do
write to me if you can think of something more.
You have written in English. Could you not have conveyed it in
Hindi or Gujarati ? You did well to have written to Shankerlal.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

182. LETTER TO S. RADHAKRISHNAN
S EVAGRAM ,

November 6, 1944
DEAR SIR RADHAKRISHNAN,

I have your two kind letters.
As to the suggestions about the use of the K. G. M. funds I read
your letter to the Trustees.2 I shall bear your suggestion in mind. I
wish you could have attended the meeting.
1

This is written on a communication in English from Gulzarilal Nanda.
The addressee had suggested that funds should not be spent on purposes which
it was the duty of the Government to carry out; they should be utilized for the
establishment of orphanages and pilgrim centers and for the selection of women to be
sent to Russia and Japan to study rural uplift.
2

132

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

As to the contemplated fast, the ultimate decision will be His, not
mine. I would have been untrue to friends, if I had not shared with
them the struggle through which I am passing.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S IR S. R ADHAKRISHNAN
VICE-CHANCELLOR
HINDU UNIVERSITY
BENARES
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

183. LETTER TO PADMAJA NAIDU
S EVAGRAM ,

November 6, 1944
1

MY DEAR LOTUS-BORN ,

So you will presently complete another year of the allotted span
of your life. Who knows what is your span? So it is forgivable to hope
that you will have many years of service of the mother land. Hope
you are taking care of yourself.
Love.
BAPU
S MT. P ADMAJA
HYDERABAD
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

184. LETTER TO PRINCESS OF BERAR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 6, 1944
DEAR PRINCESS2 ,

Sarojini Devi3 has just given me the sad news that your
illustrious father is no more. All my sympathies are with you. This
death reminds me of the glorious Khilafat days when for the brief
period Hindus and Muslims seemed to be united so as never to be
parted by any person or thing. Alas! it was not to be. Sarojini Devi
1

Literal translation of the addressee’s name
Durdana Begum, nee Durr-e-Shahvar
3
Sarojini Naidu
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

133

also tells me how you are serving the poor in your part of India. May
God bless you.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
THE P RINCESS OF BERAR
HYDERABAD
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

185. LETTER TO DR. LAXMIPATHI
S EVAGRAM

November 6, 1944
DEAR LAXMIPATHI,

Mine is a most unenviable position. You remember how helpless
you were when Ashadevi’s son died. I do not want allopathic
medicine and yet I do not get out of its coil. You are very good but
you refuse to see things as they are. I am now trying Pandit Shiv
Sharma. I do not know how I shall fare.
Yours,

BAPU
DR. L AXMIPATHI
BEZWADA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

186. LETTER TO DR. M. E. NAIDOO
S EVAGRAM ,

November 6, 1944
DEAR DR. NAIDOO,

I was glad to see your familiar handwriting. I am all with you.
Only you are too impatient. Time is on our side.1
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. M. E. N AIDOO
KOTTAR
From a photostat: G.N. 95. Also C.W. 9197

1

The addressee felt that the Brahmins of Mylapore and Tanjore were not really
for social equality of Harijans. He wanted Gandhiji to introduce inter-caste dinners.

134

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

187. LETTER TO P. G. MAVALANKAR1
S EVAGRAM ,

November 6, 1944
CHI. PURUSHOTTAM,

You have set for yourself a splendid and difficult ideal. God will
help you. Come and see me some time.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1717

188. LETTER TO PREMA KANTAK
S EVAGRAM ,

November 6, 1944
CHI. PREMA,

You are quite silly. You are dying before your death! Is not the
fast but a threat as yet? It is not at all certain. Is it likely to come
unless God wills? Anybody who understands its profound meaning
would welcome it, and look upon the day [it starts]as a blessed day. If
it comes, I alone will have to undertake it. Nobody else will be
permitted to join me. After my passing away, others may be called
upon to fast one after another. But why think about that just now?
Remain absorbed in your work and keep others absorbed in theirs.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10432. Also C.W. 6871. Courtesy:
Prema Kantak

1

The addressee had sought Gandhiji’s opinion on two of his articles, one on
his ideal and the other a Gujarati translation of a tribute by the addressee’s father to A.
B. Dhruva. Gandhiji had handed this letter to G. V. Mavalankar saying he would send
his opinion on the tribute later. Vide “Letter to G. V. Mavalankar”, 28-1-1945.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

135

189. LETTER TO AKBARBHAI CHAVDA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 6, 1944
CHI. AKBAR,

I have your beautiful letter. May God bless you with excellent
health. Your work is fine.
Zohra will write to you and tell you how she is doing.
Sushilabehn will certainly write to you about guinea-worm. The best
way is to foment the spot with hot water and bandage it. As and when
the worm shows, you should tie it up and not let it snap. BY and by it
will come out.
I suppose you know the simple remedy of an enema.
Vallabhram Vaidya’s pills are available at the Majoor Mahajan. They
may also be available with somebody in Palanpur. About this matter,
too, Sushilabehn alone can write to you in detail.
Do not worry about my fast. Nothing is certain yet. Write to me
regularly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3235

190. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 6, 1944
CHI. MATHURADAS,

What shall I write to you? Give up all worrying, whether on my
account or Dilip’s 1 or any other. You will then get well sooner. You
must not write to me yourself but content yourself by dictating to
Dilip. I am tied up with so much work. MY health, however, is
co-operating with me.
Blessings from

BAPU
MATHURADAS , B OMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

136

Addressee’s son

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

191. LETTER TO DILIP M. TRIKUMJI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 6, 1944
CHI. DILIP,

I have your letter. Your duty is now to serve your father.
Reassure him on your side. His blessings which will be evoked by the
service you render will spiritually benefit you in all ways.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

192. LETTER TO JYOTILAL A. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 6, 1944
BHAI JYOTI,

I had your wire and also your letter. I have had a talk with
Parikshitbhai1 who is here. You must see to it that no one does
physical violence to Ratilal2 . After all he is Chi. Champa’s husband.
All we have to see to is that he does not annoy Champa. In all other
respects we should be considerate to him.
Doctor3 had the Bungalow4 constructed specially for the benefit
of the Ashram; only he used to stay there whenever he wished. I was
expected to accommodate my guests in the Bungalow. Now Doctor
is no more. I never asked him to commit anything to writing.
And then Ratilal turned out to be a mental case. How can I convince
Prabhashankar5 ? Champa used to be under Prabhashankar’s control,
1

Parikshitlal Majmudar
Eldest son of Dr. Pranjivan Mehta
3
Dr. Pranjivan Mehta; a Gold Medallist of the Grant Medical College,
Bombay, Bar-at-Law; was Gandhiji’s “oldest friend”. From the time he received
Gandhiji in London in October 1888 he acted as his “guide and counsellor”. A
philanthropist, from whom “no deserving poor ever returned empty-handed”, he
rendered financial help to Gandhiji in his activities from the days of the Phoenix
Settlement till his death in August 1932. Author of M. S. Gandhi and South African
Problem. For Gandhiji’s tribute to him, vide “Dr. Pranjivandas Mehta”, 7-8-1932.
4
The Lal Bungalow near Sabarmati Ashram, Ahmedabad
5
Prabhashankar Harchandbhai Parekh, father of Champa R. Mehta
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

137

now you have become her adviser. All I wish is that you should not
sell the Bungalow. You should either have a separate trust for the
Bungalow or entrust its management to the Ashram. I would not in the
least think it right to evict any Harijans who might be living there. But
the final decision rests with Champa and you. I can say nothing
definitely about Maganlal1 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

193. LETTER TO SARALA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 6, 1944
CHI. SARALA,

Got the yarn. I hope Sheth is all right now. Come when you
want. In terrible hurry.
Blessings from

BAPU
S ARALABEHN
[C/O] S HETH GATUBHAI JAMIATRAM
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

194. LETTER TO TOTARAM SANADHYA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 6, 1944
BHAI. TOTARAMJI,

Parikshitlal has given me all the information. Your body has of
course grown old, it will go when it has to. You have been dedicated to
service all your life, so it is your dharma to accept it from those who
wish to offer it sincerely. Of course Ramanama is always there to
sustain us.
Blessings from
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2530

1

138

BAPU

Youngest son of Dr. Pranjivan Mehta

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

195. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
Silence Day, November 6, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

If you work in the Talimi Sangh then too you will be near me,
won’t you? In the alternative, let me know what you would like [to
do].
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4450

196. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
[November 6, 1944] 1
I do want to write something for you but do not have a moment
to spare.
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

197. DRAFT RESOLUTION FOR HINDUSTANI
PRACHAR SABHA
[On or before November 7, 1944] 2
The objective of the Hindustani Prachar Sabha is to popularize
Hindustani rapidly. For this it is essential that those who are learning
Hindustani acquire familiarity with the Devanagari and Persian scripts.
It is therefore the duty of this Sabha to get the right textbooks
published and arrange examinati198ons in order to be able to certify
that one knows both the scripts and can read and write Hindustani.
The Working Committee should lay down details regarding the
curriculum and the examinations.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 18

1

As supplied by the addressee
According to Mangal Prabhat, July 1952, this Resolution was drafted for the
meeting held on November 7, 1944.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

139

198. LETTER TO RISHABHDAS RANKA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 7, 1944
CHI. RISHABHDAS,

I have heard Guneji’s reputation. He should send me the names
of the medicines and their properties. I shall make use of the
information. It would be best if he prepares a booklet for me. I shall
have it printed if I like it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

199. A LETTER1
[Before November 8, 1944] 2
I don’t know when I shall fast, but, if I do fast, it will be for the
welfare of the oppressed classes of the world.
Congressmen all over India have been anxious over my
intention of fasting. But there is no necessity for becoming anxious.
When people have become inactive and when the day-to-day
activities of the Congress are at a standstill, the last and the only
effective weapon for a satyagrahi is the fast.
The Hindu, 10-11-1944

200. A LETTER3
[Before November 8, 1944] 4
When the tongue and the pen fail, the Shastras say, man should
resort to fast. Why should there be any objection to fasting?
The soul does not die. It is the body that goes away. Why should
one worry? Moreover fasting will be resorted to only when God so
wills it.
The Hindu, 10-11-1944
1

This was addressed to “a prominent Congressman of Gujarat”. The Gujarati
original, however, is not traceable.
2
The report appeared under the date-line “Ahmedabad, November 8”.
3
This was addressed to a Congress member of the Central Legislative
Assembly. The Hindi original, however, is not traceable.
4
The report appeared under the date-line “New Delhi, November 8”.

140

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

201. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 8, 1944
CHI. AMRIT,

I have been neglecting you. You know why. I am writing this
before the morning walk which commences just after 7 a.m. Dr. J.
Mehta is standing by me. He has come for a day on his way to Madras
where he is going to deliver an address to physicians.
Rajaji is unwell and so did not come for the various meetings.
Amtul Salaam is in Calcutta doing good work.
Kanu’s wedding came off very well. Nearly 300 people dined.
Harijans and caste men of Sevagram were in it. Sevagram inmates and
guests accounted for over 150.
You are right in not worrying about the fast. It will come if God
wants it.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 4148. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7783

202. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 8, 1944
MY DEAR C.R.,

It won’t do for you to get ill. I am not going to worry you to
come early. You must not strain yourself even to come to Nagpur 1 .
You may even send your address or depute someone to read it for
you. If however you do come to Nagpur you will give yourself a few
days for Sevagram, or Wardha whichever suits you best.
Did I tell you I had carefully read your pamphlet about the
Cripps offer? It carried no conviction to me. But you will try again if
you wish. Munshi2 had a chat with me on it. I have invited him to
discuss it further. He is likely to come again.
As to the fast I have ceased to think much about it. I am simply
1
For the Convocation of the Nagpur University, which was to be held on
November 25.
2
K. M. Munshi

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

141

watching myself and waiting on Truth to guide me. A double process
is going on within me. Let us see what happens.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2098

203. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
November 8, 1944
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I heard from Dr. Mehta about the set-back in your health. There
is nothing particularly wrong with your health. You have spoiled your
health by over-exertion and worry. You ought to utilize your
knowledge for the benefit of your own health. Englishmen are not
philosophers, but they keep themselves free from worry so as to
preserve their health and for the sake of their health they never let any
external trouble overcome them. You have such capacity. Stop
worrying about me and about other matters. You are giving your
services even from the sick-bed. Nothing at all is definite about the
fast.
Blessings from

BAPU
MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
BOMBAY

[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 204. Also from a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

204. TALK WITH GULZARILAL NANDA 1
[Before November 9, 1944]
If everyone stuck to his dharma and did his duty why should I
have to fast? And how would God permit it? But if people become
unsettled and remain inactive the fast will not be stopped.
So long as I can work otherwise, there is no possibility of my
resorting to a fast. When there is no work for me or no work which
can be taken from me, then alone will God ask me to go on a fast. I
1
Gulzarilal Nanda, Secretary of the Ahmedabad Textile Labour Association,
had conveyed Gandhiji’s words to the Association’s organ, Majoor Sandesh, in his
letter from Wardha dated November 9, 1944.

142

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

can hear a voice echoing that I should fast. Not that I should start a
fast right away. But when God bids me no one can prevent me from
undertaking the fast. Pray to God that I may not have to fast. Prayer is
the only thing that matters. To do sincere work in the name of God is
itself prayer. I say what I feel. There is not only one thing that
disturbs me today, there are several. I have only mentioned the thing
that most perturbs me. If something else comes up, I shall not hesitate
to say it. These have little to do with Congressmen. People today are
engaged in fraud, black-marketing and amassing of wealth somehow.
There is no end to the lies they mouth. Who can change their hearts? I
do not know whether my fast will do so. I can only pray. God’s will
be done. Nobody knows today what is going to happen. If everyone
does his duty it is possible that the fast will not come off. One man
cannot assume the whole burden, but the concerted effort of many
people may bear fruit. Let everyone calmly do his work without being
despondent or becoming agitated. This is all I ask for. God too will
want no more. I am at peace.
[From Gujarati]
Gujarat Samachar, 14-11-1944

205. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
[On or before November 9, 1944] 1
It would be advisable to let Kanchan be examined by the vaid
on Friday morning. Her health is none too good. If you can get cloth
for a mosquito-net cut, have one stitched so that we may use it when
required. Khurshedbehn has agreed to stitch one. Share the work in
this manner.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 6973. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

206. TELEGRAM TO K. N. KATJU
S EVAGRAM ,

November 9, 1944
DR. K ATJU
19 E DMONSTONE R OAD
ALLAHABAD
HER2

GLAD
1
2

AGONY

HAS

ENDED.

YOU

ARE

WISE

From the postmark
Addressee’s wife

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

143

ENOUGH
TO
GOD
BLESS

BEAR
YOU.

SEPARATION

WITHOUT

GRIEVING.

MAY

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

207. LETTER TO K. VENKATARAMANI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 9, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji had your letter of 31st October.
Gandhiji says you can come here whenever you like for your week’s stay here.
You will, of course, send previous intimation of your arrival.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
S HRI K. VENKATARAMANI
34 A LAMELUMANGAPURAM
MYLAPORE
MADRAS
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

208. NOTE TO ANAND KAUSALYAYAN 1
November 9, 1944
1. Obviously it is obligatory for a member of the Sabha to fulfil
at any rate the condition laid down by you. The objective of the
Sabha is clearly stated in its constitution. I do wish, however, that all
Indians learn both the scripts and speak a language which could be
understood by both Hindus and Muslims.
2. The Hindi style and the Urdu style are like the Ganga and the
Yamuna. Hindustani is like the Saraswati. It is concealed and yet not
concealed. The Sabha should endeavour to make it clearly
discernible.
1

Secretary, Hindustani Prachar Sabha, Wardha. This note was in reply to the
following questions:
(1) It appears that, in 1942, when the Hindustani Prachar Sabha was formed,
you intended and directed your efforts that persons enrolling themselves as members

144

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

3. Hindustani Prachar Sabha will be complementary of both and
will seek help from both. But its work will be distinct from theirs,
which could also be regarded as the same. If the Sabha tried to undo
the work of these two organizations, its own objective would be
defeated. How can you have Saraswati without the confluence [of the
three]?
4. The work of the Sabha will be, and should be, uniform all
over the country. The procedure may be modified here and there to
suit the differing needs of the provinces.
5. The new movement of the Hindustani Prachar Sabha should
not create difficulties in the work of Rashtrabhasha Prachar Samiti, if
the two co-ordinate their activities. 1
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

of the Hindustani Prachar Sabha must learn both the scripts of the Rashtrabhasha. Do
you, even today, expect that thing only from the members, or do you want that
everybody, both old and young in the country, must learn both the scripts?
(2) Regarding the plan of work of Hindustani Prachar Sabha, some people
understand that the Sabha aims at propagating both Hindi and Urdu but there are
others who say that it aims at propagating neither Hindi nor Urdu but Hindustani. In
1942, you were of opinion that the Saraswati in the shape of Hindustani had not yet
made its appearance. Is the situation different at present? What is it that the Sabha
will propagate if Hindustani has not yet made its appearance?
(3) Under the auspices of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan a number of institutions
are working for the propagation of Hindi and the Devanagari script, and the Anjuman
Taraqqi-e-Urdu for that of Urdu and the Persian script. Will the Hindustani Prachar
Sabha be merely co-ordinating the activities of these two institutions or will it be
complementary of the two? Or will it be a third body pursuing its own programme
undoing the work of these two?
(4) Will the policy and programme of the Hindustani Prachar Sabha with
respect to South India and the non-Hindi provinces be the same as in the other
provinces—that is, will the propagation of both the scripts be obligatory?
(5) Will the new policy of the Hindustani Prachar Sabha create difficulties in
continuing the propagation of Rashtrabhasha as it is being carried on in South India
and the other non-Hindi provinces for the last so many years?
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

145

209. LETTER TO ABDUL GHANI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 10, 1944
DEAR ABDUL GHANI1 ,

I was delighted to hear from you. I do hope your wife will be
fully restored and that you too will have your trouble attended to. As
to the restrictions you will do as your instinct guides you. Do please
keep me informed of your movements and the progress of your wife
and yourself.
Yours,

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

210. LETTER TO DIWANCHAND OBHERAI
S EVAGRAM , “ VIA ” WARDHA , C. P.

November 10, 1944
DEAR OBHERAIJI,

I read out your letter of the 28th to Gandhiji.
He has decided nothing about the fast1 yet but has simply put himself in God’s
hands. He won’t undertake the fast unless he has a clear call. He cannot rule out fastng
altogether as he holds it to be the ultimate and most potent weapon in the armoury of
non-violence.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
S HRI DIWANCHAND OBHERAI
S ENIOR ADVOCATE
P ESHAWAR
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1
1

146

Son of Abdul Ghaffar Khan
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 23-10-1944.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

211. LETTER TO DUNICHAND
S EVAGRAM ,

November 10, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji has your letter of 31st ult. and desires me to thank you for the same.
He has decided nothing about the fast. He has only taken the public into
confidence as to the working of his mind.
Could you kindly send the address of Maulvi Abdul Ghani though I doubt
whether anything effective can be done from this end ?
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
S HRI DUNICHAND
7-A BEGUM R OAD
LAHORE
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. Courtesy
: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

212. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
S EVAGRAM ,

November 10, 1944
CHI. MUNNALAL,

At last your father has passed away. It was for the best. He was
released from suffering and was delivered from the necessity of being
obliged to others for their services. You and the other members of the
family have no reason for grief. Life, when it attaches itself to a body,
is invariably accompanied by death. Only, it does not know the
appointed hour of death. Why, then, grieve over death? We should
learn this lesson from the death of a dear one. Let us follow his
virtues.
Both of you may remain there as long as necessary. Here
everything is going on as usual.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8468. Also C.W. 7179. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

147

213. LETTER TO CHAMPA R. MEHTA
November 10, 1944
CHI. CHAMPA,

I have your letter. I was sorry to hear that Chi. Sarala had fallen
ill again. I should be very happy if she comes here after she has
recovered. However, the fast is hanging over me. How can I therefore
assume responsibility for Sarala? We will think over this when you and
Jyoti arrive hree. I have gone through your letter addressed to
Chimanlal. I did not fully understand it. I will ask Chimanlal to
explain it. You must have read what I wrote to Jyoti about the Red
Bungalow.1
Blessings from

BAPU
C HAMPABEHN MEHTA
[C/O] M/ S S HASHIKANT R ATILAL
S IR LAKHAJI R OAD , R AJKOT P ARA
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8757. Also C.W. 1043. Courtesy:
Champa R. Mehta

214. LETTER TO COWASJI JEHANGIR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 10, 1944
DEAR SIR COWASJI,

Somebody had conveyed to me the news of your dear son’s
passing away. I had thought I would write to you a letter of
condolence but being burdened with work it slipped from my
memory. Last night I remembered it when I happened to read the
news again in Vallabhbhai’s letter to Dahyabhai. And now I write this.
Please know that I share your grief. There must be hundreds like me
sharing your grief. May they all lighten your burden and may God
grant you peace.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

148

Vide “Letter to Jyotilal A. Mehta”, 6-11-1944.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

215. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS BIRLA
S EVAGRAM

November 10, 1944
BHAI RAMESHWARDAS,

I am sending Chi. Sankaran for six months to learn the science
of village sanitation and Chi. Sharda for some homoeopathic
treatment. Can I put up these two in the dharmshala in your charge? If
Sharda is accommodated her husband will also stay with her. Write to
me without hesitation what the position is. Ghanshyamdas left today.
It was good he came. A lot of work could be done.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
Sankaran is leaving today. He will stay with Raihanabehn1 . But
he can do so only for a few days as there is not enough room.
R. B IRLA
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

216. SPEECH AT HINDUSTANI TALIMI SANGH
MEETING
November 10, 1944
Speaking to members of the Hindustani Talimi Sangh who are meeting here,
Mahatma Gandhi said that the Sangh should now take up the entire span of national
education as its field and work out a programme of national education for life in all its
stages through manual activity and handicrafts. He pointed out that the future
programme of national education thus became only an extension of the present
programme of basic education upwards and downwards.

The Hindu, 12-11-1944

1

Raihana Tyabji

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

149

217. A NOTE
November 11, 1944
(1) I have read Shri Wadia’s letter of 31-10-’44. I have no
recollection whatsoever of having made the remark attributed to me
about Shri Agnibhoj. Indeed I had nothing to do with such
appointments. I was not then nor am I now a member of the Working
Committee.
(2) There was no question of my refusal to have a Harijan on
the executive of the Harijan Sevak Sangh. As a matter of fact there are
Harijans on the Central Board as well as its branches. But I am
opposed on principle to such appointments for the Sangh is formed
of a body of caste-Hindu penitents who are vowed to eradicate
untouchability. It is therefore a debtors’ association. Harijans are
creditors. I expressed this opinion to a body of Harijans who recently
interviewed me.1
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

218. LETTER TO K. R. R. SASTRY
November 11, 1944
DEAR PROF. SASTRY2 ,

I thank you for your kind letter.
(A) My experience does not bear out the truth of your
proposition. I do not claim to be a saint. But I do not regard politics
as inconsistent with the strictest moral code. Politics I hold to be a
noble art which every good citizen must cultivate ... 3 not in...4 the
game that professional politicians play.
(B) is answered in (A)
(C) Only posterity can judge. Obviously I can’t.
(D) I am sorry I cannot subscribe to your opinion. Mine is a
new experiment. I plead for patience in coming to a judgement.
As to your constructive suggestions, you will perhaps forgive me
if I do not argue about them.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 8810
1

Vide “Discussion with H. J. Khandekar”, on or before 2-11-1944.
Of the Department of Law, Allahabad University
3
Illegible
4
ibid
2

150

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

219. LETTER TO S. RADHAKRISHNAN
November 11, 1944
DEAR SIR RADHAKRISHNAN,

I have your kind letter of 4th instant. Your amendment is too
late for revision of the draft deed. 1 It has been passed by the Board.
But there will be no difficulty if a village girl is ripe for being sent to
foreign lands for gaining further knowledge of use in the villages.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

[PS]
When may I write to you in Hindi ?
S IR S. R ADHAKRISHNAN
HINDU UNIVERSITY
BENARES
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

220. LETTER TO SATIS CHANDRA AND HEMPRABHA
DAS GUPTA
November 11, 1944
CHI. SATISBABU AND CHI. HEMPRABHA,

I have letters from both of you before me. To worry about the
fast betrays a lack of faith in God. Do you not believe that I will do
what God wills? Why should you worry then? Do your duty, that will
be enough.
Now about khadi. The ideas contained in the circular 2 sent by
Jajuji are mine. I see that you hold a different view. You must point
out the fallacy in my ideas. I take it that you will attend the meeting of
the Charkha Sangh.
What has to be done about Balvantsinha?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1640
1

The addressee, Vice-Chancellor of the Benares Hindu University had suggested that funds of the Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Trust should not be spent
on purposes which it was the duty of the Government to carry out; they should be
utilized for the establishment of orphanages and pilgrim centres and for the selection
of women to be sent to Russia and Japan to study rural uplift; vide also “Discussions
with Representatives of Hindustani Talimi Sangh”, 27-10-1944.
2
The circular contained the gist of the discussions carried on from October 7
to 14 between Gandhiji and Shrikrishnadas Jaju.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

151

221. LETTER TO SOHANLAL DWIVEDI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 11, 1944
BHAI SOHANLAL,

I have had a talk with Ghanshyamdasji. I hope you have calmed
down. The incident has shown me a new way. May I hope the same
has happened to you? A few friends, if not many, have understood my
point.1
Blessings from

BAPU
S OHANLAL DWIVEDI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

222. LETTER TO SATYAVATI DEVI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 11, 1944
CHI. SATYAVATI,

I got your letter. Send over Chandrani. If you do not get
permission to go to Lahore even for reasons of health, write to me
before taking any step.
Only this much today. Do not worry about my fast. I am in
God’s hands.
Blessings from

BAPU
S ATYAVATI DEVI
JUHAR , via S IMLA HILLS
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

152

Vide “Letter to Sohanlal Dwivedi”, 16-10-1944.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

223. CABLE TO V. K. KRISHNA MENON1
November 12, 1944
JAWAHARLAL,
THE

LAND

WRONG
OF

IS
THAT

WITH

PERSONS

A

JEWEL

OWNS

THE
LIKE

HIM.

SYSTEM
HIM

AMONG

THAN

THAT
AS

MEN.

SOMETHING
HAS

HAPPY
IS

NO

IS

RADICALLY

BETTER

USE

PRISONERS.

The Hindu, 14-11-1944

224. LETTER TO P. G. MATHEW
November 13, 1944
MY DEAR MATHEW,

Yours. Pray that God may guide me aright.
Love.
BAPU
P ROF. P. G. M ATHEW
S. H. C OLLEGE
THEVARA , via ERNAKULAM
C OCHIN S TATE
From a photostat: G.N. 1545

225. LETTER TO CARL HEATH
November 13, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Your welcome letter came into my hands today. I am in the
midst of a raging storm and often hum to myself:
Rock of Ages cleft for me, let me hide myself in Thee.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
C ARL HEATH
WHITEWINGS, 57 MANOR WAY
GUILDFORD , S URREY (ENGLAND)
From a photostat: G.N. 1051. Also C.W. 4441. Courtesy: F. H. Chopping
1

This was sent in connection with Jawaharlal Nehru’s birthday, November 14

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

153

226. LETTER TO K. T. GHANASHAM
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I assure you I am giving due weight to every argument
advanced against the contemplated fast. I wonder if this will reach
you, as you have given me no address.
Yours sincerely,

K. T. GHANASHAM
KARACHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

227. LETTER TO ERNEST F. PATON
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
MY DEAR ERNEST,

I have your heartening letter. You will not mind if I find it
helpful to publish your letter. I take it you are also a doctor. Have we
ever met?
Yours,

BAPU
ERNEST F. P ATON
C HRISTU KULA ASHRAM
TIRUPATTUR
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

154

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

228. LETTER TO ATULANAND CHAKRAVARTY
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
MY DEAR ATULANAND,

Your letter. Thanks.
Many come whom I must not turn away. I don’t want to
encourage you just now. Let me settle down one way or another.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S ADHU ATULANAND
C/ O P OST MASTER
NEW DELHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

229. LETTER TO CHARLES A. ISAAC
S EVAGRAM , via WARDHA , C . P.,

November 13, 1944
DEAR ISAAC,

Yours is one of the typical letters I am receiving daily. Pray with
me that God may guide me aright.
Yours,

BAPU
BRO. C HARLES A. I SAAC
KOCHUMURI
KAYANKULAM, T RAVANCORE S TATE
S OUTH INDIA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

230. LETTER TO P. SUBBAROYAN
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
DEAR SUBBAROYAN,

I am listening to every argument advanced by friends like you
but the final arbiter will be the inner voice.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

155

I do hope Rajaji won’t stir out unless he is completely restored.
I shall be glad if Radhabai1 breaks her journey.
Please warn her however that I am reaching the end of my
bodily resources.
Yours,

BAPU
DR. S UBBAROYAN
MADRAS
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

231. LETTER TO SYED MUSTAFA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
DEAR SYED SAHEB,

I thank you for your kind note. You have my assurance that I
shall do nothing without a call from God.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S YED MUSTAFA, B AR-AT-LAW
LUCKNOW
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

156

Addressee’s wife

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

232. LETTER TO H. J. KHANDEKAR
S EVAGRAM , via WARDHA , C, P.,

November 13, 1944
DEAR KHANDEKAR,

I have your letter. I have become afraid of you after your
unauthorized misleading report of our conversation1 . I express no
opinion on your contemplated meeting2 or its programme.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI H. J. KHANDEKAR, M.L.A.
ITWARI , N AGPUR
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

233. LETTER TO G. LAKSHMI AMMA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

The condition you mention is truly deplorable. You and I have
to do the best we can. Nothing like patience and perseverance.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
G. L AKSHMI AMMA
DEPRESSED C LASSES MISSION
MANGALORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide “Discussion with H. J. Khandekar”, on or before 2-11-1944.
Of Harijan workers and provincial leaders of Nagpur to organize Harijans
under the banner of the All-India Depressed Classes League, which was to be held in
the last week of December 1944
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

157

234. LETTER TO DEVIBEHN PANDIT
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
CHI. DEVI,

I have your letter. Also the money. The yarn is to be handed
over to Kakubhai 1 who should use the amount realized from its sale
for the service of Harijans. Vasumati 2 tells me you fall ill now and
then. How is it?
Blessings from

BAPU
DEVIBEHN P ANDIT
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

235. LETTER TO SHIVABHAI G. PATEL
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
CHI. SHIVABHAI,

What guidance can I offer? See if you can deduce something
from what I am writing. I have had a talk with Ravishankar Maharaj3 ,
who will offer some [advice]. All of you should do as much [work] as
you can.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HIVABHAI P ATEL
BOCHASAN
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Purushottam K. Jerajani
Vasumati D. Pandit
3
Ravishankar Vyas who worked among the Baraiyas, a backward community
of Kheda district in Gujarat
2

158

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

236. LETTER TO NRISIMHAPRASAD K. BHATT
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
BHAI NANABHAI,

I have your letter. I cannot come to such a quick decision; I can
say something only after we meet. Let us hope Bachu’s affairs are
settled without any hitch.
Blessings from

BAPU
NANABHAI BHATT
HINDUSTAN S TORES
C HOWPATTY
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

237. LETTER TO ADWAIT KUMAR GOSWAMI1
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
BHAI ADWAIT KUMAR,

In my opinion a Congressman may, as an individual, do
anything that is not opposed to the publicly stated policy of the
Congress. However, you should remember that I am not a registered
member of the Congress.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 804

1
The addressee, a Congress worker of Brindaban, had asked if a Congressman
could take part in satyagraha to be offered in Sind against the Sind Government’s ban
on the fourteenth chapter of Satyartha Prakash.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

159

238. LETTER TO BALVANTSINHA
November 13, 1944
CHI. BALVANTSINHA,

You should go on the 18th. Things will be managed somehow
here. The kitchen here must not come in the way of other work.
I have seen Satis Babu’s letter and I have written to him.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1948

239. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
November 13, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

May you be firm in your resolve. I like vigilance. Of course you
will always remain an inmate of the Ashram and you will be living
here in the Ashram. It is another thing that you may have to be
associated with the Talimi Sangh in the interest of your work. For the
present your personal expenses will be met by the Ashram. Whether
or not you can devote some time to the work at the Ashram is
something to be looked into. Experience alone will tell us that. Don’t
be agitated over such matters, but have faith in God. “One step
enough for me.”
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS]
Give a copy of this to Chimanlal.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4441

1

160

Vide “Letter to Satis Chandra and Hemprabha Das Gupta”, 11-11-1944.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

240. LETTER TO SARASWATI K. GANDHI
November 13, 1944
CHI. SURU,

Received your letter. Kanti 1 has written me a nice and long
letter. May you both study well, continue making progress and
rendering service. Of course I do hope to see Shanti2 . I will some day.
How do I know that you are not as silly as you used to be?
Blessings to the three of you from

BAPU
S HRI KANTI GANDHI
2994/1 V ANI VILIA MOHOLLA
MYSORE
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 3456. Courtesy: Kanti Gandhi. Also G.N.
6182

241. LETTER TO ANIL K. MISHRA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
BHAI ANIL,

If you want to draw up your programme after consulting me
you will never be able to do anything. Chart your own course from
what I have written for the general public.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

242. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
Your duty is obvious. Father is of course being looked after.
You must try to get well. You will stay here or go to Andhra only to
persist in this effort. Mother though alone is not helpless. Your son is
1
2

Addressee’s husband, Harilal Gandhi’s son
Addressee’s son

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

161

being looked after. Separation has to be endured. God willing you
will get well and all those who are separated today will be united.
Having realized this, give up worry and be cheerful with the
conviction that God does everything and what He does is for our
good.
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

243. LETTER TO SHRIPAD D. SATAVLEKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 13, 1944
PANDITJI,

I have your letter. Herewith the reply from Appasaheb1 . Please
spare me of such responsibilities. I am no longer capable of taking up
such work. My strength is limited and my burden heavy.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
P ANDIT S ATAVLEKAR
AUNDH
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. . Courtesy: Pyarelal

244. LETTER TO DURLAB SINGH
S EVAGRAM ,

November 14, 1944
DEAR SARDAR DURLAB SINGH 2 ,

This is my answer to your questions: 3
(1) My association with Rajaji in his formula4 could not affect
the Sikh position in the slightest degree, even if Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah
accepted it. The Lahore Resolution 5 of the Congress referred to by
you stands. The result of Quaid-e-Azam Jinnah’s acceptance would
have been that both of us would have gone to the Sikhs and others
1

Pant, Ruler of Aundh
General Secretary, Central Sikh Youth League
3
For extracts from the addressee’s letter, vide Appendix “Letter from Durlabh
Singh”, 12-11-1944.
4
Vide Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula”, before 5-8-1942.
5
Vide “Speech at Subjects Committee”, 1-1-1930.
2

162

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

interested to secure their acceptance. I had made this clear in my
letter 1 to Masterjee.
(2) I cannot understand the Akali indignation. My meeting a
deputation was unnecessary in view of my absolute assurance. If
Masterjee had wanted to bring his friends to me, in spite of my
assurance, I would have gladly seen them as I did other friends who
sought clarification from me.
(3) Maulana Saheb explained the implications of the Jagat
Narain Lal’s Resolution 2 which please see. But supposing that it is
inconsistent with the Rajaji Formula and the Congress accepts the
latter, there is nothing to prevent the Congress from rescinding the
Resolution.
(4) How could I favour a contrary opinion when I have always
given the closest collaboration to Sikh friends? Those Sikhs, who do
not accept the Congress creed, naturally refrain, like many others,
from joining the Congress.
(5) I know nothing about the Sikandar3 -Baldev Singh Pact,
much less about the Congress High Command’s association with it.
Nor do I know the details of the Azad Punjab scheme.
I could never be guilty of blessing anything which is con- trary to the
national interest. You can certainly have the assurance
that the interests of the nationalist Sikhs, as also of all nationalists, are
safe in my hands, also, I presume, in the Congress hands, though as
you know I have no authority to speak on behalf of the Congress.
There are many inventions about me going the round. I would
warn friends against giving credence to any of them without reference
to me.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
The Indian Annual Register, 1944, Vol. II . p. 222

1

Vide “Letter to Tara Singh”, 15-8-1944.
Vide 5th footnote of “Note to Jagdish K. Munshi”, on or before 12-8-1944.
3
Sir Sikander Hayat Khan
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

163

245. LETTER TO METROPOLITAN OF CALCUTTA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 14, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Many thanks for your letter just received. I wonder if you saw
my statement1 . If the fast comes, it will have nothing to do with the
Government. For ready reference I send you a copy of my statement.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
METROPOLITAN
BISHOP’S HOUSE
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

246. LETTER TO MOHAMMED ANSARI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 14, 1944
DEAR SARDAR SAHEB,

I have your letter. There was no question of ignoring you. Yours
is a nationalist organization not needing any wooing by me. Neither
you nor I can afford to ignore the League. We have to win
it and other like forces round to our side. I tried Quaid-e-Azam.
And though I may be said to have failed, we have lost nothing, You
and I have to work in the best manner we can, the objective being to
reduce antagonism without sacrificing fundamentals.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S ARDAR MOHD . A NSARI
BIHAR MOMIN C ONFERENCE
DEHRI -ON -SONE , E.I.R.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

164

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 23-10-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

247. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
S EVAGRAM ,

November 14, 1944
DEAR DAUGHTER,

I have received your two letters which I find very long. The fast
will come only when God sends it. He will not send it if we ask for it.
How will you carry on your work in such fear? Taking care of your
health, carry on your work. If all of you do your work, certainly the
fast will not come off. But those who are scared at the mention of a
fast do not know even the first lesson of satyagraha.
Zohra is well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 487

248. LETTER TO V. L. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 15, 1944
BHAI VAIKUNTH,

I like your note. You will see that I have made a few deletions.
May I make a suggestion? Your writing is very close making it
difficult to add anything in between the lines. You will find this in the
present case. Paper, no doubt, has to be used sparingly. But should not
there be a limit to it?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS.]
The note is enclosed.
From the Gujarati original: V. L. Mehta Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

249. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 15, 1944
CHI. DINSHAW,

Your letter. Let us not be in a hurry about the land. Things are
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

165

being delayed, but there is God’s hand in it. I understand what you
say regarding my fast. Nothing about it is yet certain, nor even
whether it will be for forty days or less. I continue to pray. I should
like to be with you when I undertake the fast but nothing about this
fast is going to be left to my choice. After all am I to seek my
convenience? Is the fast to be undertaken for the sake of my health? It
will be for God’s work and He will take me where He wants. Please
make no preparations for me. Be engrossed in your own work which
will be your greatest contribution. Neither of you should worry. Let
Ardeshir make progress; he has still farther to go. Teach him
non-violence.
Blessings from

BAPU
DR. D INSHAW MEHTA
P OONA
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

250. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI M. PATEL
S EVAGRAM ,

November 15, 1944
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

I have your letter. I suggest no one should rush down here at the
moment. All of you should immerse yourselves in your own work.
Maybe it will avert the fast.
Blessings from

BAPU
R AOJIBHAI MANIBHAI P ATEL
VITHAL KANYA VIDYALAYA
NADIAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

251. LETTER TO HARIBHAI DAHYA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 15, 1944
BHAI HARIBHAI,

I have your letter. Let us not commit another wrong to undo the
first. That cannot be the way of truth or of non-violence. Hence the
166

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

straightforward way is to offer all that we legitimately can. If it fails to
mend matters we should bear with the suffering whatever it be. If we
act in this way, we need never repent.
Blessings from

BAPU
HARIBHAI DAHYA
P.O.B. 89
WELLINGTON
NEW ZEALAND
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

252. LETTER TO TEJWANTI DHIR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 15, 1944
CHI. TEJWANTI,

I have your letter. If you want you may stay in Lalaji’s house. If
you are not perfectly all right within three months, take more time. Go
to the village only when you are fully recovered.
Blessings from

BAPU
TEJWANTIBEHN
ADAMPUR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

253. LETTER TO SECRETARY, MYSORE ASSEMBLY
CONGRESS PARTY
[Before November 16, 1944] 1
Mr. Pyarelal . . . has sent a letter to the Secretary to the Mysore Assembly
Congress Party, conveying Gandhiji’s thanks for the invitation to the Party’s
conference (held yesterday), adding that anything that helped constructive activities
and advanced the cause of popular freedom had his blessings. He also congratulated
the Party on its good work in the Legislature during the first term of its existence
under the new constitution.

The Hindu, 19-11-1944

1

The conference was held on November 16, 1944, at Mysore.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

167

254. LETTER TO J. J. SINGH
November 16, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you and other friends for your kind message.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S ARDAR J. J. S INGH
INDIA LEAGUE OF AMERICA
40 E AST, 49 TH S T.
NEW YORK 17, N.Y.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

255. LETTER TO GENERAL SECRETARY, KURNOOL
DISTRICT CONGRESS COMMITTEE
S EVAGRAM ,

November 16, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji has your letter of 24th ult.
You should be guided by Shri A. Kaleswara Rao who is at present here and will
be returning to Andhra Pradesh after his talks with Gandhiji.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
THE GENERAL S ECRETARY
KURNOOL DISTRICT C ONGRESS C OMMITTEE
NANDYAL
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

256. LETTER TO R. S. DESHPANDE
S EVAGRAM ,

November 16, 1944
DEAR PROF. DESHPANDE,

Apart from the fact that I have no time, the books have been
168

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

transferred to the late Jamnalalji’s daughter for whom Prof. Kalelkar
had meant them.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI R. S. D ESHPANDE
P OONA
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

257. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 16, 1944
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

You have not acted properly in resuming the experiment of
ground-nuts and dates. It is wrong to make such an experiment. To
persist in living on uncooked food is a kind of obstinacy. One must
know how to carry out such experiments. There is no difficulty in
cooking ordinary food, and that is what you should do. Or I may send
back Manu there. She herself will not like to remain here after hearing
about your experiment.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

258. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 16, 1944
CHI. LILI,

I have your two letters. People die all over the world and they
will go on dying. For your part you have to excel in your studies.
Everything else will follow. Try to build up the atmosphere of
Sevagram as far as possible.
Blessings from

BAPU
LILAVATI UDESHI
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

169

259. LETTER TO DR. SANGANI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 16, 1944
BHAI SANGANI,

I got your letter. You have given Sanyuktabehn1 excellent
treatment and nursing. She was in great agony. May God repay you.
Tell Chi. Sanyukta that I had her letter. She can come over when you
allow her to leave.
Blessings from

BAPU
DR. S ANGANI
HARKISSONDAS HOSPITAL
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

260. LETTER TO JAYENDRA2
November 16, 1944
BHAI JAYENDRA,

I have read your letter carefully. I have no time to set out my
arguments in reply. I shall do as God bids me. Just now there is no
call from Him.
Yours ,
M. K. GANDHI
S HRI JAYENDRA , S AHITYARATNA
HINDI P RACHARAK
AMADAL P ALLEE
From the Hindi original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

261. LETTER TO BALVANTSINHA
November 16, 1944
CHI. B. S.,

I am sending all the papers. I have nothing to say about others.
1
2

170

Daughter of Jaisukhlal Gandhi
This was not posted for want of complete address.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

All I wish to say about the letter received today is that it may be your
duty to stay on for the sake of Kishorelal. It is for you to decide that.
You are not obliged to stay on for the kitchen work. You should leave
it to me. What I would ultimately like you to do, I cannot decide that
just yet. Yes! I shall be very happy indeed if you acquire a scientific
outlook. I have not heard anything about A. S. I have no misgivings
about you. Why should I waste my time?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1949

262. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
November 16, 1944
Weeping and laughing come from the heart. When grieved one
weeps. One must turn that grief into joy and laugh. Hence the need
for Ramanama. Surrender all to Him and there is only joy. Why
grieve over the loss of hearing? You are saved from hearing a lot of
drivel. What is relevant you get through the written word. Moreover I
believe that if there is joy within, the ears will of themselves regain the
power of hearing.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

263. LETTER TO V. G. SAHASRABUDDHE
S EVAGRAM ,

November 16, 1944
BHAI SAHASRABUDDHE,

I have your letter. What authority do I have to ask Jajuji to give
the yarn to you? And why should the amount be in Jajuji’s name? It
means you cannot get yarn because the amount did not belong to
you. I do not remember all the facts. I am writing this just from
conjecture. You should ask for a raise if you cannot make both ends
meet. Otherwise choose some other vocation. If the money belongs to
you, you should get an injunction from a court of law. In case I have

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

171

forgotten something do remind me.
Blessings from

BAPU
V. G. SAHASRABUDDHE
KHADI VASTRALAYA , M AHAL
NAGPUR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

264. LETTER TO H. J. KHANDEKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 16, 1944
BHAI KHANDEKAR,

I got your letter. I was grieved to learn about the death of your
child. May God give you peace and patience. I have the notes of the
talks I had with you but I do not Wish to send them. Not words but
your conduct alone can inspire confidence. May God bless you.
M. K. GANDHI
HEMCHANDRARAO JAGOBA KHANDEKAR
ITWARI
NAGPUR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

265. LETTER TO DR. BALDEV
S EVAGRAM ,

November 16, 1944
BHAI BALDEV,

What have you done? Why is Subhadra unhappy? Will you
please write to me?
Blessings from

BAPU
DR. B ALDEVJI
AMRITDHARA [PHARMACY]
LAHORE
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

172

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

266. LETTER TO T. B. SAPRU
S EVAGRAM ,

November 17, 1944
DEAR SIR TEJ,

Gandhiji has your letter of 13th instant. He is of opinion that it will be better
not to use his name in public in connection with the forthcoming conference, but if
you feel you must he would not mind.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
R T. H ON ’BLE S IR TEJ BAHADUR S APRU
19 ALBERT R OAD
ALLAHABAD
Gandhi-Sapru Papers. Courtesy: National Library, Calcutta

267. LETTER TO THE NETHERLANDS TRADING SOCIETY
November 17, 1944
DEAR SIRS,

With reference to your draft No. nil, dated 14-11-1944 for
£.1,000 in my favour, I have to inform you that I have authorized the
Bank of Nagpur Ltd., Wardha, to collect the amount from you.
Yours truly,

M. K. GANDHI
MESSRS THE NETHERLANDS TRADING S OCIETY
BOMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

268. LETTER TO L. RAJAGOPALA RAO
S EVAGRAM ,

November 17, 1944
DEAR RAJAGOPALA RAO,

1. I have not excluded any stage of education. The question is
purely one of finding the right type of workers.
2. This is answered. Of course the parents should be contented.
3. Your suggestion is sound. Co-ordination is being attempted.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

173

4. This also, if worthy of consideration.
5. Do try. Don’t expect me to do executive work. That is for
young people like you to do.
6. I have doubts about the soundness of your suggestion. Your
note is being circulated among the Heads of the Associations
concerned. I had a talk about you with Shri Kaleshwara Rao.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI L. R AJAGOPALA R AO
P. O. R AZOLE
EAST GODVARI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

269. LETTER TO P. SUBBARAYAN
S EVAGRAM ,

November 16, 1944
DEAR DR. SUBBARAYAN,

I read out your letter of 14th inst. to Bapu.
You must have seen his reply to Rajaji’s wire. He does not
propose to make any public statement with regard to the Congress
reorganization work as suggested by you. He has favoured the
formation of ad hoc unions of Congress workers for carrying out
normal Congress work. Don’t you think that in these matters ad hoc
committees should be free to frame their own rules and shape their
policy according to local circumstances in the best possible manner
they can ? This does not involve any constitutional point. All those
who accept the policy and plan of work laid down by these bodies and
abide by their discipline would of course be entitled to join these
bodies.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
DR. P. S UBBARAYAN
WHITE ’S GARDEN
R OYAPETTAH
MADRAS
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

174

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

270. LETTER TO KHANDUBHAI DESAI
November 17, 1944
BHAI KHANDUBHAI,

May the Labour Day function 1 bear fruit. Labour has made
great strides in Ahmedabad. But much remains yet to be done. I
cannot be satisfied till the respect for labour rises higher than that for
capital, nor should labour be satisfied. We will not attain that position
till it has attained unity, 100 per cent honesty and education with
knowledge. There is no place for caste, creed or communalism in the
ranks of labour. There should be equality of rights between men and
women.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Gujarati: Gujarat Samachar, 3-12-1944

271. LETTER TO BRAHMAKUMAR BHATT
S EVAGRAM ,

November 17, 1944
BHAI BRAHMAKUMAR BHATT,

I read your full long letter today. I see your Union has made
good progress. Do make further progress.
Why do you use your letter-heads as your working papers?
About one-third of each page is thus wasted besides the useless
expenses of printing. This is an additional loss.
Among your activities I do not find service of Harijans given its
proper place.
Do you all learn Hindustani (Hindi+Urdu)?
I don’t see any Muslim names among your office-bearers. Do
you have any in your Union?
Have you seen my hints to constructive workers? 2 I wish your

1
26th anniversary of the foundation of the Textile Labour Association of
Ahmedabad
2
Vide “Hints for Constructive Workers”, 22-10-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

175

Union thinks over what I have written in it regarding students.
Blessings from

M. K. GANDHI
BRAHMAKUMAR BHATT
NATIONAL S TUDENTS ’ UNION
R AIPUR
AHMEDABAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

272. LETTER TO DR. JIVRAJ MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 17, 1944
BHAI JIVRAJ,

Chi. Sushila1 is arriving there to see Mathuradas2 and his ailing
friend. I am not very keen just now to start a maternity hospital here.
Since Sushila will not devote all her time to this work I am thinking
what her position in this project should be. Again I fail to see how the
Committee can work efficiently if she were not on it. Sushila believes
that with the time she will give, she can do justice both to the local
maternity home and the Committee. She should have a doctor under
her to attend to the needs of the maternity home. If you wish you may
discuss the matter with her. I have told Abid Ali that he should obtain
an estimate of expenditure but should not incur any expenditure just
now.
I hope you are fine.
Blessings from

BAPU
DR. J IVRAJ MEHTA
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

176

Dr. Sushila Nayyar
Mathuradas Trikumji
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

273. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 17, 1944
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I got the impression from your letter today that your work has
got on the rails somewhat. S. is leaving today to see you and his friend
Pyarelal who is also sick. He will give you further news. There is every
chance of your full recovery if you withdraw your mind from all
other worries.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

274. LETTER TO VALLATHOL NARAYANA MENON
S EVAGRAM ,

November 18, 1944
DEAR VALLATHOL1 ,

May Mallika and her husband live long in harmony and serve
the country to the best of their ability.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI VALLATHOL
C HERUTHURUTHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

275. LETTER TO OMKARNATH THAKUR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 18, 1944
BHAI OMKARNATH2 ,

Your letter reached me today. May your pious wishes bear fruit.
Your statement is very long. I shall go through it when I have the
1
2

An eminent Malayalam poet
An exponent of Hindustani music

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

177

leisure and write to you if I have anything to say.1
Blessings from

BAPU
P ANDIT OMKARNATH
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

276. LETTER TO ASHABHAI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 18, 1944
BHAI ASHABHAI,

Since I had passed on your original letter to Bapa I did not
reply to it. Ravishankar Maharaj gave me a copy of it and we also had
a talk. You certainly have my blessings. Your work is fine. And it was
good that all of you participated in [raising] the contributions. I
suggest you should utilize the fresh amount you might have for
whatever work you wish to do and not add it to the Memorial [Fund].
This will not create any difficulty and you will be able to utilize the
entire sum locally. I am sure you have a local committee.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

277. LETTER TO MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 18, 1944
BHAI SAHEB,

Sundaram showed me your letter about the Mahadeva temple. It
is my request to you that the temple should be very simple. Should
Mahadeva’s abode be in a grand mansion or in a simple place? In my
humble opinion the noblest of ideas dwell in a simple temple. The
courtyard is quite good as it is. Thousands of devotees will be able to
worship Mahadeva under a simple roof. There is no urgency to build
the temple just now. All that is needed is there. You should be happy
1

178

Vide “Letter to Omkarnath Thakur”, 18-11-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

if a firm resolve is made and a vow taken to fulfil it.
Your younger brother,

M. K. GANDHI
BHARAT BHUSHAN P ANDIT MALAVIYAJI
C/ O S HRI S UNDARAM
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 10359. Courtesy: Bharat Kala Bhawan

278. LETTER TO OMKARNATH THAKUR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 18, 1944
BHAI OMKARNATH,

I read your statement fully. Till this point I wrote in Hindi either
inadvertently or because I was possessed by Hindi. Why is your
statement in English? Your language too does not follow the English
usage and hence sounds out of tune. Very few among us have a
perfect command over English. And why must we? When we cannot
do without it we may scribble some kind of English to express our
thoughts. You want to place your thoughts before the Indian people.
They should therefore be either in Gujarati (your mother tongue) or
Hindi (the national language).
This was only a point to note.
What have you to do with a charter? Your own merit deserves to
be your writ. Certainly, you don’t need State patronage. I think the
[institutions at] Santiniketan are run without a licence and yet
command global reputation. Did Vishnu Digambar1 ever obtain a
licence?
And now the third point.
Your statement is contrary to your new resolve. It smacks of
Pakistan. Music till now is untouched [by it]. Please don’t let it be
defiled by bringing in Pakistan.
What more can you expect from a man on his death-bed except
an exchange of notes?
Blessings from

BAPU
P ANDIT OMKARNATH , S ANGITMARTAND
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

V. D. Paluskar, an exponent of Hindustani music and the addressee’s guru

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

179

279. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 19, 1944
MY DEAR C. R.,

This is merely a love-letter. I hope when you come here, you
will be fit. Winter has set in here.
Pray that I may look at your pamphlet1 with your eyes.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2099

280. LETTER TO DR. HARIPRASAD DESAI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 19, 1944
BHAI HARIPRASAD 2 ,

I was very pleased to meet you after so many years and that too
in Sevagram.
I was glad to listen to the detailed news from Ahmedabad that
you gave me. But you know how greedy I am. I shall be satisfied only
if Ahmedabad helps me realize my dream, that is, if untouchability
goes root and branch, men and women practise abstention as a matter
of dharma and attain equality, the inequality between the rich and the
labourers is removed, drink and gambling are stopped, all wear
nothing but pure khadi whether at home or outdoors, ideal cleanliness
of the heart as well as in outer life is observed and no one suffers
hunger. Do whatever you can out of this and persuade others to do
so. 3 What more shall I say? Come again.
Blessings from

BAPU
DR. H ARIPRASAD DESAI
AHMEDABAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

About the Cripps offer; vide letter to the addressee, “Letter to C.
Rajagopalachari”, 8-11-1944.
2
Ex-President of the Ahmedabad Municipality
3
This message was sent for the ‘Labour Day’.

180

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

281. LETTER TO JIVANLAL DIWAN
S EVAGRAM ,

November 19, 1944
BHAISHRI DIWAN,

I was pleased to read your letter. You have not yet regained your
full strength. I don’t like it. Do the doctors and the vaids have no
remedy? Or is it that you are lax in your observance of the rules of
hygiene? True, my asking you this question may sound like the pot
calling the kettle black, but it is not quite that.
No doubt, you must miss Babubhai at every step. I had regarded
you two as inseparable. But he has left us all behind and gone ahead.
Herewith the reply to your student.1 Read it and tell him what
you think right.
The rest you may learn from Dr. Hariprasad.2
Blessings from

BAPU
JIVANLAL DIWAN
AHMEDABAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

Vide the following item.
Vide the preceding item.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

181

282. LETTER TO SURYAKANT PARIKH 1
S EVAGRAM ,

November 19, 19442
CHI. SURYAKANT PARIKH,

The sincerity of your letter is unmistakable. The leaders who are
in jail are doing their duty by being there. A satyagrahi in prison
never rots. He serves his cause by his imprisonment, nor can anyone
say with certainty that he could have served the cause better if he had
remained outside. But it is the duty of those who are outside not to
forget those who are in prison. They must labour to get them out. If
we had the requisite strength, many of our leaders should not be today
in jail. In its absence, we must strive with whatever measure of strength
we may possess. I, therefore, like the idea of students abstaining from
going to school on 9th, provided they devote the whole day to
self-purification and service. There should be strictest adherence to
truth and ahimsa in whatever they do. Mass civil disobedience is today
in abeyance; rather, it was never started but the fight for independence
shall go on so long as independence is not attained.
Whatever your decision let the bounds of propriety be not
transgressed and let the decision be taken after due consultation with
your teachers and school management. Do not forget that yours is not
a Government school.
You must also remember what I have said in another place about
the duties of students.
Blessings from

BAPU
S URYAKANT
C/ O JIVANLAL DIWAN
AHMEDABAD

The Hitavada, 21-1-1945
1

The addressee, a student of the Proprietary High School, Ahmedabad, had
written to Gandhiji on behalf of the School Committee asking how the 9th of each
month was to be observed. Since Gandhiji was receiving a large number of similar
enquiries especially from students and incomplete extracts from this letter had
appeared in the Press, this authorized translation was released to the Press on January
19, 1945.
2
The date, superscription, subscription and the address are from the Gujarati in
Pyarelal Papers.

182

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

283. SPEECH AT ALL-INDIA TEACHERS’ TRAINING CAMP1
S EVAGRAM ,

November 19, 1944
At the request of Shrimati Ashadevi, Gandhiji delivered a short address to them
on the 19th instant, to explain the meaning of New Education. He described in a few
words how the Basic Education scheme was born. In 1937 when the Congress took up
power for a short term, as it afterwards turned out, in seven out of the eleven
Provinces they were confronted with the question of popular education. His advice
was sought. Like many others, he had been dissatisfied with the present system of
education. He felt that if education was to be linked with the living needs of the
masses inhabiting the villages of India, it ought to be imparted through a basic craft.
He had no practical experience of agriculture. But he was saturated with the idea of the
charkha which he had identified with village life. He, therefore, suggested that it
should be used as a medium for the children’s education. The idea appealed to Shri
Aryanayakum, Shrimati Ashadevi and Dr. Zakir Husain and through their effort the
Hindustani Talimi Sangh was founded.
Originally this New Education was intended to cover only the first seven years
of a child’s education, viz., from the seventh to the fourteenth year. The experiment
had already completed six years and was now entering upon the seventh. As a result of
further thought, he had come to the conclusion that this education should cover the
whole of life from the moment of conception to the moment of death.
Referring to the prayer which had been recited at the beginning of the
proceedings, he observed:

There are several things in this prayer which are worthy of your
note but I want to draw your attention to that particular portion of it
which pledged the reciter to adherence to Truth in speech and action
under all circumstances and at all times. One mantra means: “Lead
me from untruth to Truth, from darkness to Light, from death to
Immortality.” Similarly the Islamic prayer, which has just been recited
is an outpouring of the soul for Light and for being guided on to the
straight path of Truth and Righteousness. This quest for Truth is the
Alpha and Omega of all education.
After finishing your training here you will go back to your
respective Provinces to propagate this New Education. You will keep
this ideal of devotion to Truth before you. Your work will be that of
pioneers. There will be no one to help or guide you with his previous
experience. You shall have to grope your way all by yourselves. It is,
therefore, not an easy task that you have before you. Then this New
1
Organized by the Hindustani Talimi Sangh and attended by about 50 students,
the camp was inaugurated by Gandhiji in the afternoon. This is the authorized version
of Gandhiji’s speech, presumably in Hindi.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

183

Education will not help you to get big jobs carrying high salaries and
emoluments. But yours will be the privilege to go among and serve
the villagers in their villages. Palatial buildings and costly equipment
can, therefore, have no place in your scheme of work. The school of
my conception is one where classes are held in the open under the
shade of a tree. I know that it cannot be realized at present. Some
shelter will be necessary, perhaps always for protection against the sun,
wind and rain. True education can only be given under conditions of
utmost simplicity.
Pointing to the building in which they were assembled, he continued:

All the buildings here in the Talimi Sangh are built of local
material and with the help of local artisans. We have thereby
established a living link between ourselves and the people. That by
itself is an education for the people and constitutes the foundation of
our future educational work.
If you thoroughly assimilate this ideal of simplicity and its
importance in the New Education, you will have justified your training
here. You will then appreciate your work.
That work consists of cleaning up. Cleanliness of the mind and
body is the first step in education. Prayer does for the purification of
the mind what the bucket and the broom do for the cleaning up of
your physical surroundings. That is why we always commence our
proceedings with prayer. No matter whether the prayer we recite is the
Hindu prayer or the Muslim or the Parsi, its function is essentially the
same, namely, purification of the heart. God has innumerable names
but the most beautiful and suitable in my opinion is Truth. Let Truth,
therefore, rule every action of our life, be it ever so insignificant. Let
every morsel of food that we eat be sanctified with His name and
consecrated to His service. If we eat only to sustain the body as an
instrument of His service not only will it make our bodies and minds
healthy and clean, the inner cleanliness will be reflected in our
surroundings also. We must learn to make our latrines as clean as our
kitchens.
As with the individual so with society. A village is but a group of
individuals and the world, as I see it, is one vast village and mankind
one family. The various functions in the human body have their
parallel in the corporate life of society. What I have said about the
inner and outer cleanliness of the individual, therefore, applies to the
whole society. In the mighty world, man, considered as an animal,
occupies but an insignificant place. Physically, he is a contemptible
worm. But God has endowed him with intellect and the faculty of
discrimination between good and evil. If we use this faculty to know
184

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

God we become a power for good. Abuse of that talent converts us
into an instrument of evil, so that we become like a scourge and a
plague and fill this earth with strife and bloodshed and unhappiness
and misery.
The struggle between the forces of good and evil is ceaseless
and eternal. The former have truth and ahimsa as weapons against the
letter’s falsehood, violence and brute force. There is nothing more
potent in the universe than God’s name. If we enthrone Him in our
hearts and keep Him there always, we shall know no fear and lay for
ourselves rich treasure in life.
The Hindu, 5-12-1944

284. LETTER TO GOPINATH BARDOLOI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 20, 1944
DEAR BARDOLOI 1 ,

I have your letter with enclosures. Concentrate on producing a
solid scheme for villages and the names and qualifications of those
who would work it. If you can do that there might be no difficulty
about funds even if you exceed your allotment. But you must be
prepared for a stiff test. Don’t take a full bite at once and face
disaster.
Yours ,
BAPU
S HRI GOPINATH BARDOLOI
GAUHATI
ASSAM
From a photostat: C.W. 10493. Courtesy: Omeyo Kumar Das

1

Ex-Premier of Assam

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

185

285. LETTER TO F. J. CURTERI
S EVAGRAM , I NDIA,

November 20, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your letter and the interesting enclosures.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
F. J. C URTERI, E SQ.
425, 112 WEST DORAN
GRENDAEC 3
C ALIFORNIA , U. S. A.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

286. LETTER TO A. KALESHWARA RAO
S EVAGRAM ,

November 20, 1944
DEAR KALESHWARA RAO,

I see that I cannot bear the burden you want me to shoulder
about Rajagopalarao. You should have no difficulty in bearing it.
Yours ,
BAPU
S HRI KALESEIWARA R AO
NANDIGRAM
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

287. LETTER TO CHIEF SECRETARY,
GOVERNMENT OF C. P.
November 20, 1944
SIR,

Perhaps the Government are aware that I am intimately
connected with the institutions1 described in the enclosed 2 which has
been prepared at my request. The figures are necessarily approximate.
1
2

186

Nalawadi and Paunar Ashrams; vide, letter to the addressee, 7-1-1945.
This is not available.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Apart from the question of the legality of the confiscations and
without prejudice to the rights of parties interested to claim damages
for losses sustained, I venture to suggest that the properties described
in the enclosed may be returned to the trustees, so that the constructive
and creative activities providing means of livelihood to those for
whom they were designed may be resumed as before and further
deterioration may be prevented.
I am,
Yours faithfully,

M. K. GANDHI

Encl. 1
THE C HIEF S ECRETARY TO THE C. P. G OVERNMENT
NAGPUR
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

288. LETTER TO HIRABHAI S. AMIN
S EVAGRAM ,

November 20, 1944
BHAI HARIBHAI [sic ],

I have seen Chi. Jeram’s1 letter to you. Everyone here is pleased
with the service he has rendered. I approve of his desire to learn
painting. However I cannot use for this purpose the money that lies
with me. But I think it would not be wrong if you encouraged him in
his endeavour. The present generation will certainly want to have
freedom in the choice of education, etc., when it comes of age.
Whatever elders do—except the restraint they exercise upon those
going astray—can hardly be anything but coercion.
Vandemataram from

M. K. GANDHI
HIRABHAI S. A MIN
TARAPORE
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Jeram Patel

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

187

289. LETTER TO BALVANTSINHA
November 20, 1944
CHI. BALVANTSINHA,

You have rightly cautioned me.1 I shall do what I can. The result
will be what we all deserve.
Who knows what will happen tomorrow? Ramji hadn’t known
what was to happen the next morning. You may return after
straightening out things there and setting your mind at rest.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1950

290. LETTER TO SATYAVATI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 20, 1944
CHI. SATYAVATI,

Received your letter.
Chi. Chandrani has arrived here. But since I am observing
silence I cannot speak to her today.
You may go to Lahore if there is no answer from the
Government and if they impose humiliating restrictions you may
break them. It will be best if they allow you to come here, then we
shall see what happens. Go to jail if they imprison you and there even
if you meet your death it doesn’t matter. In death too the victory will
be yours; it is yours even as it is. I do not see any point now in
complying with the restrictions imposed by the Government. Write to
them plainly that your primary duty is to recover your health. I have
assumed responsibility for Chandrani.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 10234. Courtesy: Brijkrishna Chandiwala

1

188

The addressee had offered some suggestions about the Ashram administration.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

291. LETTER TO KALAVATI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 20, 1944
CHI. KALAVATI1 ,

Chi. Anand has given me Rs. 10 on your behalf and has also
told me all about you. Remember, we are after all made up of this
country’s soil. We belong to the starving millions. And so you should
lead a simple life and be one with God.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: C.W. 10584. Courtesy: Anand T. Hingorani

292. LETTER TO A. C. PATWARDHAN
S EVAGRAM ,

November 20, 1944
BHAI PATWARDHAN,

How can I write to Bhaiya? I have no preferences. I have agreed
to take up the responsibility only out of love—provided both the
parties are willing.2
I treasure many sweet memories of the late Abhyankar. Reduced
to words they will lose much of their worth.
Blessings from

BAPU
A. C. P ATWARDHAN
“TARUN BHARAT ”
NAGPUR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

293. LETTER TO V. G. SAHASRABUDDHE
S EVAGRAM ,

November 20, 1944
BHAI SAHASRABUDDHE,

I have your frank letter. I am helpless. Only today I received
Patwardhan’s letter. He says that I should arbitrate in this dispute also.
1
2

Anand T. Hingorani’s sister
Vide the following item.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

189

I shall do so provided you are also willing. Patwardhan writes that you
will agree only if I write to you. I have written to him that it is not my
job. I have no wish to undertake this responsibility but I shall agree to
arbitrate out of love provided both the parties are willing. And that too
on the condition that I should have written statements from both the
parties. I cannot accept oral statements. And you must allow me six
months’ time for the verdict. If you agree please inform him and send
me the statements and the letter of authority.
Blessings from

BAPU
V. G. SAHASRABUDDHE
KHADI VASTRALAYA
NAGPUR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

294. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
November 20, 1944
I saw Vidya’s mobile samadhi1 . It is good but I am inclined
towards the simple and subtle. Let it be if you get peace and solace
from it. It is also transient and if you can free yourself of attachment
for it your love for Vidya will become further purified. You will better
understand Vidya’s true nature and your oneness will become clearer.
A photograph shows difference. By identifying yourself with the
unmanifest Vidya, that is with her spirit, non-difference can be
attained. If you can keep the ashes in a little box which can be put in a
pocket you may do so. You do not have to do this because I am
saying so, but only if you yourself fully understand its meaning and
its importance. Only then can it profit you. What I mean is your peace
and your joy should increase more with this sacrifice. If this does not
happen then let things be as they are.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

1

190

Memorial
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

295. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
November 21, 1944
CHI. AMRIT,

Your letter came in today.
You have to submit to the relief in instalments for the sake of
your brothers. Amid conflict of duties, the choice is often a very
delicate affair. In every case you will be cheerful and keep your body
in a fit condition. The climate there must be most bracing. I hope you
had a good time with Kamalnayan1 .
I am well. Sushila has gone to Bombay to see Mathuradas. She
is due any day now.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 4149. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7784

296. LETTER TO C. V. RAJAGOPALACHARI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 21, 1944
DEAR SHRI RAJAGOPALACHARI,

I have your letter of the 18th inst. and also your pamphlet.
I hold the concluding paragraph of your last letter to be
offensive. However, let me say briefly that when I wrote the article
referred to by you, so far as I recall past events, I had not Rajaji’s
opinion in mind. My correction was a correlated reflection of my
mind.
I have no place in the Congress for several years past. I never
court publicity. A sense of duty compels me sometimes to write. I
have no desire to enter into a public discussion about the matters
raised by you.
Yours truly,

S HRI C. V. R AJAGOPALACHARI
BUCKINGHAMPET
BEZWADA
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1

Jamnalal Bajaj’s eldest son

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

191

297. LETTER TO KUSUM GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 21, 1944
CHI. KUSUM 1 ,

Your letter after many days. It was well you spared me.
Naturally I remember you very often. It is precisely for your sake that
Narandas refrains from coming to me. If he himself comes whom
should he bring along and whom should he leave behind? Besides,
what is the point in our meeting? All of you there are busy rendering
service which is more valuable than our meeting each other. I have
Narandas’s letter as also Jamna’s2 . I am not writing to either. Kanu
and Abha are fine. For my part I have given them permission to go
there but they will not for some time.
Blessings from

BAPU
[C/O] NARANDAS GANDHI
R AJKOT
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

298. LETTER TO BALKRISHNA P. PATHAK
S EVAGRAM ,

November 21, 1944
BHAI BALKRISHNA PATHAK,

True, I had close contact with the late Anandshankarbhai 3 . My
greetings for the unveiling of his portrait. But will the University be
content with unveiling his portrait by way of commemorating him or
will every teacher and student endeavour to follow his noble qualities?

1

Daughter of Vrajlal Gandhi
Wife of Narandas Gandhi
3
A. B. Dhruva (1869-1942); Sanskrit scholar and Gujarati man of letters;
Pro-Vice-Chancellor, Benares Hindu University
2

192

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

This came off my pen in Gujarati. If a Hindi rendering is
necessary do it yourself.
Vandemataram from

M. K. GANDHI
DR. B. P. P ATHAK
AYURVEDIC C OLLEGE
BENARES HINDU UNIVERSITY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

299. LETTER TO SHARDA G. CHOKHAWALA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 21, 1944
CHI. BABUDI,

I have your letter. You went away too soon after you arrived. I
could not listen to your little confidences. I am reduced to a difficult
and awkward position. The days when I could give individual
satisfaction can be said to be almost over. For the present I see no
possibility of getting anything better than the dharmashala where you
have been accommodated. I hope Anand 1 does not make a nuisance
of himself. I trust you are keeping well.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HARDABEHN C HOKHAWALA
BIRLA ’S DHARMASHALA
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

300. LETTER TO SUJATA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 22, 1944
DEAR SUJATA,

Amrit Babu is leaving tomorrow. From the account he gives me
of your activity I see you are doing good work. May God bless you
for it.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 10511
1

Addressee’s son

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

193

301. LETTER TO J. C. GUPTA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 22, 1944
DEAR GUPTA,

When I saw in the papers months ago a reference to a lawyer
brilliantly arguing his case before the Federal Court, I never knew that
you had the honour to own that lawyer as your son. May his marriage
be a blessing to him and his future wife. I congratulate her on her
choice.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI J. C. G UPTA
23 C IRCUS AVENUE
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

302. LETTER TO JYOTILAL A. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 22, 1944
BHAI JYOTI,

Your letter is fine. Obviously what you say is correct. I also
know that the Bungalow has changed hands. I have raised only a
question of dharma. 1 If you sell the property I shall have to bear it
without a word.
Who is Keshubhai? I cannot understand why Qureshi should
turn inimical. I am writing to him.
I consider it intolerable that anyone should disfigure the
Bungalow. I should also consider it wrong on the part of anyone who
appropriates the Bungalow. Arrange, if you can, for the property to
cease to be negotiable. But you may sell it if it will safeguard
Champa’s interests and if you think that it will not tarnish Doctor’s
name. I have a letter from Maganbhai of which I am sending you a
1

194

Vide “Letter to Jyotilal A. Mehta”, 6-11-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

copy. Just now I am not in a position to arbitrate.
Blessings from

BAPU
J. A. MEHTA
JYOTI & C O.
MORVI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

303. LETTER TO MAGANLAL P. MEHTA
November 22, 1944
CHI. MAGAN,

I had your letter. I have written to Champa’s adviser.1 I will
forward the reply to you. I am not in a condition just now to take up a
long inquiry. I am buried under public work. Hope you are all happy.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI MAGANLAL P RANJIVAN MEHTA , B ARRISTER
82 GHODBUNDAR R OAD
ANDHERI , B.B. & C.I. RLY .
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 1031. Courtesy: Manjula M. Mehta

304. LETTER TO KUSUM M. KOTHARI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 22, 1944
CHI. KUSUM,

I got you letter. How do you meet your expenses? Where you
are? You and your sisters should not give up your studies.
Blessings from

BAPU
KUSUM MANILAL KOTHARI
TAKHTESHWAR P LOT
BHAVNAGAR
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

195

305. LETTER TO LIMAYE
S EVAGRAM ,

November 22, 1944
BHAI LIMAYE,

It is disturbing that both of you keep indifferent health. The
only consolation is that you have two doctors with you. Please come
when you are free.
I feel that we cannot let those who sell uncertified khadi also
have Congress agency. It is not a matter of rules but of morals. You
however have to work as the local committee directs.
It is good that you have taken up the work of Nayee Talim.
About this when you come.
Chi. Balmohan must be progressing well.
Blessings from

BAPU
ACHARYA LIMAYE
925 S ADASHIVPETH
P OONA 2
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

306. LETTER TO SUBHADRADEVI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 22, 1944
CHI. SUBHADRA,

I have your sorrowful letter. I have written to Dr. Baldev.1 I shall
write to you if I hear anything from him. What else can I do? What
could I do for you if I called you here? Nothing is definite about me.
God alone is our true help. He will protect you.
Blessings from

BAPU
S UBHADRADEVI
C/ O AMRITDHARA [PHARMACY]
LAHORE
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

196

Vide “Letter to Dr. Baldev”, 16-11-1944.
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

307. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
November 22, 1944
Do not take to heart what Mother says. All mothers say things
like this. Laugh over it.
To worship God in His invisible form, watch the stars every
night and look at the sun early in the morning. Mingle Vidya with the
vision. Has not Vidya too gone up? The Saptarshi 1 is there and so is
the Arundhati2 . Though it is an imagination it helps.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

308. LETTER TO TOTARAM HINGORANI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 23, 1944
MY DEAR TOTARAMJI 3 ,

Anand is somewhat reconciled to Vidya’s death. He sees that a
soul does not die with the dissolution of the body. His one and real
unhappiness is that you are not reconciled to your wife. As a dutiful
son the grief is natural to him. Is there no possibility of
reconciliation? Pardon me for this intrusion. I feel for Anand.
Yours sincerely,
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T.
Hingorani

309. LETTER TO T. R. NARSIMHACHAR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 23, 1944
DEAR FRIENDS

I thank you for your cautions. Everyone is useful. I shall not
enter upon the fast unless I have the clearest possible call from the

1

Ursa Major
A star near Ursa Major
3
Anand T. Hingorani’s father
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

197

inner voice which is God.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI T. R. NARSIMHACHARJI OF TIRUPATI
S RIRANGAM
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

310. LETTER TO JETHALAL G. SAMPAT
S EVAGRAM , W ARDHA ,

November 23, 1944
CHI. JETHALAL,

I am not at all in a condition to write to anybody, but how can I
remain without sending you an acknowledgement? I got your detailed
letter. I hope you will he able to make your way through the
difficulties. You must have written to Jajuji.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 9872. Courtesy: Narayan J. Sampat

311. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
[November 23, 1944] 1
CHI. MANILAL,

This cable [from Sushila] has been just received on the
telephone. I suppose it means that you should not go. But we need not
act on that. Nothing is definite about the fast. If it comes, Sushila may
be with me at the time instead of you.
From Gujarati: C.W. 1354. Courtesy: Sushila Gandhi

1

198

From the C.W. Register
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

312. LETTER TO MARUTI SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 23, 1944
CHI. MARUTI 1 ,

I was happy to have your letter. It was wise of you to have
cancelled your plans of coming here. Who but Bapa would
accommodate you? I have not seen many people whose generosity
can match Dada’s [and] Bapa’s. Do as he bids. It is certainly a fine
idea to build yourself a house. It is right that you and Lakshmi
practise abstention. In the present circumstances it is better not to go
about meeting people. It is our duty to save every single pie. I hope
the children are fine.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

313. LETTER TO SUMITRA GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 23, 1944
CHI. SUMI,

I reach your fine letter, which I have preserved since October 21,
right up to this day. For a long time I had intended to do you justice.
But now I don’t have the time, so I shall make do with this little note.
See that you get yourself the right food. Keep writing to me regularly.
I hope you are fine. Keep the promises you have made me. Have you
made friends with any of the girls? Take care of your eyes.
Blessings from

BAPU

[P.S]
I just got your letter. How did Mathuri2 happen to fall ill? I hope
she is all right now.
KUM. S UMITRA R AMDAS GANDHI
BIRLA S CHOOL
P ILANI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
An inmate of the Satyagraha Ashram at Sabarmati, married to Gandhiji’s
adopted daughter, Lakshmi, a Harijan
2
Mathuri Narayan Khare

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

199

314. LETTER TO NATHTHUBHAI PAREKH
S EVAGRAM

November 23, 1944
BHAI NATHTHUBHAI,

I have your letter full of affection. This is only to acknowledge
receipt of it. I just don’t have the time to write more. Writing even this
little thing is burdensome, but how can I forget you?
Blessings from

BAPU
NATHTHUBHAI P AREKH
C/ O KISHORE BROTHERS
BANGALORE
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

315. LETTER TO SUNDERLAL
S EVAGRAM ,

November 23, 1944
BHAI SUNDERLAL,

Received your letter. I had read about your case in the
newspapers. 1 I felt sorry. Is there no scope for an appeal? What does
Dr. Sapru say?
I understand what you say regarding the Hindustani Prachar
[Sabha]. Dr. Tara Chand2 could not join it, but do invite Dr. Abdul
Haq Saheb 3 to come. Even though there are Muslim members in the
Sabha, Abdul Haq Saheb ought to be there.
I have occasionally noticed the activities of the Hindustani
Culture Society. We should welcome whatever people are able to do. I
note that your lectures are going on. They must be having a good

1

After the ban on the addressee’s book Bharatmen Angrezi Raj was lifted, it
was reprinted by another publisher. This led to litigation in which the addressee lost
the case. Later an appeal was filed leading to a compromise. T. B. Sapru had pleaded
the addressee’s case.
2
Head of the Department of History and Politics, Allahabad University
3
President, Anjuman Taraqui-e-Urdu

200

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

impact.
Come whenever you can.
Blessings from

BAPU
P ANDIT S UNDERLALJI
8 T UKOGANJ MAIN R OAD
INDORE
From the Hindi original: C.W. 10264. Courtesy: Purushottam Prasad

316. LETTER TO KHWAJA A. HAMID
S EVAGRAM ,

November 23, 1944
BHAI HAMID,

Why in English? I can read Urdu written in a clear hand. I can
also write it but with some difficulty. I am writing to you in Hindi
hoping that you can read the language. I have gone through your
letter thoroughly. What have I to discuss with the nationalist
[Muslims]? I can meet the nationalists only if I can bring something
from Jinnah Saheb. I did not go to him to surrender the rights of the
nationalists. Our duty is to reach, if possible, an agreement with the
League, is it not?
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
KHWAJA A. H AMID
BYCULLA
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

317. LETTER TO AKBARALI I. LOKHANDWALA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 24, 1944
BHAI AKBARALI,

I have your letter. What advice, much less help, can I offer you?
I don’t even fully understand this kind of work. I am sorry that you
are in trouble and that things are getting worse. May God soon relieve

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

201

you from your troubles.
Blessings from

M. K. GANDHI
AKBARALI ISMAILJI LOKHANDWALA
GODHRA
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

318. LETTER TO GOPE GURBUXANI
November 25, 1944
DEAR DR. GURBUX,

Please wait till I am free. Send me a reminder at the end of
December.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 1319

319. LETTER TO K. RENGARAJAN
November 25, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

You should have mer[cy] on me. I am one and senders of
papers are many. How can I cope with the work except by excluding
much unsolicited matter?
Yours truly,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: C.W. 10232. Courtesy: Gandhi Seva Sangh, Sevagram

320. LETTER TO KAILAS HAKOOR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 25, 1944
DEAR SIR KAILAS,

I am late in acknowledging your kind letter of 28th ultimo. I am
so much pressed for time. I send these lines to thank you for your
letter.
Pray don’t be anxious about the contemplated fast. It won’t

202

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

come except in answer to a call from God.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S IR KAILAS HAKOOR
S IMLA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

321. LETTER TO KRISHNABAI NIMBKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 25, 1944
DEAR KRISHNABAI,

I am late in answering your letter. I see you are incorrigible.
Obstinacy is both a virtue and a vice. Which it is depends on
circumstances. In your case I would fain believe that it is a virtue. You
ask for permission to do certain things. Who am I to give or withhold
permission? I can only advise where advice is sought. I have given
you my answers.
Your attack on Rajaji is ill-founded.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S MT. K RISHNABAI NIMBKAR
192 P OONAMALLEE HIGH R OAD
VEPERY, M ADRAS
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

322. LETTER TO JETHALAL JOSHI
November 25, 1944
BHAI JETHALAL JOSHI,

I could not reply to your letter immediately. I have received
other letters similar to yours and I am drafting a statement 1 with
reference to them. Please read it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 1353

1

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 27-11-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

203

323. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
November 25, 1944
CHI. MANILAL,

I have your letter. I was glad to hear that all of you reached
there safely. I am better now. Now in place of Kanu Sushilabehn
sleeps here. The massage and bath are given by Kanaiyo. Krishna’s
teeth caused some anxiety, He had some relief after Sushila arrived.
He had sound sleep last night. I have accommodated him in Rustom
Bhavan. Your decision to go is perfectly correct. I am in God’s hands.
I have started sleeping in the verandah since last night. Do not worry
about me in the least. I sent you Sushila’s cable. I wrote a couple of
words below it.1 You must have received it by now. My blessings to
Kishorelal and Gomati and the rest. Let no one worry about me.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI MANILAL GANDHI
C/ O S HRI NIRMALABEHN S HROFF
ISHVARDAS MANSION
BLOCK-A, 5 TH F LOOR
NANA C HOWK, G AMDEVI
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4940

324. LETTER TO PURUSHOTTAM GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 25, 1944
CHI. PURUSHOTTAM,

I like your letter very much. You can take both the
examinations. You will see a statement that I am issuing.
I have correctly understood what you write about music. You
should not take anything from the Harijan Sevak Sangh. You should
cease to be a burden. Service of Harijans is the warp and woof of our
lives. Music is your life’s mission. It is the legacy left by Panditji 2 .
Merge yourself into music. I should regard it not at all improper if
1
2

204

Vide letter to the addressee, 23-11-1944.
Narayan Moreshwar Khare
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

you earned your maintenance through it. But I am prepared to write
to Jivanlal if right now you are shrinking from doing it. He is a sound
and dependable person and your relationship with him is not confined
to that of a father-in-law and son-in-law. Hence you need not be
embarrassed if he pays your expenses for the sake of your music. I
shall not write without your consent. You may also consult Narandas
and let me know if both of you think of something else. I know that
Vijaya1 is fully co-operating with you. I had also learnt that Aruna is
progressing. You are lucky. Acquire full control over your body.
Charge only those who are rich and not the poor.
Blessings from

BAPU
P URUSHOTTAM N. G ANDHI
R AJKOT
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

325. LETTER TO SATYACHARAN
S EVAGRAM ,

November 25, 1944
BHAI SATYACHARANJI,

I have your letter. I am considering what I ought to do. I am
also having a talk with Ghanshyam Singhji.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
S ATYACHARANJI
D. A. V. HIGH S CHOOL
ALLAHABAD
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

326. LETTER TO V. N. BARVE
S EVAGRAM ,

November 25, 1944
BHAI BARVEJI,

I had your letter. With such a rush of work I forget whether or
not I have replied to the letters. I value your Harijan service highly. I
1

Addressee’s wife and daughter

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

205

admit that our work is proceeding very slowly. I do not know how to
quicken its pace.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
V. N. B ARVE
P RESIDENT , H ARIJAN S EVAK S ANGH
DHULIA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

327. LETTER TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 26, 1944
DEAR KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA GARU,

Bapu was delighted to see your letter of 4th instant. He was sorry to learn that
you are not keeping well. You have got to keep well.
He is not anxious to undertake a fast. He is praying for light.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
DESHABHAKTA KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
GUNTUR
From a photostat: G.N. 3227

328. LETTER TO T. N. AVINASHILINGAM
S EVAGRAM ,

November 26, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji had your letter of 3rd November.
With regard to the Kulasekharapattanam rioting case he is of opinion that the
appeal ought to be filed in the Privy Council. He wants to know what the probable
costs would be and the extent of assistance that would be required.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
S HRI T. N. AVINASHILINGAM
13-A F EROZESHAH R OAD
NEW DELHI

206

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

[P.S.]
I have just finished Ranga’s thing. 1 I am taking up yours next without any
further delay.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

329. LETTER TO ANNE MARIE PETERSEN
S EVAGRAM , “ VIA ” WARDHA ,

November 26, 1944
DEAR SISTER2 ,

Bapu was very glad to have your letter of 3rd inst. He is sorry he cannot write
to you himself as he has been forced to further curtail his work owing to overstrain. In
fact he has almost reached the limit of his capacity and has had nature’s warning
signals which he cannot ignore.
He does not want to undertake a fast, but he is faced with a moral dilemma and
he is praying to God for light. He will not undertake the fast unless he has the
clearest indication that it is the will of God.
I hope you had a favourable response from the trustees of the Kasturba
Memorial Fund with regard to your proposal about your school.
What you write about Ba is but too true.
You will certainly come whenever you feel like coming.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
S ISTER MARIA
S EVA MANDIR
P ROTO NOVO
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

Vide footnote of “Interview to N. G. Ranga”, 29-10-1944.
The addressee, a former member of the Danish Mission, had founded an
ashram—a school for girls—at Porto Novo.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

207

330. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS1
S EVAGRAM ,

November 27, 1944
At present, the Hindustani prachar work is being carried on in
Gujarat by Shri Amritlal Nanavati. This work is in accordance with the
scheme prepared by Kakasaheb in consultation with me. Hindi
prachar work is being conducted by the Rashtrabhasha Prachar
Samiti, Wardha, appointed by the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan. Both these
activities are supposed to be undertaken for spreading the national
language. I regard myself as the founder of the Hindustani Prachar
Sabha. In 1925, the resolution about Hindustani was passed at the
Cawnpore session of the Indian National Congress. But no attempt was
made to act upon the resolution. The Hindustani Prachar Sabha was,
therefore, established in Wardha on the 2nd May, 1942. The Sabha
has defined Hindustani as follows:
Hindustani is that language which the Hindus, Muslims and all other
people of villages and towns in Northern India speak, understandand use for
mutual intercourse, which is written and read in both the Nagari and the Persian
scripts, and the literary forms of which are recognized today as Hindi and
Urdu.2

But before the work of the Sabha could be started properly,
many people of the country, including the founders of the Sabha,
were thrust into jails on account of the August Resolution3 of the
Congress. Shri Nanavati was not in jail, and he felt that he should start
the Hindustani prachar work. In my opinion he has served the
country by doing this work.
Hindi and Urdu are the two literary styles of the same national
language. These two styles are, at present, diverging from each other.
From the point of view of Rashtrabhasha—Hindustani—it is
necessary to bring these two styles nearer to each other. Without the
knowledge of both these styles and the scripts this is impossible to
achieve.
1
This was issued on January 10, 1945, by Shriman Narayan, Honorary General
Secretary, All-India Hindustani Prachar Sabha, in order to remove misunderstandings
about the object and work of the Sabha. The Gujarati original appeared in Gujarat
Samachar, 2-12-1944.
2
Gujarat Samachar has this paragraph in Hindi.
3
Vide Appendix “Resolution Passed by All-India Congress Committee”,
8-8-1942.

208

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The venom of Hindu-Muslim differences has entered the sphere
of language as well. I have been possessed with the idea of
Hindu-Muslim unity ever since my childhood. In order to eliminate
this poison of disunity in the domain of language, it is necessary to
learn both the styles and the scripts. If the Congress desires to conduct
its work without English—and this must be done—it is the duty of
each Congressman to learn both the styles and the scripts. This will
result in the happy fusion of Hindi and Urdu, and the language that
will thus evolve will be the natural Hindustani.
A question is asked whether the enthusiasm for learning both
the styles and the scripts should be among both the Hindus and
Muslims or only in one of them. A misunderstanding lurks behind
this question. Those who make progress in the knowledge of
languages will stand to gain: those who do not will be the losers.
Moreover, he who cherishes unity will take special pains to know both
the styles and the scripts. It should also be remembered that, in
provinces like the Punjab, the Hindus, Muslims and all others know
only Urdu. To know at least this much is the duty of every patriot. In
a vast country like India, the more languages we strive to learn the
better equipped shall we become for national service.
Should both the scripts and the styles be learnt by national
workers and Congressmen only or by all?
My answer to this question is that all Indians should become
Congressmen, and thus everybody should learn both the styles and the
scripts. In fact, the very question is irrelevant, because only a very
limited number of men and women have so far developed this hobby
of learning the national language. We cannot go into raptures over the
fact that a few thousands or a few lakhs of people appear at the
Rashtrabhasha examinations. Even the number of persons in the
non-Hindi and non-Urdu areas who desire to learn only Hindi or
Urdu is not sufficient to satisfy our ambition.
Is it not enough that those who desire to learn Urdu should do
so through the Anjuman1 and those who desire to learn Hindi should
do so through the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan?
Not at all. It was precisely because of this that the Congress
passed the resolution on Hindustani and the need of establishing the
Hindustani Prachar Sabha was felt. The scopes of both the institutions
(Sammelan and Anjuman) are restricted, and from my point of view,
narrow as well. It is my cherished desire that both these sister
institutions should co-operate with each other. When that auspicious
1

Anjuman Taraqui-e-Urdu

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

209

day will really dawn, the work of the Hindustani Prachar Sabha will be
deemed to be over. So long as this situation does not arise, the
Hindustani Prachar Sabha should continue to perform its duty. I do
hope that these two sister associations will not only tolerate but also
welcome this third sister institution which seeks to establish unity
between them.
In Gujarat many workers who are at present engaged in Hindi
and Hindustani prachar work are my colleagues. Some of them have
sought my guidance. This statement is my guidance to them. If those
who are working for the Wardha Samiti of the Hindi Sahitya
Sammelan agree with my views on Hindustani prachar, they should
take up this work as well. They can certainly teach and coach for the
Sammelan examinations those students who desire to learn only the
Hindi style and the Devanagari script. But they themselves should
popularize both the styles and the scripts and should also try to
persuade as many persons as they can to do the same. So far as
language is connected with the welfare of the nation, I regard
Hindustani prachar work to be most essential. There should never
develop any conflict between the two activities (of Hindi and
Hindustani).
Now a question arises as to what should be done by those
who have so far learnt or may learn in future only Hindi or only
Urdu.Such persons should learn the other style or script and sit for the
Hindustani examinations which are to be conducted in both the
scripts. Those who have already learnt one style and script will find it
very easy to answer the question papers.
The Hindu, 15-1-1945

331. LETTER TO MALIK WAHID
S EVAGRAM ,

November 27, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

You will please forgive me for being late in replying to your
letter of 1st ultimo.
Munshiji1 cannot be disqualified for holding certain political
views. He has rendered assistance to the trust in a variety of ways.

1

210

K. M. Munshi
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I thank you for your good wishes.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
MALIK WAHID S AHEB
JOGESHWARI
B. S. D.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

332. LETTER TO ATULANAND CHAKRAVARTY
S EVAGRAM ,

November 27, 1944
DEAR ATULANAND,

Do be merciful to me. Don’t ask me to read anything and don’t
seek my opinion. Of course you must pursue your mission, come
what will.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

333. LETTER TO BHAGWANDAS
S EVAGRAM ,

November 27, 1944
BABOOJI,

I have treasured your letter of 28-9-44 all these days in the hope
of answering it. I came across it today while overtaking arrears.
You lay upon my shoulders a burden they are ill able to carry. I
am ill-equipped for the task you call me to.
I hope you are keeping quite well.
Yours ,
M. K. GANDHI
DR. B HAGWANDAS
BENARES C ANT .
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

211

334. LETTER TO S. M. PINTO
S EVAGRAM ,

November 27, 1944
DEAR PINTO,

As to my fast do your duty and leave me in the strong hands of
God. Trust Him to guide me aright. I shall do nothing without His
guidance. As to the Trust1 do you not see that the trustees were
self-constituted? Their business was to collect from whomsoever gave.
Then I came on the scene. I was permitted to add names of those who
I thought would carry out best the object of the Trust. The whole of
India now comes in to see that the money is spent on and for the
women and children excluding males beyond an age in the 700,000
villages of India. Here there is no religious or other distinction.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S. M. P INTO
NATIONALIST C HRISTIAN P ARTY
F ORT, B OMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

335. LETTER TO SITA GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 27, 1944
CHI. SITA,

I have your letter. The handwriting is beautiful. You should
make your letters slightly bigger. It has now grown pretty cold here.
Build up your body with the same devotion with which you are
pursuing your studies. Do not be lax about anything.
Blessings to you all from

BAPU
S ITA
C/ O NANABHAI MASHRUWALA
AKOLA
From a copy of the
1

212

Gujarati:

Pyarelal Papers.

Courtesy:

Pyarelal

Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Trust
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

336. LETTER TO BALUBHAI P. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 27, 1944
BHAI BALUBHAI,

I have your letter. I am no more useful for personal work. My
strength is limited. I can hardly cope with public work either. There
are hundreds who are afflicted like you. Would I have the time if I set
out to meet all of them? One should find out one’s own way out of
one’s troubles.
Blessings from

BAPU
B. P. MEHTA
GANJIKHET
NAGPUR
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

337. LETTER TO VIKRAM A. SARABHAI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 27, 1944
CHI. VIKRAM,

I have your letter of the 16th. You have taken a lot of pains but
the job can be done only if we have power in our hands. A ‘Gallup
poll’ is conducted by newspapers and it means nothing. Besides, the
number of newspaper readers in our country is so small that a
research of this kind will not give any worth-while result. Let us see
what the Sapru Committee1 does.
Blessings from

BAPU
VIKRAM S ARABHAI
BANGALORE
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
The Conciliation Committee appointed by the Standing Committee of the
Non-party Conference under the Chairmanship of T. B. Sapru, vide Appendix “Letter
From T. B. Sapru”(b) and (c) “Names Suggested for Conciliation Committee”.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

213

338. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 27, 1944
BAPA,

I have gone through your letter. Some people are capable of
sitting idle enjoying their leisure. You are certainly not one of them.
Your enjoyment lies in doing work. Well, enjoy yourself Narahari is
coming tomorrow and he will examine your statement. Sushilabehn is
examining it. It seems it will be delayed to some extent. I hope you
are getting some peace of mind. Yesterday Pakvasa 1 came and took
my signature.
BAPU
THAKKAR BAPA
S[ERVANTS OF ] I[NDIA] S OCIETY
P OONA
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

339. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
S EVAGRAM ,

November 27, 1944
CHI. LILI,

By all means have a mosquito-net. For this you don’t have to go
up to the Dean. Whatever the rules, one should observe them
ungrudgingly. Of course it is a different matter if they are morally
wrong.
It is good that you reported your talk with the Dean, which
shows that you must clear all the examinations with perseverance. That
is your dharma. Forget Sevagram and devote yourself to your studies.
About my fast we shall see when one actually comes up. You have to
be guided by the straight line that has been chalked out for you. You
are not so much as to glance aside this way or that.
You already sign your letters as ‘obediently’. Well, you have got
1

214

Mangaldas Pakvasa
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

my command.
Blessings from

BAPU
LILAVATIBEHN UDESHI
MEDICAL HOSTEL
P AREL, B OMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

340. LETTER TO DR. JIVRAJ MEHTA
November 27, 1944
BHAI JIVRAJ,

I have your letter. Your worrying about my health is misplaced.
It is quite unnecessary to give any importance to the reeling ensations.
Nothing would have happened if I were not observing silence. It am
exhausted, no doubt. I have therefore increased the amount of rest
and I shall go on increasing it if I feel the need. Yes, the stomach is
slightly better. But it is an old story, don’t worry about it. I have no
desire to move out. The cold does not bother me. There is still the
month of December to go. Besides, the echoes from Bengal are
resounding in my ears. If the need arises Sushila will send for all three
of you.
It is good news that Mathuradas is better.
True, I am no more as keen as I was about the medical section
of the Memorial. For the present we are not going to have anything
on a large scale here as decided earlier. Let us see what finally comes
off. Sushila is trying to do something herself. She is training a few
girls, and she will carry on as she thinks right.
Thinking about a board of trustees I see that any scheme
coming from outside will necessarily have to be examined. So there
will have to be a board. I am considering its final form. You too
should think over it and write to me. The onslaught of Ayurveda,
πhomoeopathy, etc., is crushing. All this confuses me But a way has to
be found. I shall watch where we land.
The Charkha Sangh meetings start tomorrow.
I hope you are up on your two feet. I hope Hansabehn 1 and the
children are fine.
Blessings from

BAPU
DR. J IVRAJ MEHTA , B OMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

Addressee’s wife

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

215

341. LETTER TO KAMAL NARAYAN MALAVIYA
November 27, 1944
CHI. KAMAL NARAYAN,

Received your letter. Your suggestion is very good but it is
beyond my capacity to carry it out. To establish a school and a library
in every village is a Herculean task. I am glad to know that Babuji1 is
well.
Blessings from

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI KAMAL NARAYAN MALAVIYA
BHARTI BHAVAN
ALLAHABAD (U. P.)
From the Hindi original: C.W. 10556. Courtesy: Municipal Museum,
Allahabad

342. LETTER TO SHIVLAL GUPTA
S EVAGRAM ,

November 27, 1944
BHAI SHIVLAL GUPTAJI,

It is from the Provincial Congress Committee that you should
ask for help for Bhai Sant Ram. I am helpless.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
S HIVLAL GUPTA
JAIPUR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

216

Madan Mohan Malaviya

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

343. LETTER TO TEJRAM BHATT
S EVAGRAM ,

November 27, 1944
BHAI TEJRAMJI,

You spend money needlessly. I can no longer attend to personal
problems. I cannot look into your case. I have no time at all. Please
have mercy on me.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
TEJRAM BHATT
DEHRA DUN
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

344. LETTER TO RADHAKANT MALAVIYA
S EVAGRAM ,
November 27, 1944
BHAI RADHAKANT1 ,

What you say is correct. No doubt I promised but now I plead
helplessness. I feel exhausted and the burden of work is quite heavy. I
know what you want to tell me. Spare me, if you can. Come if you
must but after December 5.
M. K. GANDHI
R ADHAKANT MALAVIYA
ALLAHABAD
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

345. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
November 27, 1944
Inspect everything in Andhra and meet the patients. If you find
anything lacking in the matter of sanitation report it to the doctor,
undergo the treatment he advises and if you do not find it good come
back.

1

Son of Madan Mohan Malaviya

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

217

Get to know Babaji1 and Gokhaleji who accompanies him and
extend whatever help they need. Write to me fully. See what the
treatment is. Do not become disheartened if you do not recover your
hearing. There is no harm in not hearing. There is harm only in
forgetting God.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

346. LETTER TO LLOYDS BANK LTD.
November 28, 1944
DEAR SIRS,

Ref: Your letter marked Exchange dated 24-11-1944
With reference to your letter above enclosing your receipt in
duplicate dated 24-11-1944, for £539-12-6 in my favour, I have to
inform you that I have authorized the Bank of Nagpur Ltd., Wardha,
to collect the amount from you.
Yours truly,

M. K. GANDHI
MESSRS LLOYDS BANK LTD .
HORNBY R OAD
BOMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

347. LETTER TO IFTIKHAR-UD-DIN
S EVAGRAM ,

November 28, 1944
DEAR MIAN SAHIB,

Bapu was glad to have yours and Mrs. Iftikhar’s letters. He is too tired to write
to all those whom he would like to write. He desires me to thank you both for your
kind sentiments.
So far as the fast is concerned, he says he won’t undertake it unless there is a
clear call.

1

218

Babaji Moghe

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

How is your health now ? I hope this will find you fully restored.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
MIAN IFTIKHAR -UD -DIN
21 A IKMAN R OAD
LAHORE
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

348. LETTER TO R. K. KARANJIA
November 28, 1944
1

BHAI KARANJIA ,

I have your letter. I read the journal. Is not offering satyagraha
also subject to some rules? No satyagraha violating its own rules can
be offered even if it were to bring in millions of rupees. One
invariable rule is that it is to be offered by one who suffers tyranny.
The country should be able to stand by him. I or anybody else who
might lead the band of satyagrahis must drift with the current. As
things stand now it seems to be impossible.
Blessings from

BAPU
R. K. KARANJIA
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

349. LETTER TO MAHADEV A. HINGORANI
S EVAGRAM ,
November 28, 1944
CHI. MAHADEV,

Anand says that you get quite scared at night. Why should you
be afraid in the night? God does not sleep at night. He keeps watch
for us even while we are asleep, why should we be afraid then? Sleep
after reciting Ramanama and have no fear at all.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hind. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand
T. Hingorani

1

Editor of Blitz, a Bombay weekly

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

219

350. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 28, 1944
You are going not only to have your ears treated but for nature
cure in a wider sense. My opinion is that your deafness is closely
connected with the state of your mind. Nature cure includes mental
activity. In this sense uttering Ramanama, reading the Gita, and so on,
are part of nature cure. Perhaps Rajuji’s 1 centre will provide this. I
have a feeling that Raju looks at nature cure in a spiritual way. You
too should make such an effort. Give up all other thoughts. Go there
determined that you will be cured and you will get back your hearing.
Take the treatment that Raju advises and eat what he says you should.
Do some reading and writing. Leave all thoughts of Vidya, Father,
Mother, myself and Mahadev (son). You will be doing good to them
all by giving up their thought. Detachment will help cure your ears.
Do not think about the ears. Think about work. Try and remove the
shortcomings you notice in Raju’s centre. Get to know the patients
there. Speak to Gokhale or Babaji. Learn the Gita from them. Learn
Telugu. We from the North neglect the four Southern languages. It is
a great mistake. In short you are going to Andhra for a new life. You
must give there what you have taken from here and you have to bring
here what you find there. Do spinning and other allied work
regularly. What more? God is with you.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS]
It will be good if you show this to Gokhale and Babaji. But do
as you please.
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

1

220

Krishnaraju

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

351. INTERVIEW TO N. G. RANGA
November 28, 1944
1

At the second interview Prof. Ranga placed before Gandhiji two alternative
proposals for the re-organization of the Kisan Sabhas and their co-ordination with
the Congress organization. They were:
(1) To include in the kisan councils that may be formed one-third
representation from corresponding Congress Committees. This would secure for them
the co-operation and the advice of the Congress.
(2) (a) To adopt Congress membership as a basic membership for the kisan
organization.
(b) To constitute kisan councils out of rural delegates to the Congress
Committees elected as per the present constitution. Such kisan councils would be part
of the Congress Committees while retaining their separate Corporate existence for
dealing with the problems relating to the kisans.
(c) In addition to Congress members some non-Congress but not
anti-Congress members also might be taken on the kisan councils to provide a
suitable representation.
He felt that the first formula would be more acceptable than the second to most
Kisan Sabhaites. The final clause in the second formula too had the same object in
view, namely, to make it acceptable to them.
GANDHIJI: But this is a variation upon what you suggested last

time. Then you suggested that the Kisan Sabha will have no member
who is not a member of the Congress also.
PROF . RANGA : We want to have in our organization some non Congress kisans
also who are not anti-Congress but for various reasons could not afford to join the
Congress.
GANDHIJI: Why do you want that? You said that you did not want

anything in opposition to the Congress. So, if you have for your
members only Congressmen, the kisan organization will deal with
matters relating to the rights of kisans as against landlords and
employers. It won’t deal with political questions. I thought that I
could reconcile myself to it. I said I approached it with hesitation
while it was for you to dispel my doubts. So you better stick to your
original proposal.
PROF . RANGA : It has been forcibly brought home to us that the Congress
people feel nervous about this double membership. So I thought the Kisan Sabha had
better remain as a distinct body. Our workers are used to that idea. I have been able to

1

For the earlier interview, vide “Interview to N.G. Ranga”, 29-10-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

221

persuade them that so far as politics is concerned we must accept Congress leadership.
The idea is that after the Congress elections are over the rural delegates will form
themselves into a kisan council. This kisan council will deal with matters relating to
the kisans and in politics accept the lead of the Congress.
GANDHIJI: My suggestion is this. You have your own

organization where you register all the kisans. As soon as the kisan
becomes your member, he becomes also a Congress member. Matters
particularly bearing on the kisans and their relationship with the
landlords, etc., are then tackled by your organization while political
matters will be tackled by the Congress.
PROF . RANGA: In that case may we retain one anna for the kisan council out of
the Congress membership fee of four annas?
GANDHIJI: You can do that subject to Congress approval. This

would mean that the Congress allows a gratuity of one anna to you for
doing this special work. If I were at the head of Congress affairs I
would certainly allow it.
PROF . RANGA : In the mean time may we start with one-anna membership from
now on the clear understanding that those who are now enrolled are to become
members of the Congress as soon as the Congress organization again begins to
function? Or we can take five annas from each member now and out of it keep four
annas in trust for the Congress.
GANDHIJI: I am afraid you cannot do it today. You must do it

openly or not at all. Do not collect the four annas Congress
membership fee in advance. I will suggest a better plan which I
recommended to Shrimati Rama Devi. Have a register of workers
only. Don’t have Congress members just now.
PROF . RANGA: Can’t we have something like a Congress Seva Sangh, an
ad hoc body of Congress workers but not Congress members, to carry out Congress
work?
GANDHIJI: Yes, you may do that. But seeing that ours is a

non-violent body their work will only be to carry on the fifteen-fold
constructive programme. That will avoid tussle with the Communists
also. Today you are not working for power but as Congress servants.
If you carry on your work silently and unostentatiously you become
irresistible. No one will come in unless he wants to work with you.
There will be no eloquence or Press publicity to attract power seekers.
PROF . RANGA: Eloquence by itself, I admit, is no good but has it not its use
when coupled with solid public work?
GANDHIJI: Work by itself is eloquence. Here there are workers in

Khadi Vidyalaya, Hindustani Talimi Sangh and the Gram Seva Sangh,
working themselves to death. They make no speeches. They speak to
the villagers through their activity.
222

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

PROF . RANGA: As regards the Communists they have done a lot of harm so far
as kisan work is concerned and as a result have become very unpopular. There are two
kisan organizations in Andhra, one Congress-minded, the other Communist. So far as
we are concerned we keep the Communists out of our organization.
GANDHIJI: You won’t be able to keep anybody out of primary

membership by merely making rules. But you can keep out trouble if
you work on the lines I have indicated.
The Hindu, 23-1-1945

352. MESSAGE TO STUDENTS’ CONFERENCE1
[Before November 29, 1944] 2
The fourteen-point programme is dear to Gandhiji and if you can implement it
and give it a dynamic drive you will advance the country towards freedom, peace and
progress. The blessings always go to workers in the cause of freedom.

The Bombay Chronicle, 1-12-1944

353. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR3
S EVAGRAM ,

November 29, 1944
My heart goes out to you all. Give my love to Maud 4 . She is
brave. I hope that the impending examination will show nothing
worse.5 How has Beryl6 taken the thing? Shummy7 must be soldier-like
and face all this bravely. Of you what shall I say? Do send me a
cheerful wire, if you can.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 4203. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7839

1

This was sent by Pyarelal. The Conference was scheduled to be held at
Allahabad on December 2 and 3.
2
The report appeared under the date-line “Allahabad, November 29, 1944”.
3
This is a postscript to Sushila Nayyar’s letter to the addressee dated
November 29, 1944.
4
Consort of Maharaja of Kapurthala
5
The addressee’s sister-in-law, Raniji, had undergone an operation and was to
be treated at the Tata Memorial Cancer Hospital, Bombay.
6
Maud’s daughter
7
Shamshere Singh, addressee’s brother
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

223

354. LETTER TO RAMNARAYAN PATHAK
S EVAGRAM ,

November 29, 1944
BHAI RAMNARAYAN,

I had asked you to write again regarding the Hindustani Prachar
Sabha. There were other letters too, on the basis of which I have issued
a statement1 which both of you should see, and write to me if you have
anything to say. You ought to get some guidance.
Blessings from

BAPU
R AMNARAYAN P ATHAK
ELLISBRIDGE
AHMEDABAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

355. LETTER TO KALANGI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 29, 1944
BHAI KALANGI,

I have your letter as well as the money order. I hope you will get
this letter. One cannot put an end to the misery of the masses by
ending one’s life in the way you describe. A number of things
happen in the world to which we are helpless witnesses. We should do
our utmost and leave the rest to God. He also bears with whatever His
creation does, doesn’t He? You have no idea at all about what I do
and what I refrain from doing. Therefore I would advise you to give
up your idea of suicide. If you want I shall return the money.
M. K. GANDHI
S JT. K ALANJI [sic]
F IRE S ERVICE 2
UTTARPADA
DIST. H OOGLY
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

224

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 27-11-1944.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

356. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,
November 29, 1944
CHI. SHARMA,

There is a letter from Bhai Vichitra 1 from which I gather that
you have raised a grand structure. But you have no one to help you.
The question is what and how much you will be able to do by
yourself. Who can bear your expenses? How and from where can
I draw money for what does not look promising? I am convinced
that you should do what you can with your own efforts. At times I
feel that I have entered your life only to disorganize it. You belong
neither here nor there which means you have lost your moorings.
Now forget me and make your own decision. I shall make the final
decision regarding the trust after hearing from you.
Blessings from

BAPU
HIRALAL S HARMA
S URYA C HIKITSALAYA
KHURJA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

357. LETTER TO VANAMALA N. PARIKH
7.15 a.m., November 30, 1944
These chapters are not bad, but they do not come up to my
expectations. Perhaps I should not have entertained those
expectations. I have not permitted you to have enough experience or
education for that. You could certainly have worked harder. Since
you are not lethargic, I assume that you did not get the necessary time
for putting in more work. Now revise the Writing at the places I have
indicated and hand over the manuscript to Jivanji3 to deal with it as he
likes. You need not at all feel discouraged.
2

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5845. Also C.W. 3068. Courtesy:
Vanamala M. Desai
1

Vichitra Narayan Singh
Of Amaran Ba
3
Jivanji D. Desai, Manager, Navajivan Press
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

225

358. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 30, 1944
BHAI MUNSHI,

I have had a talk with Rajaji. The position is as I have explained,
namely, that the Princes can preserve their independence and Pakistan
can exist only if British power remains. How can I tolerate this? It
means that a part of India can be independent, and the British rule will
continue in the States ruled by the Princes and in the Muslim majority
Provinces. I can never be a willing witness to this. I cannot understand
how you can be. You may, if you wish, meet Rajaji and seek
clarification. I have stated here the position as I have understood it.
See that in trying to secure something you do not lose everything. Go
thoroughly into the details.
Sarala 1 must be doing fine.
Blessings from

BAPU2
From Gujarati: C.W. 7684. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

359. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

November 30, 1944
CHI. DEVDAS,

I have your letter. Rajaji does not feel inclined to go there. His
health is impaired. He would not be able to stand the Delhi cold.
There is nothing specifically wrong with his health, only he is not
keeping robust health. He has made changes in his diet. You and
whoever else wants to see him should come over here.
I am also preparing to take a little rest. I think I will stick to this
place but stop doing any work. Rajaji strongly insists on it. He has
well spread his fragrance in Nagpur. Dr. Mahmud is fairly well
although he has grown weak. He is taking Pandit Shiv Sharma’s
1

Addressee’s eldest daughter
The letter bears the following instruction: “Send this with anyone going to
Bombay.”
2

226

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

prescriptions. Krishnadas had to bear a lot of pain in having some of
his teeth extracted. He is better now.
Blessings from

BAPU
DEVDAS GANDHI
DELHI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

360. LETTER TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN
S EVAGRAM ,
November 30, 1944
CHI. SHRIMAN,

Your letter. There is no need to write to Tandonji1 . I have
received the resolution.
Kedar Babu’s note is good. I am herewith sending a copy of it.
I want you to guide Madalasa in this respect. Talk to Shantabehn if
you wish to. I appreciate the letter; something must be done. I am
even prepared to meet all the teachers. But I should not be burdened
with this responsibility. Owing to fatigue I wish to stop all work from
the 3rd until the 31st.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 302

361. LETTER TO SHIV SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,
November 30, 1944
BHAI SHIV SHARMA,

Hope you are in perfect health. Ramesh is a very nice person
but he failed to reveal the wonders of Ayurveda to me. He is
hard-working. He tries to compete with Allopathy. A great deal of
diligence and experience is required to compete with Allopathy.
I have grown very weak. My intake of food is somewhat
reduced. Two to three hours’ work exhausts me. Now I am thinking
1

Purushottamdas Tandon

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

227

of disengaging myself to some extent from public work.
Ganeshshastri Joshiji had prescribed some pills. I did not take them. I
am unable to decide what to do. Sushilabehn, of course, recommends
her line of treatment. I am still keen on getting well with the help of
Ayurveda or my own methods of treatment. Let us see what I decide
to do. Instead of sending another vaidya it would be better if you
yourself come over whenever you can.
Blessings from

BAPU
P ANDIT S HIV S HARMA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

362. LETTER TO AMRITA LAL CHATTERJEE
December 1, 1944
DEAR AMRITLAL,

I have revised the draft1 sent by you. There should be no
reference to fast. You should confine yourself only to the marriage.
You will see the addition about the reform.
I hope Sailabala Devi 2 is better and will soon be completely
restored. How is Ronu3 ? Love to you all.
BAPU

[PS.]
Sailen’s meals and residence are properly fixed up now. I do
not think that Sailen can be appointed auditor for the K. B. Trust
Fund. They will have well-known chartered accountants for the
purpose, I expect.
BAPU
From a photostat: C.W. 10509. Courtesy: Amrita Lal Chatterjee

1

Of a Press statement
Addressee’s wife and son
3
ibid
2

228

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

363. LETTER TO K. R. AGHARWAL
S EVAGRAM ,
December 1, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Please believe that the fast will not come except for a definite
call from within.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI K. R. AGHARWAL
DIBRUGARH
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers,. Courtesy: Pyarelal

364. LETTER TO JAYA
S EVAGRAM ,
December 1, 1944
CHI. JAYA 1 ,

Didn’t my sending the yarn by itself mean my blessings? Since,
however, you are not satisfied with that, tell Chi. Bindu2 and Chi.
Chandrakant that I bless them and wish that both of them should
understand the significance of marriage which I have explained, act
accordingly, lead their lives in a spirit of service and be happy.
If you can persuade Manu to go with you, she may certainly do
so. I have not held her back. You should, however, understand that on
an occasion like this one should entertain no expectation from
anybody who may have been entrusted to me.
Blessings from

BAPU3
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIII

1

Jaisukhlal Gandhi’s sister
Addressee’s daughter
3
The letter bears the following instruction: “Show this to Manubehn.”
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

229

365. LETTER TO KISHORELAL G. MASHRUWALA
S EVAGRAM ,

December 1, 1944
CHI. KISHORELAL,

You understand the matter correctly. Maybe, I should proceed
in the same direction. In support of my action I quote the fasts in the
past that were universally praised. But I should not waver if they were
found to be wrongly undertaken or not fully justifiable. It is my firm
conviction that even from a purely modern point of view fasting has
an important place. It is as much necessary for the atman that takes on
a body as for the body itself. If in the process the body drops that
should be no reason at all for grieving. Nevertheless I should like to
read whatever Nathji1 may write.
Improve your health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

366. LETTER TO GOMATI K. MASHRUWALA
[December 1, 1944] 2
CHI. GOMATI,

I have your letter. If you have the faith that I am—in fact all of
us are—in the hands of God, what is the point in worrying? I am
taking all the care I can. I hope to come through. I have decided to
retire immediately for rest, mainly urged by Rajaji.3 It will start on the
fourth. The weather here does not disagree with me. Manilal has given
me all the news. Both of you seem to be doing well on the whole.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Kedarnath Kulkarni, addressee’s guru
The letter was enclosed along with the preceding item.
3
According to Sushila Nayyar’s letter to Amrit Kaur dated November 29, Rajaji
“put the suggestion of rest to Bapu in a very original fashion. He said that just as
when he fasted he abstained from food, he should take up a fast from work and
religiously Abstain from work for one month.”
2

230

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

367. LETTER TO V. L. MEHTA
[December 1, 1944] 1
BHAI VAIKUNTH,

I saw your letter to Pyarelal. I think you should bring along the
Maharaja’s money. Maybe, we will not be able to take up the
responsibility. He should entrust the amount either to the Talimi
Sangh or to someone in Bihar who might take up the burden. It would
be all right if he could accomplish the job through Badrinarayan who
is in Bihar.
Blessings from

BAPU

PS.
Show this to Bapa if you can. Don’t hesitate to write to me if
you differ from me.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

368. LETTER TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN
S EVAGRAM ,
December 1, 1944
CHI. SHRIMAN,

Your letter is very frank and good. We will all discuss it after my
[work] fast is over. I quite understand the importance of your college
work. Organization of the students and the responsibility of the
Mahila Ashram work will take up all your time. Hence I shall try to
relieve you, as much as possible, from the work of the Hindustani
Prachar [Sabha]. I will see what call be done.
You must keep yourself in good health. I hope you will not
neglect your duty to preserve your health for the sake of service.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 302

1

In the source this letter is placed at the end of the letters dated December 1,
1944 and before those of December 2, 1944.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

231

369. LETTER TO INDUBHUSHAN BHINGARE
S EVAGRAM ,

December 1, 1944
BHAI BHINGARE,

I showed your bhajans to Diwanji who is a poet and who
has made a study of the abhangas 1 , Jnaneshwari2 , etc. I enclose
herewith his opinion. In this condition how can I write a preface for
them? I would advise you to see Diwanji and with his help revise [the
manuscript] where necessary.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

370. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
S EVAGRAM ,
December 1, 1944
BHAI GHANSHYAMDAS,

I am dissociating myself from all public activity, discussions,
etc., from the 4th to the 31st. There is no cause for panic. It is only by
way of precaution. I hope I shall be completely all right.
You have sent a telegram to Rajaji but he is reluctant to go. Nor
is it necessary. Besides, he cannot be said to be too well. There is no
mental exhaustion but his physical energy is at a low ebb. He won’t
brave the Delhi cold. He wants to leave for Madras soon after I start
my [work] fast.
Blessings from

BAPU
GHANSHYAMDAS BIRLA
DELHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Compositions of Tukaram
The first Marathi commentary on the Bhagavad Gita by Jnaneshwar
advocating the path of knowledge
2

232

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

371. ADDRESS TO A.I.S.A. TRUSTEES
S EVAGRAM ,

December 1, 19441
I am sorry to say that I am physically not so fit and fresh as I
had expected to be and that I have decided to take complete rest for
four weeks commencing from the 4th December in order that I may
be able threafter to take up the work more energetically. However, I
warn the members not to take pity on me and spare me in the
deliberations.
Shri Jajuji, the General Secretary of the Sangh, has discussed
with me2 the future policy of the Sangh in all its aspects for seven days
devoting one hour daily to it The gist of those discussions has been
sent to the members of the Board and other prominent khadi workers
in the form of a circular letter. Replies thereto have been received
from a number of members and they are all before the Board for their
consideration.
The chief thing that I want the members to consider is that so far
the Sangh work was directed from the Central Office, but henceforth
the work is to be decentralized and any province or district which
wants to be autonomous is to be allowed to do so. Workers must be
prepared to go to organize such autonomous centres with the prestige
and moral support of the Sangh. The worker will be paid a
maintenance for five years on an annually diminishing scale. He
should work there according to the fundamental principles and policy
laid down by the Sangh. It is not possible otherwise to decentralize the
work in seven lakhs of villages.
There are two schools of thought current in the world. One
wants to divide the world into cities and the other into villages. The
village civilization and the city civilization are totally different things.
One depends on machinery and industrialization, the other rests on
handicraft. We have given preference to the latter. After all, this
industrialization and large-scale production are only of comparatively
recent growth. We do not know how far it has contributed to our
development and happiness, but we know this much that it has
brought in its wake the recent world wars. This second world war is
not still over and even before it comes to an end we are hearing of a
third world war.
1
2

From Charkha Sanghka Navasamskaran
Between October 7 and 14

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

233

Our country was never so unhappy and miserable as it is at
present. In the cities people may be getting big profits and good
wages, but all that has become possible by sucking the blood of
villagers.
We do not want to collect lakhs and crores. We do not always
want to depend on money for our work. If we are prepared to
sacrifice our lives for the cause, money is nothing. We must have faith
and we must be true to ourselves. If we have these, we shall be able to
decentralize our capital of thirty lakhs in the villages to create national
wealth amounting to three hundred crores. To do that, the main thing
that is necessary is to make the village self-sufficient and self-reliant.
But mind you, my idea of self-sufficiency is not a narrow one. There
is no scope for selfishness or arrogance in my self-sufficiency. I am
not preaching isolation. We have to be humble as dust for a cause. We
have to mix with people even as sugar mixes itself with milk. Though
the villagers will be self-sufficient so far as it is possible, they will
devote their time also to their intellectual development for the creation
of the consciousness for the contemplated non-violent society of the
future.
Cloth stands second to food as necessity. If every village begins
to produce its own cloth, its strength will greatly be enhanced. But to
achieve that we do not want to close down the textile factories by
legislation. We want to achieve our purpose by revolutionizing the
psychology of the people. By decentralization we want to produce
cloth wherever cotton is grown.
But what of the city people who have taken to khadi now? I
would ask them to spin their own yarn and to find out for themselves
weavers to weave that yarn into cloth.
It is absurd that the cloth should come from Manchester for the
poor, who produce cloth for Bombay people. It is also not proper to
compel the poor to accept part of their wages in the form of khadi.
They should be so educated that they may Spin voluntarily and
intelligently and may use with love and pride the cloth produced by
them. If the people of Bombay want to wear khadi they should spin
for themselves or get their children and other dependents to spin. If
people pledged to khadi, spin for themselves, the practice will be
contagious. Even if we are able to produce khadi worth ten crores
instead of one crore as at present our object of reaching the whole of
India will not be achieved.

234

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Gandhiji then read out the resolution1 which he wanted the Board to consider
and adopt. Whilst explaining its implications he said:

The workers of all our five constructive programme institutions
(Charkha Sangh, Gram Udyog Sangh, Hindustani Talimi Sangh,
Harijan Sevak Sangh, Goseva Sangh) should possess such knowledge
that the politics of the whole country may be guided by them.
Today we are all the while thinking that our work will be able to
make headway only when Rajaji becomes the Prime Minister of
Madras. But that is not proper. In our present politics we are looking
with longing eyes to the Viceroy’s Secretariat but if we do our work
properly the Viceroy will have to come to us. He will see our work
and realize that it is not possible to keep such people in subjection or
to rule over them. When seven lakhs of villages will take up this work
in the new spirit we shall not remain a subject nation. Each one of our
villages will be independent and self-reliant. That is true swaraj and
that is true democracy. I do not worry when we shall be able to attain
our goal, but if we are sure of our path and if we have faith that it is
the only true one, we should go on striving for it incessantly and
uninterruptedly.
The Bombay Chronicle, 7-12-1944

372. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
S EVAGRAM ,

December 1, 1944
That ‘man proposes and God disposes’ constantly proves true
in my case, as I expect it does in every case whether we realize it or
not. I was contemplating a food fast for reasons I hold to be entirely
spiritual. But for the time being, it is being replaced by a
day-to-day-work fast. I had hoped that I had recovered sufficiently to
be able to go through the routine work without interruption. But
nature’s warning has been sounding in my ears during the last ten
days. I was feeling fatigued. Even after the noonday siesta, the brain
seemed tired. There was a complete disinclination to speak or write.
But I continued hoping that I would be all right without having to
discontinue mental activity.
But nature would have her way. Rajaji who saw me after a month
detected a marked change in my face, and he said, ‘You must stop all
1
For the draft resolution, vide “Speech at A.I.S.A. Meeting-II”, 2-9-1944 and
for the resolution passed, vide Appendix “Resolution Passed by A.I.S.A.”, on or
before 3-12-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

235

this ceaseless mental activity if you want to avoid a disaster.’ I seized
the suggestion. He even went so far as to say that I should not mind
disappointing invited workers of the Charkha Sangh, although I was
looking forward eagerly to meeting them and discussing with them
my plan for a new orientation of khadi work. But I would not listen.
So I am going through these meetings in the best manner I can in the
hope that no crisis will overtake me during the remaining two days of
these meetings.
From the 4th to the 31st of this month, I have decided rigidly to
discontinue all public activities, all interviews for public or private
purposes and all correspondence of any nature whatsoever. I shall
read no newspapers during the period. This abstention will be subject
to exception for unforeseen circumstances of a grave nature.
I shall not deny myself the pleasure of reading non-political
literature in which I am interested. This also I shall read without in any
way unduly taxing the brain. I have asked friends who were expecting
to see me during the month to indulgently postpone their visits for the
time being.
Let readers not be alarmed at what is only a precautionary
measure. Dr. Sushila Nayyar assures me that there is nothing
physically wrong with me except that my old friends, the hookworms
and the amoebae, have not left me. I am able to take daily walks
without the slightest strain and they will be continued. I had hoped to
make one or two public statements in connection with a lot of
misrepresentations of my views and doings about the communal
question and some other public questions. I must forbear for the time
being. But I must repeat the warning I have given before, that nothing
that is not authoritatively stated by me should be accepted by the
public. There are things which I have seen in the Press which I can
only say I am incapable of having countenanced directly or
indirectly.
There are some vital questions addressed to me by
correspondents. They will forgive me for my inability to deal with
them for the moment. If, after a month, they still feel the necessity,
they will please repeat their letters and if all goes well, I shall gladly
reply. Starvation of millions, black markets, and what I cannot but
describe as gambling, will continue to worry me as they do now. I can
but entreat my numerous co-workers to do what they can to ease the
situation, which can be done, I am perfectly sure, if those concerned
will make up their minds that the claims of the famishing millions are
the first charge on their care and attention.
The Hindu, 3-12-1944

236

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

373. NOTE TO AMINA G. QURESHI
[After December 1, 1944] 1
Stay over if you can. No message would be sent up to the 31st;
nor a letter.
BAPU2
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10776. Courtesy: Ghulam Rasool
Qureshi

374. TELEGRAM TO RASHID KHAN
December 2, 1944
R ASHID KHAN
MUSLIM LEAGUE
KUMBAKONAM
YOUR

TELEGRAM.

BEST

WISHES.

From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

375. LETTER TO ANIL CHANDRA CHANDA
S EVAGRAM ,

December 2, 1944
DEAR ANIL,

Satis Babu has handed me your note. I have not forgotten
Santiniketan. As you know Kamalnayan had taken over the whole
burden himself. Unfortunately he had to go to Mussourie to look
after his wife. He has not returned. I shall attend to the matter as soon
as he returns but not before my rest-cure is over.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From C.W. 10515. Courtesy: Visvabharati

1

This is written on a letter dated December 1, 1944, to the addressee from her
Son requesting her to get from Gandhiji a message for the students who had planned to
observe the 9th of every month by engaging in patriotic activities.
2
The signature is in the Urdu script.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

237

376. LETTER TO AKBARBHAI CHAVDA
S EVAGRAM ,

December 2, 1944
CHI. AKBAR,

I have made arrangements for a watch for you. You will get it
soon. I have read all your letters. You have been doing fine work.
God will bless you with success.
You will soon get lots of drugs, but they will not be very helpful.
So long as water, fire and earth are available, drugs are not necessary.
Give the people boiled water to drink. This will cure most of the
complaints. Use soda [bicarb] if you have it. Water containing soda
will stop diarrhoea. Food should be stopped. Persuade the people
patiently to stop eating. You may even let them die who do not listen
to you. Search for village medicinal herbs. You must have neem trees
there. If you persuade the people to chew its leaves and see that they
fast, the fever will probably disappear. Boil neem leaves in water and
wash the blisters with that. The water should be bearably hot. Cover
the blisters with a mud-pack of clean earth. Get clean cloth for
bandaging the blisters. If you can get tamarind you can give a
solution of it in place of water mixed with lemon juice. Revive
people’s knowledge of nature-cure remedies. Local medicinal drugs
should be made available. Give rice water instead of milk. If you mix
jaggery with it, it will provide more energy. Teach people the rules of
hygiene. If food is stopped to people suffering from fever or
diarrhoea and they are put on boiled water, more than fifty per cent of
the cases will recover. I have no doubt in my mind about this at all.
Fifty per cent is a conservative guess. For guinea worm, try
fomentation with hot water and tie up the thing as it comes out. Try
also a poultice of onions. You must have received the suggestions sent
by Kishorelalbhai and Sushilabehn. I have suggested only the simplest
remedies. Let Devibehn send whatever she wishes. If cows, buffaloes
or goats are offered, accept them. To meateaters you may
unhesitatingly give meat-soup. Soup means water in which meat has
been boiled. These things should be served hot after boiling them.
This is not the time for doing our religious duty of propagating
vegetarianism. Soup is bound to be useful where milk is not available.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3236

238

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

377. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
December 2, 1944
CHI. AMRITLAL,

Where do you want to keep Chakrayya 1 ? Do you want to keep
him in Adhyapan Mandir2 or in Harijan Ashram or with you?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10805

378. LETTER TO ABDUL MAJEED
December 2, 1944
BHAI KHWAJA,

I had known it even earlier that my Muslim friends who are not
with the League were a little angry with me because I went to Bombay
to talk with Jinnah Saheb and did not talk with them. As I have
already written to you earlier, I can never be unfaithful to the Muslims
or Islam. I had never thought that I would have any settlement with
Jinnah Saheb which would be against the interests of my Muslim
friends who have joined me in making sacrifices or which would harm
the genuine interests of any community in India. Had any such
situation arisen, I would have certainly consulted some of you.
I was distressed to learn that some of my Muslim friends think
that in my friendliness with Jinnah Saheb I have ignored them. That
certainly is not the case. It must be accepted that the majority of the
Muslim community belongs to the Muslim League whose
Quaid-e-Azam is Jinnah Saheb. It must also be accepted that he is
opposed to our line of action. That is why I wished that either he
should convert me to his course or I should convert him to mine, and
if this could be done, the Hindus and Muslims would march together
to freedom. I failed in my attempt. I wish that Maulana Sabeb and
certain other friends, particularly Maulvi Hafizur Rehman Saheb,
Mufti Kifayatullah Saheb and Maulana Syed Ahmed Saheb would
take the trouble of meeting me here. I would try to clear their doubts.
We can all work together and pray to God to show us the straight path
to freedom. If all of you cannot come, it would be enough if only
1
2

An inmate of the Sevagram Ashram
Training school

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

239

Maulana Saheb comes. Or, Maulvi Hafizur Rehman Saheb who is the
secretary of the Jamiat may come. Please convey my regards to all the
friends.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Urdu original: A. M. Khwaja Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library

379. LETTER TO VICEROY
S EVAGRAM ,
December 3, 1944
DEAR FRIEND 1 ,

This is with reference to your letter of 2nd November last.
My letter2 of 17th July to Mr. Churchill was, in my estimation,
of a sacred character, not meant for the public eye. I now contemplate
an occasion or time when it might need publication without losing the
sacred character. Even so I do not wish to publish it without the Prime
Minister’s permission. May I have it, in case I need to publish it?3
I should tell you that I have shown the contents to a few friends.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
H. E. THE VICEROY
VICEROY’S C AMP
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, p. 15

380. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
S EVAGRAM ,
December 3, 1944
CHI. MIRA,

So you have the land of your choice 4 . May all your dreams be
fulfilled. If I go to Delhi and get the time of course I should love to
1

Lord Wavell
Vide “A Thought for the Day”, November and December, 1944.
3
In his letter dated December 21, 1944, E. M. Jenkins conveyed the Prime
Minister’s consent.
4
For the Kisan Ashram near Roorkee
2

240

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

drive to your place.
Do not be anxious about me. All I need is rest from the routine
work, even love-letters. So till the end of the year this is my last letter.
This is the final day of writing letters.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6501. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9896

381. LETTER TO METROPOLITAN OF CALCUTTA
S EVAGRAM ,
December 3, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

I thank you for your kind letter of 25th November and for
responding to Sir Tej Bahadur’s invitation1 .
You must have seen from the papers that from tomorrow, I am
imposing on myself abstention from day-to-day routine— work-fast.
I see clearly that I must take rest, if I am to avoid a breakdown. The
fast is to end with the month.
I am,
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
THE METROPOLITAN
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

382. LETTER TO H. KALLENBACH
S EVAGRAM ,

December 3, 1944
2

MY DEAR KALLENBACH ,

Manilal will give you all the news about me. I hope you are
doing well. I send you these lines to tell you that the Phoenix Trust 3
1

To be on the Conciliation Committee of the Non-Party Conference
A German architect, devoted friend and co-worker of Gandhiji during his
South African days. He placed his “Tolstoy Farm” at the disposal of the satyagrahis
during the satyagraha struggle which lasted for 8 years.
3
For the original Phoenix Trust-Deed, vide “The Phoenix Trust Deed”,
14-9-1912. The addressee was one of the Trustees.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

241

requires complete overhauling.
There are now no settlers. Therefore the clause about them
should go. There is no formal resignation or withdrawal by them. If
the law requires it, a formal resignation should be secured from each
one of them. Perhaps their physical withdrawal amounts to
resignation.
The following new trustees may be added:
Manilal, Jalbhai1 , Medh 2
Manilal should be the managing trustee and the manager of the
Settlement, including Indian Opinion. He should draw from the Trust
£100 per month for the maintenance of his family and children and
live on the land free of rent with the right to use for his household the
fruits, vegetables and cereals grown on the Settlement. He should
maintain proper books of account in connection with the Settlement
and Indian Opinion. He should be free, subject to its being no
additional burden on the Settlement, to remove Indian Opinion partly
or wholly to Durban.
Such changes as may be necessary may be made in the
Trust-Deed. In the event of my death before the Deed is prepared and
signed by me, this letter may be treated by the present trustees as
authority for the changes herein suggested.
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

383. LETTER TO HERMANN KALLENBACH
[December 3, 1944] 3
MY DEAR LOWER HOUSE,

I hope you are keeping well and fit even as I am. Don’t worry
over the threatened fast. 4 If it comes, it will come from God. And
where is the cause for worry when a thing is from God?
I had a discussion with Manilal and Jalbhai when he was here.
This is the result.
Three new trustees should be added. Jalbhai, Medh and Manilal.
Manilal should be the manager of the settlement in my place. He is
managing Indian Opinion and everything at present and drawing his
1

Son of Parsee Rustomji
Surendra Medh
3
Vide “Letter to Herman Kallenbach”, 3-12-1944.
4
Vide "Statement on Proposed Fast”, 29-10-1944,
29-10-1944 and Gandhiji’s letters of November 1944.
2

242

“A Statement”,

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

expenses. I think and he agrees that he should draw for himself and
his family a fixed sum per month, say £100. The budget of expenses
for the settlement should be prepared annually and passed by the
Board.
There should be a clause added giving the trustees authority to
sell the proceeds to be utilized for the objects of the trust.
If a Kasturba memorial is to be founded, on the Phoenix
ground, it should be properly secured.
If you, the remaining trustees, approve of my suggestions, an
amended deed may be prepared and sent to me for my signature.
Should I die before my signature is taken, this letter should be used
by the trustees as my wish in the matter. I hope that they will give
effect to it and free Manilal from the uncertainty that hangs over him.
I feel too that those settlers who are not working on the
settlement, although they may be deemed to have resigned, should
formally do so, to avoid future complications.
From the original : Gandhi-Kallenbach Correspondence. Courtesy : National
Archives of India

384. LETTER TO DR. PANDIT
S EVAGRAM ,

December 3, 1944
DEAR DR. PANDIT,

Shri Parnerkar is a valued co-worker. His mother is in Indore.
She is ailing. If you can give her the treatment she needs, I shall feel
obliged. You will please pardon me for giving you this trouble, even
though I do not happen to know you.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. P ANDIT
INDORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

243

385. LETTER TO SULTANA QURESHI
S EVAGRAM ,

December 3, 1944
1

DAUGHTER SULTANA ,

Now you are married. It is good that you found a partner within
the family itself. May you both be happy and bring credit to Imam
Saheb2 by your selfless service.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10764. Courtesy: Ghulam Rasool
Qureshi

386. LETTER TO HAMID AND WAHID QURESHI
S EVAGRAM ,
December 3, 1944
SONS HAMID AND WAHID3 ,

Amina4 has talked to me about both of you. You should make
very good progress. Wahid has become a cowherd. If he is a true
cowherd he will produce pure milk and ghee for the country and will
breed such bullocks as would attract universal attention.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10775. Courtesy: Ghulam Rasool
Qureshi

1

Daughter of Ghulam Rasool Qureshi
Abdul Kadir Bawazeer, addressee’s grandfather and Gandhiji’s associate since
the South African days
3
Sons of Ghulam Rasool Qureshi
4
Addressees’ mother; daughter of Abdul Kadir Bawazeer
2

244

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

387. LETTER TO MOHANLAL
S EVAGRAM ,

December 3, 1944
BHAI MOHANLAL,

I don’t at all approve of your action. In fact you are no more
worthy of anybody’s alliance. But that will be difficult. You should
therefore form a fresh alliance.
Vandemataram from

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

388. LETTER TO KANAIYALAL DESAI
S EVAGRAM ,
December 3, 19441
BHAI KANJIBHAI,

I am deeply pained that I had to stop you from coming. But
what could I do? I am helpless. The month will pass quickly and God
will have me restored.
I have already spoken at length to Mangaldas, who will explain
things to you. The main point is that if Congressmen and
Congresswomen feel sore about it, I shall carry on correspondence
with none but you as the president or with anybody who happens to
be the president. I did not consider Mavalankar an outsider. You may
appoint whatever committee you wish for the running of the Kasturba
Trust. The rules are formulated with a view to safeguarding the Trust,
the purpose being that the money should be spent according to its
objectives. It may be said that all parties are, or rather no party is,
represented on the Trust. Individuals have contributed on their own
behalf whatever they wanted. We should, in view of this, appoint a
committee comprising men of all shades of opinion. Indeed, whoever
is appointed on the committee should be in his or her own right a
representative of India’s village women. It will be proper only when
all work done in this spirit. Then alone shall we be able to utilize the
one crore rupees for our village sisters. There is no place for
distinction between rich and poor, Congressmen and non1

Sansmarano however has “December 2, 1944”.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

245

Congressmen. I indeed desire that a Congressman should harbour no
hatred in this heart. All our actions should be based upon love and
truth.
You may read out this letter to all the men and women. Please
understand it is my earnest wish that there should he no bitterness
whatsoever.
Blessings from

BAPU
KANJIBHAI
S URAT
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

389. LETTER TO BALVANTSINHA
December 3, 1944
CHI. BALVANTSINHA,

Your letter. I showed it to Satis Babu. He says that you have to
stay in the village itself and do what is required. The problem of water,
etc., can be met; he has told you something about it and will talk to
you more. You should take it that until the 31st you will not hear
from me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1951

390. LETTER TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN
December 3, 1944
CHI. SHRIMAN,

I just now received your letter. It is full of the affection that you
both have for me. However, it does not seem necessary to have a
change of place right now. Let me see what happens during the
[work] fast. I would enjoy spending even a little time with you,
though. Hope you are well.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 303

246

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

391. LETTER TO GANESH SHASTRI JOSHI1
S EVAGRAM ,
December 3, 1944
I have been taking the little pills, which you gave me, for the last
three days. I must say that they have done me some good. What is this
pill?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 10358

392. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
S EVAGRAM ,
December 3, 1944
CHI. ANAND,

I have your letter. May God cure you all. Give me all the news.
You would have noticed that from tomorrow I am going to stop
writing letters, etc. I shall resume in January.
Blessings to you all

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

393. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
S EVAGRAM ,
December 3, 1944
BETI,

You have done well in not coming. Today is the last day for
writing letters. I am taking a reprieve from such activities from
tomorrow until the 31st. I have undergone a lot of mental strain and
have to get rid of it. You must be keeping well. Akbar is working
hard. I shall try and send one of his letters on to you.2
Don’t worry about me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 541
1

This is a postscript to Abha Gandhi’s letter to the addressee.
The letter bears the following instruction in Gujarati, obviously for the
secretary: “Please enclose a letter from Akbar.”
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

247

394. LETTER TO KRISHNARAJU
S EVAGRAM ,

December 3, 1944
BHAI KRISHNARAJU,

My letter-writing acitivity ceases from tomorrow until the end of
this month. Hence I am sending this letter to convey my good wishes
for your success in your treatment of the three friends1 .
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 10357

395. LETTER TO DHIRENDRA CHATTERJEE
S EVAGRAM ,
December 3, 1944
CHI. DHIREN,

I have your letter. From tomorrow my silence starts. I shall not
be writing letters till the 31st. I am happy to learn that you are doing
well. By any means get rid of your constipation. Sailen has improved
a lot.
Blessings from

BAPU
DHIREN C HATTERJEE
KHADI P RATISHTHAN
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

248

Anand T. Hingorani, Gokhale and Babaji Moghe

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

396. A STATEMENT1
[Before December 4, 1944] 2
I have never put any ban on individual satyagraha, where
self-respect is in danger.
The Bombay Chronicle, 10-12-1944

397. TELEGRAM TO ANUGRAHA NARAYAN SINHA 3
December 4, 1944
ANUGRAHANARAYAN S INHA
KADAM KUAN
P ATNA
BEST
FOR
FOR.

WAY
BIHAR
NEED
I

CELEBRATE
RAJENBABU
DIAMOND
AT
LEAST
TO
DO
ALL
SAY
WHAT
HE
STANDS
FOR?

JUBILEE
IS
HE
STANDS

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

398. NOTE TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
December 4, 1944
I will not meddle with this during this month. All of you may do
what you think best. Everybody has truth and ahimsa in him. This
need not have been mentioned in the last meeting of the Charkha
Sangh, for the circular4 was drafted on that assumption. What you are
doing about the kitchen must be all right. See that the men whom you
engage are clean in body and mind. Their clothes, etc., should be
decent. You should look after their all-round education. This should
include their children. You should also go and inspect their homes. If
they are well trained, we can influence the villages sooner through
them. We must go deep into whatever work we do.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati:
G. Shah

C.W.

5808.

Courtesy: Munnalal

1

& 2 Gandhiji said this in reply to an ‘enquiry’ from some prominent Congress
workers. The statement was obviously made before Gandhiji disengaged himself from
all public activities on December 4; vide “Statement to the Press”, 1-12-1944.
3
This was in response to the request of the Bihar Students’ Federation.
4
Sent by Shrikrishnadas Jaju. It contained the gist of his discussions with
Gandhiji carried on from October 7 to 14.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

249

399. LETTER TO G. V. GOKAL
December 6, 1944
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji desires me to thank you for your letter of the 13th ult. and the
remittance of £ 1,000/- which you have sent.
You must have seen from the papers that owing to health reasons he has taken
four weeks’ complete holiday from all work. I regret, therefore, that he cannot write
to you himself.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
S HRI G. V. G OKAL
MESSRS. V. G OKAL & C O.
47 MARKET S TREET
JOHANNESBURG
S OUTH AFRICA
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

400. LETTER TO SHYAMLAL
S EVAGRAM ,

December 11, 1944
DEAR SHYAMLALJI,

I have your letter of 2nd inst. and the enclosures.
As desired by Bapu I have written to Dr. Dharam Prakash to send his accounts
as he had offered to. His reply is being awaited. Bapu would get the accounts
scrutinized when they arrive.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
S HRI S HYAMLALJI
HARIJAN S EVAK S ANGH
[CAMP] K INGSWAY
DELHI
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

250

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

401. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
S EVAGRAM ,

December 11, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

My idea was that the khadi work should be learnt as part of the
Talimi Sangh training while working for the Talimi Sangh itself, in
accordance with the sincere wishes of the couple1 . The work going on
in the Khadi Vidyalaya these days is very good. The work of the
Talimi Sangh depends on khadi. Whether or not it depends as much
or more on agriculture remains to be seen. What I mean to say is that I
had very high expectations from you. And I still believe that they will
be fulfilled. If there is anything else, you may join me tomorrow
during my walk. I shall be taking a walk towards Sevagram [village].
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4452

402. TALK WITH NARAHARI D. PARIKH
[Before December 12, 1944]
I see khadi dying. Hence if khadi, which is the main plank of
the constructive programme, is to be saved, it ought to become
self-supporting. Those who do not spin have no right to wear khadi.
All those who wear khadi must spin so that khadi may survive.
[From Gujarati]
Sandesh, 12-12-1944

403. REMARK IN VISITORS’ BOOK2
December 12, 1944
For me this is a place of pilgrimage. I wanted to visit the
institution ever since it was started, but there was no opportunity. May
God help the afflicted through this institution. Only He can reward
Bhai Manhar Diwan for his pioneering work in this field. But the fact
1

E. W. Aryanayakum and his wife Ashadevi
This is recorded in the Visitors’ Book of a leprosy relief society in Dattapur
Colony near Wardha.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

251

is that for him service is its own reward.
M. K. GANDHI
From the Hindi original: Maharogi Seva Samiti Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

404. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
December 16, 1944
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I understand what you say. Obviously I expect you to become
an ideal teacher in Nayee Talim. That sums up everything. Wherever
you go it will be at my instance only. But you must develop the ability
to get along with Aryanayakum and Ashadevi. I am in no hurry. You
will yourself understand that the experience of comradeship with them
is in itself a part of your training in Nayee Talim. After all you have
started your own Nayee Talim, haven’t you?
Yes, I consider it very essential that you acquire complete
mastery of carding. Start [learning] it in the Khadi Vidyalaya after
taking permission from both of them. You have already been given
one responsibility, haven’t you? Do you want another person besides
Anantramji?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4453

405. NOTE TO CHANDRANI
December 21, I944
I hope you will prove to be a very good sevika.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: Chandrani Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi National
Museum and Library

252

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

406. A NOTE1
December 22, 1944
You have done the sums very well. There is room for
improvement in the handwriting.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

407. NOTE TO MANU GANDHI2
December 23, 1944
This is good enough, but there is plenty of room for neatness.
Whatever you do must be neat.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III

408. NOTE TO MANU GANDHI
December 25, 1944
It is indeed an achievement that most of the sums are correct.
Take your own time to improve the handwriting. See that henceforth
not a single [sum] is incorrect.
BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./III

409. A CHRISTMAS MESSAGE
S EVAGRAM ,

December 25, 1944
I had hoped that I would be able to speak a few words today.
But God willed otherwise. Today is Christmas Day. We hold all
religions in equal respect and all such festivals deserve respect. But
our respect is different from the common kind. For us such festivals
are for meditation and introspection. On such occasions we should
search our hearts and cleanse it of all impurity. We should know that
1

Presumably this was meant for Manu Gandhi; vide the following two items.
This and the following note to the addressee appear in the form of remarks on
the lessons done by her.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

253

God is one, whether we call Him Ishwara or Khuda, and that His
commands are the same for all. We should not harm others for what
we regard as Truth or right. We should be prepared to die for Truth
and when the call comes give our life for it and sanctify it with our
blood. This in my view is the essence of all religions. On this day we
should ponder upon this and remember that Jesus mounted the Cross
for what he considered to be the Truth.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 7903. Also C.W. 4271. Courtesy: Amrit
Kaur

410. LETTER TO BENARSIDAS CHATURVEDI
S EVAGRAM ,

December 27, 1944
BHAI BENARSIDAS,

It is natural to feel sad at Father’s passing away but if we reflect
for a moment we shall realize that it is futile to grieve over the
inevitable. Why then should one grieve? And who is it that dies?
Surely not the jiva 1 which was always associated with us, which is with
us now and will remain with us hereafter.
Father’s last words are very precious to me. I shall regard them
as a blessing.
Blessings from

BAPU
P ANDIT BENARSIDAS C HATURVEDI
F EROZABAD
DISTRICT AGRA (U. P.)
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2575

1

254

Soul

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

411. A THOUGHT FOR THE DAY1
November 20, 1944
Innumerable are the names of God; but if a choice were to be
made of one, it would be Sat or Satya, that is, Truth. Hence verily
Truth is God.
November 21, 1944
Realization of Truth is not at all possible without ahimsa. That is
why it has been said that ahimsa is the supreme dharma.
November 22, 1944
The quest of truth and the observance of non-violence are
impossible without brahmacharya, non-stealing, non-possession,
fearlessness, equal respect for all religions, removal of untouchability
and the like.
November 23, 1944
Brahmacharya here mean control over the sense-organs—in
thought, word and deed. One who, while remaining bodily chaste, is
impure at heart shall not be deemed a true brahmachari.
November 24, 1944
Non-stealing does not mean mere abstention from theft. To
keep or take what one does not need is also stealing. And of course
stealing is fraught with violence.
November 25, 1944
Non-possession means that we should not hoard anything that
we do not need today.
November 26,1944
Fearlessness should connote absence of all kinds of fear—fear
of death, fear of bodily injury, fear of hunger, fear of insult, fear of
public disapprobation, fear of ghosts and evil spirits, fear of anyone’s
anger. Freedom from all these and such other fears constitutes
fearlessness.
November 27,1944
Let us respect other religions even as we respect our own. Mere
1

At the request of Anand T. Hingorani Gandhiji on November 20, 1944, started
the practice of writing ‘a thought’ for each day and continued it for about two years.
Those written during the period covered by this volume are given here as a single item
under the last date, namely, December 31, 1944. The thoughts were originally written
in Hindi.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

255

tolerance thereof is not enough.
November 28, 1944
Removal of untouchability means not merely touching the
Harijans, but also looking upon them as our own kith and kin; in
other words, treating them in the same way as we would our own
brothers and sisters. None is high, none low.
November 29, 1944
Yogah Chittavrittinirodhah—This is the first aphorism of
Patanjali’s Yoga Darshan 1 . Yoga is controlling the activities of the
mind. Restraining the surging passions, suppressing them, that is yoga.
November 30, 1944
How can one is whose mind passions keep surging ever realize
truth? The upsurge of passions in the mind is like a tempest in the
ocean. The helmsman who holds fast to the helm in a storm remains
safe. Likewise, he triumphs who relies upon Ramanama when the
mind is restless.
December 1, 1944
The bhajan “Take Thou a Lesson from the Tree” 2 is worth
laying to one’s heart. The tree bears the heat of the sun, yet provides
cool shade to us. What do we do?
December 2, 1944
Let us always beware of false knowledge. That which keeps or
turns us away from Truth is false knowledge.
December 3, 1944
For the realization of Truth it is necessary to read the lives of the
saints and reflect upon them.
December 4, 1944
Against whom shall we harbour enmity when God Himself says
that He dwells in all living beings? (Translation of today’s bhajan.)
December 5, 1944
The great lesson that we learn from the life of Mirabai is that she
renounced her all—even her husband—for the sake of God.
December 6, 1944
What can a person not accomplish by faith? He can do
everything.
December 7, 1944
Man can overcome mountains by faith.
1
2

256

Philosophy of Yoga
By Surdas

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

December 8, 1944
He who concentrates on any one thing with singleness of
purpose, will ultimately acquire the capacity to do everything.
December 9, 1944
True happiness does not come from without; it comes from
within.
December 10, 1944
He who loses his individuality loses all.
December 11, 1944
The straight path is as difficult as it is simple. Were it not so, all
would follow the straight path.
December 12, 1944
“Compassion is the essence of religion,” so Tulsidas has said.
And he adds: “Abandon not compassion as long as you live.”
Suppliants for compassion ourselves, all of us, how shall we take
compassion, and on whom?
December 13, 1944
A sister said: “I used to pray, but have now given it up.” I
asked: “Why?” She replied: “Because I used to deceive myself.”
The reply is of course correct. But let her give up deceiving. Why give
up praying?
December 14, 1944
Yesterday’s bhajan was very melodious and worth pondering
over. It says in essence: God dwells neither in the temple, nor in the
mosque. Neither within, nor without. If at all He is anywhere, it is in
the hunger and the thirst of the humble folk. Let us spin daily in
order to sate their hunger and quench their thirst, or, with Ramanama
on our lips, engage ourselves in some such labour for their sake.
December 15, 1944
Why is it that even ordinarily we do not escape untruth be it out
of fear or even shame? Would it not be better to adopt silence instead,
or, shedding fear of one another, speak frankly what is in our mind?
December 16, 1944
Even a little untruth ruins a man, as a drop of poison ruins milk.
December 17, 1944
We are loath to devote time to things that matter, but hanker
after worthless things and find pleasure in them!!!
December 18, 1944
“Man is not God; call him not that. But of Divine refulgence he
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

257

is part.”
December 19, 1944
Listen to the discourses of the sages, study the scriptures,
become learned. But if you have not enthroned God in your heart,
you have achieved nothing.
December 20, 1944
1
We all desire mukti but, perhaps, we do not know precisely what
it means. Deliverance from the cycle of birth and death is one of its
several meanings.
December 21, 1944
The poet-saint Narsinh says: “ A man of God seeks not
deliverance from birth and death; he asks to be born again and
again.” Viewed from this angle, mukti takes on a somewhat different
form.
December 22, 1944
Extreme non-attachment is salvation, according to the Gita, and
we find the same meaning given in the first verse of the Ishopanishad.
December 23, 1944
How to develop non-attachment? This can be done by regarding
joy and sorrow, friend and foe, mine and thine, as all alike. Thus
another name for non-attachment is equanimity.
December 24, 1944
As drops add up to make the ocean, we can be friendly and
become an ocean of friendliness. The world would be transformed if
everyone in the world lived in a spirit of mutual amity.
December 25, 1944
Today is Christmas Day. For us who believe in the equality of
all religions, the birth of Jesus Christ is as worthy of veneration as that
of Rama, Krishna, etc.
December 26, 1944
Illness itself should be a matter of shame for man. Illness
betokens some lapse. Illness should not beset one whose body and
mind are wholly sound.
December 27, 1944
Evil thoughts are also a sign of illness. Let us, therefore, avoid
evil thoughts.
December 28, 1944
One infallible means for escaping evil thoughts is Ramanama.
1

258

Salvation

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The Name should come not merely from the lips but from the heart.
December 29, 1944
Numerous are our ailments; numerous, too, are physicians and
their treatments. But we would be spared much bother if we regarded
all diseases as one and Rama as the one and only Physician who can
eradicate them.
December 30, 1944
How strange that we run after physicians who are mortals
themselves but forget Rama, the immortal, eternal and never-failing
Physician!
December 31, 1944
Stranger still it is that, knowing that we, too, are mortal and that a
doctor’s treatment can at best but prolong our life for a few more
days, we still run from pillar to post to seek it.
A Thought for the Day, pp. 1-42

412. TELEGRAM TO ANUGRAHA NARAYAN SINHA 1
Express

[1944]

ANUGRAHANARAYAN S INHA
KADAM KUAN , P ATNA
HOPE

SOMEBODY

DEFENDING

MAHOMMED

YASIN’S

CASE.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

413. LETTER TO PRANLAL D. NANJI
1944
If you have to go to Deolali, you can have exemption from
having to come to Wardha. Coming here is chiefly a matter of
sentiment, whereas going to Deolali may be your duty.
From a facsimile of the Gujarati in Pranlal Devakaran Nanji Abhinandan
Granth, between pp. 14 and 15

1

This is found in the file of documents belonging to the year 1944. The exact
date of this and the following item is not ascertainable.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

259

414. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 1, 1945
MY DEAR C. R.,

This is the first letter to you on 1st January in the place of
speaking to you. I shall speak only at the time of opening the prayer
at 7.30. My sin in playing with Ayurveda has laid me low. Now I am
weak because according to the law of natural science I am throwing
off the poison. Don’t you be anxious for me.
Love.
BAPU
S HRI C. R AJAGOPALACHARI
BAZULLAH R OAD , T HYAGARAYA NAGAR
MADRAS
From a photostat: G.N. 2100

415. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 1, 1945
CHI. DEVDAS,

Having written my first letter to Rajaji I now write this to you.
Do not at all worry on my account. I am paying for my sins. I had too
much of Ayurveda and I suffered. And now I am slowly throwing off
the poison. I have therefore grown very weak but I am watching the
developments. Hook-worm and amoeba, my old enemies, won’t leave
me.
All this is but flushing out the poison that I had taken. I do not
know what other suffering is in store for me. I shall go on doing as
God dictates. You should not worry. Ramdas 1 has come. And now
Nimu 2 too.
Blessings from

BAPU
DEVDAS GANDHI
NEW DELHI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
2

260

Ramdas Gandhi, addressee’s elder brother
Nirmala, wife of Ramdas Gandhi

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

416. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EVAGRAM ,

January 1, 1945
CHI. RAJKUMARI,

This is merely in answer to yours received at 4 p.m. after my 3
postcards had gone. This therefore though written today will be
posted probably tomorrow.
Yes, a happy New Year to you, such happiness as you can derive
from within. Happiness without there is none so far as I
can see.
I have your two dhotis. I am wearing them, too. They are fine.
But the real fineness comes from the knowledge that the handiwork is
yours so far as yarn is concerned.
Yours with love

BAPU
From the original: C.W. 3694. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6503

417. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
January 1, 1945
You should not worry. I have fallen ill through my own sins. I
indulged a little too much in Ayurveda and am paying the price. Now
I am bed-ridden because according to the law of nature I am throwing
off the poison. I am all right. Get well soon.
[From Gujarati]
Bapuni Prasadi, p. 205

418. LETTER TO E. W. ARYANAYAKUM
S EVAGRAM ,

January 3, 1945
DEAR A. N.,

I have heard that you want to take in someone sent by Akbar
but want the Ashram to pay for his upkeep. This is wrong and after I
am gone the whole thing will close down. It must not be so. The first
14 years may pay in the end, but altogether in the end. But the adult
education and the preparation of school masters should pay from the

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

261

beginning, barring of course the expense of the permanent teaching
staff. I can argue this out and prove it but I must not do so now. It will
tax me unnecessarily. I hope that all those whom we have taken just
now have been taken on that basis.
If they have not, the matter requires re-thinking out. I have not
allowed the mind to lie quite fallow all this month.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
ARYANAYAKUM
S EVAGRAM
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

419. LETTER TO Y. M. PARNERKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

January 3, 1945
BHAI PARNERKAR,

The new gentleman who has been sent over to look after the
A.[I.] Goseva Sangh must give us full service if he is strong and useful
and if we need him. In that case he should draw as much as he needs
for his maintenance and it should be borne by the goshala. If he is not
useful he will be a burden to the Goseva Sangh and will not learn
anything. If we do not adopt such a policy the G. S. S. will become
just another mushroom institution which we should not allow to
happen. For after my death all such ventures are sure to close
down.We must never let it happen. I am not in a position to talk, hence
it is better that I write out what I think.
Blessings from

BAPU
P ARNERKAR
GOSHALA
S EVAGRAM
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

262

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

420. LETTER TO SATYAVATI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 3, 1945
CHI . SATYAVATI1 ,

I am sorry that your disease is getting worse. But that might be
God’s will. What does it matter? The body is transient. It has to perish
one day. We must do as much as we can.
By all means defy all orders. Tell them plainly that you wish to
go home, and if it is possible take some treatment there. Do come here
if you so wish. I am to some extent an invalid; but that makes no
difference. Dr. Sushila is here and there are other friends too. Now the
air also is good.
I shall be content if you die in my arms. But if you live, well,
what more can one ask! Chand will write the rest.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 10235. Courtesy: Brijkrishna Chandiwala

421. LETTER TO MOHAN PARIKH AND ANASUYA
PAREKH
S EVAGRAM ,
January 4, 1945
CHI. MOHAN 2 AND ANASUYA3 ,

Unfortunately for me I did not even see the letter to which I am
replying though it was read out to me. It was torn up. 4 It was good
news that you two were engaged to be married. For me, marriage is
not a means of enjoyment but a field for practising dharma. It is an
important ashrama dharma among the four ashrama dharmas. Hardly
anybody looks upon it as such. Everybody looks upon it as a means
of enjoyment. I hope that you two will bind yourselves with it
regarding it as a dharma and will inspire each other to follow the path
of service.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9190
1

Granddaughter of Swami Shraddhanand
Narahari D. Parikh’s son
3
Kunvarji Parekh’s daughter
4
Narahari Parikh however says that the letter was later found and was read by
Gandhiji.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

263

422. LETTER TO KUNVARJI S. PAREKH
S EVAGRAM ,

January 4, 1945
CHI. KUNVARJI,

I had just got up from bed when I received your letter. Pyarelal
read it out to me and threw it into the waste-paper basket. Then
Narahari came and I was reminded of it. I also felt a little strong and
sat down to write this. You have all my good wishes for this alliance. I
could not imagine a better choice than this for Anasuya. The marriage
has my sincere blessings. I have written1 to Mohan and Anasuya.
BhaiNarahari will send you a copy of that letter too. He will also do
whatever else is necessary.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: S.N. 9752. Also C.W. 731. Courtesy:
Navajivan Trust

423. LETTER TO SITA GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 4, 1945
CHI. SITA 2 ,

I have your few letters. Now that my month3 is over I am writing
these few lines. Now a month of physical weakness has begun. I am
reaping what I sowed. I went on taking Ayurvedic medicines without
thinking and had to suffer the consequences. I am now getting rid of
the poison. I am daily improving and getting stronger. There is very
little cough. The pain in the ribs has also practically disappeared.
After reading and showing this letter to the people there, post it to
Natal so that I do not have to write a separate letter.
Chi. Manilal served me with great devotion. Let us see now when
Sushila comes to take his place.
I am glad that you are studying hard. Taking care of your
health you may work as hard as you can. It will not matter if it takes a
1

Vide the preceding item.
Daughter of Manilal Gandhi
3
Of work-fast
2

264

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

little longer.
Blessings to everybody there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4943

424. LETTER TO SUMITRA GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 4, 1945
CHI. SUMI1 ,

Though there is no letter from you Ramdas wrote to me about
you.
First, about your eyes. You should not be in a hurry to pass the
examination. You may do as much work as you can, while taking care
of your health and your eyes. It should be enough for you that you
are not idling away.
Then, about gold bangles. What will you do with them? There
can be bangles made of yarn, sea shells, glass, copper, silver, gold,
pearls, diamonds, and so on. But what use are they to you? Your
bangles should be in your heart. That alone is the real lasting
adornment. All else is false. If nevertheless you cannot do without
them you may put on any kind of bangles that you want and your
parents can get for you. Consider how it will affect the poor. Do what
your heart prompts you to do. Only hear what I say. Write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
S UMITRA R AMDAS GANDHI
P ILANI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Daughter of Ramdas Gandhi

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

265

425. LETTER TO THE HEAD MISTRESS,
BALIKA VIDYALAYA, PILANI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 4, 1945
HEAD MISTRESS
P ILANI S CHOOL
THE HEAD MISTRESS,

Please find enclosed a letter1 for Sumitra Gandhi. Please see its
contents and pass it on to her. Since her eyes are weak her diet needs
some attention.
Please tell Lakshmibehn2 and Chi. Mathuri3 to write to me.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

426. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 5, 1945
MY DEAR K.,

It has cost me much trouble to see you free.4 You are naughty to
have been so ill. Poor S. 5 is going after you. She tried to establish
connection from here. Now she and Munnalal will try from Nagpur to
establish connection with you or Zaverbhai before going further.
Meanwhile love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10167

1

Vide the preceding item.
Widow of N. M. Khare, an inmate of Sabarmati Ashram
3
Daughter of N. M. Khare
4
The addressee had been imprisoned in the Jabalpur jail.
5
Sushila Nayyar
2

266

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

427. LETTER TO THOMAS COOK & SON
January 5, 1945
Ref. Your letter No. TT/CB2708 (Foreign Exchange Dept.),
dated 11-12-1944
DEAR SIRS,

With reference to your above-mentioned letter enclosing a
receipt in duplicate of even date for Rs. 3,000 in my favour, I have to
inform you that I have authorized Messrs Bachhraj & Co., Ltd.,
Bombay, to collect the amount from you.
Yours truly,

M. K. GANDHI
MESSRS THOS. C OOK & S ON , L TD .
P. O. BOX NO. 46
BOMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

428. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 5, 1945
CHI. DINSHAW,

I have read your telegrams. I like them. I fell ill owing to my
own folly. Now I am taking only the nature-cure treatment which I
know. I am throwing off the poison of Ayurveda. I am improving
daily. If I called you now I would take your full treatment. But I
cannot bring myself to have faith in the experiment of milk and I
have lost faith in daily or frequent enema. I have come to believe that
diet and mud-packs are more beneficial. I shall not take up your time
merely for the sake of the massage. I shall consult you through letters
if I feel the need. Please go on doing your own work. I am of course
giving it thought. I hope Ardeshir1 is well.
Blessings from

BAPU
DR. D INSHAW MEHTA
P OONA
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Addressee’s son

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

267

429. LETTER TO DEVDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 5, 1945
CHI. DEVDAS,

I have your telegrams, etc. I like the forbearance you have
shown. You would laugh if you were here. I am paying for my folly.
Ayurveda is not for me, just as doctors are not. I am getting rid of the
poison with my own treatment. I shall see what is to be done about the
hook-worm and the amoeba after I recover. I am improving daily.
It seems Dr. Dinshaw’s trust has not yet come into being. It will
be good if it takes shape soon. It has taken too long. I hope Lakshmi
and the children are all well.
I have written to Chi. Sumi.1
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

430. NOTE TO BHULABHAI J. DESAI2
January 5, 1945 3
I understand all that you say. I have trust in you. You know the
parliamentary mind. You also know the minds of our people. You
may, therefore, do what you think best. My own thinking runs in the
opposite direction to the parliamentary one. But I know that there is,
and will remain, room for both points of view in the Congress. You
may, therefore, go ahead without fear. Let nobody take cover behind
this note. Everybody should form an opinion independently and act
accordingly. But tell them that I am not against the scheme. This note
may be used.
As regards the Hindu-Muslim question, you may do what you
can. I would welcome a Congress-League Ministry along the lines I
1

Vide “Letter to Sumitra Gandhi”, 4-1-1945.
Bhulabhai Desai, leader of the Congress Party in the Central Assembly, had
been carrying on negotiations with Liaquat Ali Khan, Deputy Leader of the Muslim
League in the Central Assembly, with a view to forming a Congress-League coalition
at the centre and had sought Gandhiji’s advice. Gandhiji communicated his views in
writing.
3
From Gandhijini Dinwari
2

268

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

have suggested. I would also welcome co-operation between them in
the parliamentary programme. But you should obtain authorization
for it from the Working Committee. Without that I think it will be
risky to come to a final agreement. The League should join in the
efforts to get the Working Committee released. In my view it will be a
test of its sincerity. I should not like you to let yourself be persuaded
on just any terms.
This draft is for your perusal. You may suggest any
emendations or additions that occur to you. I will make the changes if
I like them.
I now wish to rest for a while. Meanwhile think things over and
let me know.1
From the Gujarati original: Bhulabhai Desai Papers. Courtesy. Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

431. LETTER TO RAGHAVDAS
S EVAGRAM ,
January 5, 1945
BHAI RAGHAVDAS2 ,

What is this? The golden remedy is Ramanama. Recite it from
the heart. Let me know what medicine the local vaidya prescribes. I
also have some good vaidyas. Get well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

432. LETTER TO BALVANT SINHA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 5, 1945
BHAI B. S.,

I have your letter. I am quite well. Your work was sure to
proceed well. I have never found you wanting in diligence. Don’t
leave Satis Babu’s work incomplete.
By all means go to Khurja or a few days from there and then
come here. There is work here too and there is not. Get well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

For the steps proposed for the formation of an Interim Government, side
Appendix I.
2
Baba Raghavdas, a Gandhian worker from Maharashtra settled in Gorakhpur
district of U. P.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

269

433. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
S EVAGRAM ,
January 7, 1945
CHI. MIRA,

I have gone through your letter.
Pray do not disturb yourself on my behalf believing that I am
consciously in God’s good hands. I have suffered for my sins in
over-believing Ayurveda physicians. Now I am treating myself and
have shed poison. I am really much better.
But you are yourself unwell. I do not mind. The same law
applies to you as to me. You will be well again.
I do not mind the suggested changes. Experience will teach you
and you will be right in the end. Do come when you can and you will
do well and see many new things and possibly pick up workers.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6502. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9897

434. LETTER TO CHIEF SECRETARY, C. P.
GOVERNMENT
January 7, 1945
THE C HIEF S ECRETARY TO THE C. P. G OVERNMENT
NAGPUR

Re: Nalwadi and Paunar Ashrams
SIR,

As my work-fast is now over I write this to remind you of my
letter 1 of 20-11-1944, and ask for a reply thereto. The property in
question is not only going to increasing waste but so much usefuland
creative labour is being lost for what may be termed want of human
consideration.
I am,
Yours faithfully,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy,: Pyarelal
1
Requesting that Nalwadi and Paunar Ashrams, which had been confiscated by
the C. P. Government, be returned to their trustees; vide “Letter to Chief Secretary,
Government of C. P.”, 20-11-1944.

270

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

435. LETTER TO PARAMANAND K. KAPADIA
[January 7, 1945] 1
This is just to give you my blessings. I shall not condole with
you. Father has cast off the body and become one with the elements.
What is there in it to grieve over ?
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI P ARAMANAND KUNVARJI KAPADIA
T. BHAVNAGAR
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 11589

436. NOTE TO TARA N. MASHRUWALA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 7, 1945
What improvement can I suggest in a scheme to which Bhai
Kishorelal has put his seal? The scheme, of course, has my blessings,
especially because it is for women’s uplift.
Blessings from

BAPU
TARABEHN MASHRUWALA
AKOLA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

437. LETTER TO A. N. SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 8, 1945
MY DEAR SHARMA,

Acted upon by you I have banked high on the spiritual and
nature-cure attainments of our friend.2 I now understand that the
patients fasted well but are now unable to pick up strength. As you
know the patients are from the picked ones. Of course I do not know,
1

This is a postscript to Narahari D. Parikh’s letter of this date to the addressee.
Krishnaraju, who was giving nature-cure treatment to Anand T. Hingorani,
Gokhale and Babaji Moghe. Vide “Letter to Krishnaraju”, 3-12-1944.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

271

but you should know the reactions here and do the needful.
You know that Chakrayya is being suited, according to his
letters.
For me I am apparently flourishing on my own nature cure.
Love.
Yours,

BAPU
DR. A. N. S HARMA
P RAKRITI ASHRAM
BHIMAVARAM (ANDHRA )
From a microfilm. Courtesy: National Archives of India. Also Pyarelal Papers.
Courtesy: Pyarelal

438. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 8, 1945
CHI. SHARMA,

I have your letter. I shall hear what you have to say but my faith
in your ability is diminishing. I find that you do not meet any
naturopaths. You now fight shy of coming here. I have been of the
opinion that a naturopath should be so endowed that he can mix well
with others and be completely free from pride and anger. I feel you
have both in good measure.
Still, you should go on doing your work. Produce results and
remove my doubts and fears. The money you have been paid, you
have been paid. From now on I am not going to beg for donations for
you. You are quite capable of raising funds. So collect the funds and
carry on your work. Win the trustee’s confidence. I am observing
silence.
Blessings from

BAPU
HIRALAL S HARMA
KHURJA, U. P.
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

272

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

439. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EVAGRAM ,
January 9, 1945
CHI. AMRIT,

I should be no cause of worry. I am in God’s hands and that
should be more than enough. I am daily gaining ground.
So Beryl is fixed up. She has sent me a hand-written book
“Khalil Gibran” and handspun.
I have not written hitherto. If you think I now can, you may
hand her the enclosed.
Love.
BAPU

[PS.]
Don’t worry about yourself either, come what will. I envy you
your snow.
This is supposed to be the best part in Simla. So said Valji Desai.
R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
S IMLA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

440. LETTER TO BERYL
S EVAGRAM ,
January 9, 1945
MY DEAR BERYL,

So you are at last fixed up. I hope the choice is good. Do write
everything to me.
I prize your khadi and more so your hand-written “Khalil
Gibran”. I have commenced reading it.
Do write to me all about Mother. She has suffered. R. K. has
told me all about her.
Love and kisses.
BAPU
BERYL
C/ O R AJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR
S IMLA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

273

441. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 9, 1945
CHI. GHANSHYAMDAS,

I read all your letters or have them read out to me.
I have not got myself involved in Ayurveda in an unscientific
way. Such as it is all we have. It would therefore be well if we could
take Ayurveda to the villages. I had faith in Pandit Shiv Sharma and I
took this treatment. There was no other way of knowing his
limitations. Having realized his limitations, I felt I should retrace my
steps from the point where I had erred. So I took recourse to my
naturopathy. There is very little room for going wrong in
naturopathy. Every day I only gain something. If you come here and
see it for yourself all your fears will be dispelled. I am feeling very
much better indeed. As for the hook-worm and amoeba I have told
the doctors that I will take their treatment. I shall be in a better
position to think about it after I get rid of whatever little weakness I
still feel.
I do not need any change of place. If I do, I shall go to Bombay
or Panchgani or, maybe, Poona. I would like to go to Delhi and yet I
feel hesitant. I shall not insist, though. I shall go to Delhi if you take
me there in connection with the Kasturba Fund. I shall go wherever
you take me.
It is absolutely necessary to have a deed about Dinshaw.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 8063. Courtesy: G. D. Birla

442. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 9, 1945
CHI. ANAND,

I have your letter. What does it matter whether your ear heals or
not? The more we trust in God the happier shall we be. The vaidyas,
etc., are there, but they keep us away from God. That is why I
preferred to send you three there. Naturecure treatment brings us
nearer to God. Even if we give that up I have no objection but why

274

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

should we avoid fasting?1 Naturecure treatment means going towards
Nature, towards God. Let us see where I arrive. I shall do as I feel
prompted.
Blessings to all of you from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

443. LETTER TO S. H. PANDIT
[After January 9, 1945] 2
let you know if anything worthwhile strikes him to add.
Gandhiji is grateful for your assurances and your reminding him of old
acquaintances. He is glad to hear of your work and he will read the report when it
comes, and From the original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

444. NOTE TO SUSHILA NAYYAR
[After January 9, 1945] 3
Write to him a nice letter : “Gandhi will be only too pleased to
meet you whenever you can come. His health is improving.”
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Dr. Sushila Nayyar

445. LETTER TO T. S. S. RAJAN
January 10, 1945
DEAR DR. RAJAN,

On my return from Bombay on the 1st inst. I read out your
letter of 15-12-44 to Bapu.
With regard to the action you have taken about the Bharadwaja
Ashram, I am to say that you have Bapu’s approval.
Yours sincerely,
PYARELAL
DR . T. S. S. R AJAN
TRICHINOPOLY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial
Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

Museum and Library.

1

Vide also “Letter to A. N. Sharma”, 8-1-1945.
This reply by Pyarelal was in response to the addressee’s letter of January 9,
1945, wherein recalling his acquaintance with Gandhiji, he gave him his assurance
regarding the eye-treatment of Parnerkar’s mother.
3
The note is written on a sheet bearing a letter dated January 9, 1945 from
John Sargent to the addressee.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

275

446. TRIBUTE TO ROMAIN ROLLAND1
WARDHA ,

January 10, 1945
Having been once bitten, I am too shy to believe in Romain
Rolland’s reported death. But it seems that this report is true. And yet
for me as for many millions, Romain Rolland is not dead. He truly
lives through his famous writings and perhaps more so through his
many and nameless deeds. He lived for truth and non-violence as he
saw and believed them from time to time. He responded to all
suffering. He revolted against the wanton human butchery called
war.
The Hitavada, 12-1-1945

447. LETTER TO KUNDAR DIWAN
January 10, 1945
BHAI KUNDAR,

Here are a few words2 from me. Call them what you will
and print them if you want. Your preface of course is good. Let it
stay.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

448. FOREWORD TO “TUKARAM KI RASHTRAGATHA”
S EVAGRAM ,

January 10, 1945
Dr. Indubhushan Bhingare had published earlier the first edition
of Sant Tukaram ki Rashtragatha. The present edition is the revised
one. My knowledge of Marathi is very slight. I like Tukaram very
much. But I could read only a few of his abhangas without effort.I
therefore passed on Dr. Bhingare’s selection to Kundarji Diwan who
took great pains to go through the whole thing.
1
2

276

Romain Rolland died on December 30, 1944, in Vezelay, France.
Vide the following item.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

The Gatha needed a fitting picture. Dr. Bhingare had selected a
cheap one. It hurt me very much. I sent it to Shri Nandalal Bose, the
renowned Santiniketan artist. He has been kind enough to send me
four pictures of Tukaram to go with the abhangas. I sent the one that
I thought the best among them to Bhingare and it will be published in
this edition.
I hope this edition will command the respect of people.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

449. A FOREWORD
January 10, 1945
The Ishavasya gripped me during my Harijan tour of
Travancore. All my speeches invariably included the first verse of this
Upanishad: “All that is pervaded by God. It all belongs to Him,
therefore nothing belongs to you. But in a way it is yours too. But
why get caught in the argument? Renounce all, and all is yours.
Nothing will remain in your hands if you regard anything as yours.”
This was the note with which I concluded my Travancore tour and I
felt that I had come by a treasure. I told Vinoba and requested him to
give me a simple Hindi rendering of the Ishavasya. As is his wont he
granted my request. The result is this translation.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

450. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
S EVAGRAM ,

January 10, 1945
CHI. DAUGHTER A. S.,

I have read your letter to Sushilabehn.
If you must come here, come when you find the time.
Your falling ill is not good and is contrary to our pact. Dying is
not an ideal. Indulging in such things is false attachment. You must
free yourself from that.
Do preside over the meeting if you wish. But your giving a
lecture on the basis of a note sent from here is pointless. You should
give to the meeting what you have digested.
If the officer has sent you the money without attaching any

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

277

conditions, I see no harm in your accepting it 1 . It is different that
having gone into the matter further I may suggest something else.
Your worrying about my health shows that you know neither God nor
me. If you knew God, you would realize that you, I and everyone else
are solely in His hands. If you knew me, you would know that I take
every possible precaution. There are lapses nonetheless, but what can
one do about it. However, I am maintaining good health. Under any
circumstances you need not worry.
I repeat you may come any time you wish.
You have nothing to do with the 26th of January. You are all the
time doing that work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 489

451. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
January 10, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I have your two letters before me. Enclosed please find some
letters. Parnerkar’s sister’s son passed away. It is a sad thing. I
understand about Anantramji. It would be good if he could grow
leafy vegetables. Find out how much land Aryanayakum requires and
where. In my opinion he should be given whatever he wants. I may
have left something unanswered; but only this much for now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4454

1

The Collector of Comilla had offered one thousand rupees to the Kasturba
Seva Mandir for relief work.

278

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

452. ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS
[Before January 11, 1945] 1
[QUESTION]: If it is possible to meet the Working Committee, will you try to
persuade the Working Committee to accept this plan2 ?
[ ANSWER]: Yes.
Q.

What are your arguments in favour of this plan?

A.

After my talks with Jinnah, Jinnah told many people that
Gandhi had not even mentioned Interim Government. Bhulabhai’s
effort is a reply to this. But if the intentions of the League are not
genuine, nothing will come out of it.
Q. What happens if the Viceroy uses his veto over the head of the Congress
and the League?
A. In that case there will be an agreement between Bhulabhai

and Liaquat Ali that the Government will resign.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book I, p. 119

453. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 11, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I have read the whole thing. It is good. There are many
instances of repetition; these can be avoided. A few things have been
left out, but that does not matter.
I am sending Ramjibhai’s letter on to him. It seems good.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4455

1

According to the source the conversation took place before the
Bhulabhai-Liaquat Ali Pact was concluded on January 11, 1945.
2
Of a Congress-League coalition at the Centre; vide Appendix “Guidelines for
Proposed Interim Government”, 5-1-1945.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

279

454. LETTER TO RAMJIBHAI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 11, 1945
BHAI RAMJI,

Owing to my illness I could not answer your letter sooner. Your
resentment is not justified. You are an indefatigable worker; therefore,
you will certainly go on working and that is good. Still I am sending
you the frank letter from Chi. Krishnachandra. You may come if you
feel like it after you have read the letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
R AMJIBHAI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

455. LETTER TO INDUBHUSHAN BHINGARE
S EVAGRAM ,

January 11, 1945
BHAI BHINGARE,

I send herewith the manuscript of my foreword 1 and a picture.
Please send me the proofs of my foreword.
I have other pictures. If you want to publish them at appropriate
places write to me. I shall send them.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. B HINGARE
MAHAL
NAGPUR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyalelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

280

Vide “ Foreword to Tukaramki Rashtragatha”, 10-1-1945.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

456. SPEECH AT HINDUSTANI TALIMI SANGH
CONFERENCE 1
S EVAGRAM ,

January 11, 1945 2
DR. ZAKIR SAHEB, ARYANAYAKUMJI, SHRIMATI ASHADEVI AND BROTHERS
AND SISTERS,

I had hoped to speak a few words while opening this
Conference, but God had willed otherwise. I had to observe silence
because of a cough, and other things. Therefore I have written down
what I wanted to say.
Although we have been working for Nayee Talim all these years,
we have so far been, as it were, sailing in an inland sea which is
comparatively safer. We are now leaving the shoals and heading for
the open sea. So far our course was mapped out. We have now before
us uncharted waters, with the Pole Star as our only guide and
protection. That Pole Star is village handicrafts.
Our sphere of work now is not confined to Nayee Talim of
children from seven to fourteen years; it is to cover the whole of life
from the moment of conception to the moment of death. This means
that our work has increased tremendously. Yet workers remain the
same. But that should not worry us. Our guide and companion is
Truth which is God. He will never betray us. But Truth will be our
help only if we stand by it regardless of everything. There can be in it
no room for hypocrisy, camouflage, pride, attachment or anger.
We have to become teachers of villagers; that is to say, we have
to become their servants in the true sense. Our reward if any, has to
come from within and not from without. It should make no difference
to us whether in our quest for Truth we have any human company or
not. Nor does Nayee Talim depend on outside financial help. It must
proceed on its own way, whatever critics might say. I know that true
education must be self-supporting. There is nothing to feel ashamed
of in this. It may be a novel idea if we can make good our claim and
demonstrate that ours is the only method for the true development of
the mind. Those who scoff at Nayee Talim today will become its
ardent admirers in the end and Nayee Talim will find universal
acceptance.
1
The four-day conference, attended by more than 200 educationists, was held
under the presidentship of Zakir Husain, who read out Gandhiji’s speech.
2
From The Hindu, 11-1-1945

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

281

Seven lakhs of our villages, which are today the symbol of our
poverty in every sense, ought to become prosperous in the real sense.
This prosperity will not come from outside; it will grow from within
the villages as a result of the labour of every villager. Whether this is a
mere dream or a practical reality, this is the goal of Nayee Talim and
nothing short of it. May the God of Truth help us to realize it.
I have gone through the balance-sheet of the Talimi Sangh. It
shows that whatever we have spent has been spent with due care and
consideration. It is a brief document. I hope everyone will go through
it carefully.
The question of language as such does not fall within the scope
of Nayee Talim but the question of the medium of instruction does
and that must always be the mother tongue. This point cannot be
over-emphasized. Equally important is the question of a national
or all-India language. It can never be English. English is undoubtedly
the language of the rulers and of international commerce. But
Hindi-Hindustani alone can be our national language. At present ithas
two forms. In order to understand both the forms of the national
language, viz., Hindi and Urdu, and for their natural synthesis we must
learn the Devanagari and Persian scripts. I find this lacking even in
my immediate surroundings. All our sign-boards 1 must be written in
both the scripts and there should be none amongst us who cannot
easily read and write either.
I want to draw your attention also to another thing. I consider
the Sevagram centre to be an ideal centre for conducting the central
experiment in Nayee Talim, as it is here that the Charkha Sangh is
carrying out its main experiments. Wardha is the centre for the other
village industries. Experiments for the improvement of cattle, which is
service of the cow in the true sense, are also being conducted here.
Sevagram does not stand alone; there are nearly 20 villages lying
about it in close proximity. Therefore if experiments in Nayee Talim
in its most natural form can be carried out anywhere, it is here. The
various institutions mentioned above are not rival organizations; they
are complementary and are calculated to supplement one another’s
efforts. That is the hallmark of a revolution of love.
[From Hindi]
Samagra Nayee Talim

1

282

From The Hindu, 13-1-1945; the source however has ‘teaching’.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

457. A LETTER1
[Before January 12, 1945] 2
I have no partiality for any militant programme for 26th
January. According to my idea, the constructive programme is the
programme. Therefore, it should be prosecuted with redoubled zeal.
Flag salutation with the reading of the independence pledge3 has
become an inseparable item. It should, therefore, be retained.
But I would avoid mass gatherings and processions. My advice
should be followed only if it appeals to the head and the heart.
However, if the significance of the constructive programme has been
properly understood, I am sure my advice will not fail to find a ready
response.
The Hindu, 15-1-1954

458. LETTER TO MIRZA ISMAIL4
S EVAGRAM ,
January 12, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,

I appreciate your cordiality. I hope some day we shall be able to
meet. Meanwhile please do not worry. I am trying to put myself under
the unfailing Chief Medical Officer and to act under His guidance. If
I err in interpreting His guidance, He is generous enough to correct
me. Read me in that light and you will find that I have not acted
unscientifically.
Love to you all.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 2187
1

Addressed to a Congress worker, the letter was released to the Press by
Pyarelal on January 12, 1945.
2
ibid
3
The independence pledge was first drafted by Gandhiji in January 1930; vide
“Draft Declaration for January 26”, 10-1-1930. In December 1939 it was amended and
approved by the Congress Working Committee; vide “Letter from Dharmandrasinh”,
3-3-1939. Gandhiji added a paragraph to it on January 11, 1941; vide “Instructions
for Independence Day”, 10-1-1941. Again in January 1943, Gandhiji, while in
detention in Aga Khan Palace, prepared another pledge for “celebrating the
Independence Day” vide “Independence Day Pledge”, 25-1-1943.
4
Dewan of Mysore

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

283

459. LETTER TO GOPE GURBUXANI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 12, 1945
MY DEAR GURUBAX,

If you both must come, do; only know that I am not speaking
during the whole day. But you will see the whole place and
inhabitants and decide what part you can play.
Yours sincerely,
M. K. GANDHI
DR. G OPE GURBAXANI
17 HASAN BUILDING
NICHOLSON R OAD
DELHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

460. LETTER TO RICHARD SYMOND
S EVAGRAM ,
January 12, 1945
MY DEAR SYMOND 1 ,

Your good letter. I have met Sujata 2 and listened to her and
Written out things to her. I am silent the whole day long. This for
reasons of health. It suits me.
Davies has ‘stolen’. He has to prove worthy of the ‘stealth’.
Never mind comments. I know you will act as the Spirit guides you
and it will be well with you. You can do what others may not and must
not. I have explained this to you.
Do come whenever you can.
Love to you both.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
F RIEND R ICHARD S YMOND
THROUGH S UJATA DAVIES
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
2

284

Of the Friends Ambulance Unit
Indian wife of Glan Davies, a fellow-worker of the addressee

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

461. LETTER TO ABDUL MAJID KHAN
S EVAGRAM ,

January 12, 1945
MY DEAR PROFESSOR,

Fortunately you have sent me a Copy of my previous message.
I cannot improve upon it. You should boldly stand and win.
They will choose you for your work as a man.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
P ROF. A BDUL MAJID KHAN
LAHORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

462. LETTER TO SUSHILA GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 12, 1945
CHI. SUSHILA,

I got your letter. You must not worry about me. Trust me to
God’s mercy. He will do as He wills. Come soon.
You are a strong-willed woman. Is it not God’s grace that you
have the strength to look after so many children? For you look after
them, feed them, and so on, while doing your other work.
Sita is getting along very well indeed. She feels perfectly at
home. She is very sociable and therefore has made several friends.
The rest from other letters.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4944

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

285

463. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
S EVAGRAM ,
January 12, 1945
CHI. LILI,

I have your letter. I am daily getting stronger. I was glad that
this time you felt satisfied. You served me with great devotion and
have gone there well in time. It does not matter if you have lost a day;
you have not missed your lessons. Even where you are, it is me you
are serving. Do your work in that faith. You are then bound to pass.
You are violating dharma in desiring to leave before I do. What would
happen if all the workers did that?
I never said that the students should observe a strike on the 9th.1
On the contrary they should devote themselves all the more to service
on that day. That would please the teachers, too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9599. Also C.W. 6571. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

464. LETTER TO SATYAVATI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 12, 1945
CHI. SATYAVATI,

I have your letter. Even the little improvement in your condition
is a matter of consolation to me.
Do write the story of Ba, Mahadev and others if you wish. Is
your health all that good? Your writing will not be coming from your
own heart if you ask for material from others. This is my opinion.
Now do what you like.
My letter was for you alone. Why give a father’s letter to his
daughter to the papers? But if doing so benefits you in any way give it
to the Press by all means.
Others will write the rest.
Blessings from

BAPU
S ATYAVATI DEVI
LAHORE
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
However, Gandhiji had written to Suryakant Parikh, a student leader, on
November 19, 1944: “I . . . like the idea of students abstaining from school on the
9th provided they devote the day to self-purification and service.”

286

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

465. LETTER TO ANATH NATH BASU
S EVAGRAM ,

January 14, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,

I have gone through your paper. It reads well on paper but it
appears to me to be largely unpractical. I feel that the new type is
made of sterner stuff and is revolutionary in the true sense of the
term. I should like you to think deeper and in terms of the starving
millions of the villages.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI ANATH NATH BASU
C| O S HRI ARYANAYAKUM
From a photostat: G.N. 9248

466. LETTER TO DR. NIROD MUKHERJEE
S EVAGRAM ,
January 14, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,

I have gone through every bit of what you have given me. It has
caused me great pain. Though your Association’s work is
humanitarian on your own showing, it touches hardly the fringe. The
problem is medical only in a very small measure. The deterioration
will continue in spite of your medical effort. You have to act
humanely and boldly as men and not as mere medical volunteers. You
have to be of the masses and tell the rulers the truth. The disease is
starvation appearing as malaria and what not. Outsiders will bring little
relief, money will bring less. Give the people milk and other food,
their dwellings and their boats and I am positive that no medicine will
be needed.
Your report makes me more and more eager to rush to
Bengal and make common cause with the starving dumb masses.
But I know I cannot rush. I do not want a palace like jail. I
want to be with the people and touch their decaying bones.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

287

This is my reaction to your paper. That just now I am weak adds to
my sorrow.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. N IROD MUKIIERJI
C| O S HRI ARYANAYAKUM
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

467. LETTER TO BARBARA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 14, 1945
DEAR BARBARA,

Since you undertake to remain here, at least meanwhile, there
should be no difficulty in the Nayakums going for a change. I am
with you.
Love.
BAPU
BARBARA
C| O NAYAKUMJI
S EVAGRAM
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

468. LETTER TO E. W. ARYANAYAKUM
January 14, 1945
CHI. ARYANAYAKUM,

Read the letter from Barbara. If she herself wants to stay here, it
will be good if the two of you go to Hoshangabad for a few days. I
am of course here. If the two of you keep indifferent health all the
activities will suffer.
Blessings from

BAPU
NAYAKUMJI
S EVAGRAM
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

288

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

469. LETTER TO VIJAYA M. PANCHOLI1
January 14, 1945
We have been talking a great deal about you two2 . When are you
coming?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 7150. Also C.W. 4642. Courtesy:
Vijaya M. Pancholi

470. LETTER TO SHRIKRISHNADAS JAJU
S EVAGRAM ,
January 14, 1945
BHAI JAJUJI,

I know that if a true worker goes to any village he will become
self-supporting within a short time. When we pay his personal
expenses nothing else need be given him. We shall provide him no
paraphernalia because the villagers themselves will supply the things.
The worker will keep a takli with him one made from bamboo will be
the best. He will of course carry a knife with him. If nothing else he
will at least teach the children. They will make taklis from bamboo
and spin. If no cotton is grown in the village he will choose another
occupation. But we shall start with a village where cotton is grown. I
feel I have given you enough for a beginning. Ask me more questions
if you want. I realize it is a new thing but I know also that if one has
faith it is no difficult task.
Blessings from

BAPU
JAJUJI
KHADI VIDYALAYA
S EVAGRAM
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

This is a postscript to Kisan Ghumatkar’s letter to the addressee.
The addressee and her husband Manubhai Pancholi

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

289

471. LETTER TO SITA GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 15, 1945
CHI. SITA,

I like your letter. It is clear and to the point. Your presumption
is correct. In that case Sushila should arrive soon.
I am glad, too, that you are making good progress in your
studies. Make as much progress as you can, but see that your body is
strong.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4945

472. NOTE TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
January 15, 1945
When I go to visit the sick in the evening, I notice that the
so-called servants needlessly throw away water and people leave
vegetables, etc., in the dishes. You should look into this. You can tell
the guests without being discourteous. You may show them the notices
put up for the purpose. They can also be told when being served. I do
not like Kanchan continuing to be ill. Yesterday again she had fever.
You should find out the cause of the fever. There ought to be perfect
cleanliness and peace all over the Ashram.
BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 5812. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

473. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
January 15, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

Dastane 1 writes that if you are willing to go you should let him
know. Surely you will consult the people here before you go, won’t
you ?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4456
1

290

Vithal V. Dastane

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

474. LETER TO SATYAVATI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 15, 1945
CHI. SATYAVATI,

Your letter is good. Indeed you will have won a victory if you
recover. Yes, it goes without saying that you will come to me when
you feel like it.
The rest from Khurshedbehn and others.
Blessings from

BAPU
S ATYAVATI DEVI
T. B. H OSPITAL, LAHORE
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

475. LETTER TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
January 16, 1945
DEAR DESHABHAKTA,

I have your two letters. I have given full satisfaction to Shri
Sitarama Sastry. He will tell you all about it. The wonder to me is that
you are showing, at your age, so much interest and energy. Of course
I met your daughter.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 3228

476. LETTER TO GLADYS E. SUNWANI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 16, 1945
DEAR SISTER,

Yours is a case in which I shall value your letter in English
before I can usefully reply.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
GLADYS E. S UNWANI
C/ O D. E. DEAN
R AIPUR
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

291

477. LETTER TO KANAM GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 16, 1945
CHI. KANAM 1 ,

I have your letter. As desired by you, I am returning it. I am
glad that Father has now got dentures. Now he should not misuse
them by eating indiscriminately.
Your preparation seems all right. What little was taught to you
here seems to have borne fruit.
Write an essay comparing Nagpur and Sevagram and send it to
me. My health is all right, but the pressure of work is fairly heavy. I
shall, therefore, correct the essay when I get the time and return it to
you.
I don’t believe in ghosts. I have had no such experience. It is all
right if Bhansalibhai believes in them. That does not detract from his
saintliness. But there is no reason to believe that everything a saint
says must be true. No one is omniscient. The planchette business is
pure fraud. Do not get involved in it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9515. Courtesy: Kanam Gandhi

478. LETTER TO SHARDA G. CHOKHAWALA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 16, 1945
CHI. BABUDI,

I read your postcard addressed to Father and Mother. You have
lost your common sense. It is fair neither to Vallabhraibhai nor to you
that he should send you medicines by post. You have tried
homoeopathy. We have an allopath here, as also a vaid. A
homoeopath also may join. I am also here. If, therefore, you can
summon up courage, come over. Resolve that you will return only
when fully recovered or when I admit defeat. But don’t come merely
because I ask you to. Come only if you are fully convinced that my
advice is correct, for only then will you benefit.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10050. Courtesy: Sharda G. Chokhawala
1

292

Ramdas Gandhi’s son

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

479. LETTER TO INDU MASHRUWALA
[January 16, 1945] 1
CHI. INDU2 ,

Are you asking my blessing? I have already refused it to
Gomati. She understood. What is so novel about your marrying within
your caste? Still, if you want my blessing you have it. Never mind if
you both belong to the same caste; both of you should break the
barriers of caste. Make your own rules. Observe them and do work of
service. Be good.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

480. NOTE TO INDULAL YAJNIK3
January 16, 1945
1. I shall see about Sahajanand.
2.I understand about you. Thakkar Bapa, Kanjibhai, Mavalankar
and others are at your back so nothing remains to be said. If they all
have some misgiving or other you have to put up with it and remove it
by your conduct. All good work has my blessing. I have had
confidence in you ever since I knew you. I have been seeing you
since 1915. I have worked with you and learnt from you. There have
been sweet and bitter experiences. I have noticed your virtues as I
have also experienced your unsteadiness. I am therefore a little wary
of you. But you must not be afraid of me, a satyagrahi. For I will
never interfere with your good work. It is also my experience that a
noble act carries with it good wishes of the whole world. You should
therefore shed all fear and go on doing your duty.
3. I like what you say about youths. I shall think over it
although I see practical difficulties. I have not asked for a hundred
thousand. I would consider myself fortunate even if I could get a
thousand young people. I am looking for them.
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

The source has placed the letter at the end of the letters dated January 16,
1945, and before those of January 17.
2
Niece of Kishorelal Mashruwala
3
This was Gandhiji’s part of the conversation the addressee had with him.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

293

481. NOTE TO H. C. DASAPPA1
S EVAGRAM ,

January 17, 1945
1. As for my coming, I would love to go to Mysore. But there has
been so much tyranny everywhere that I shirk going anywhere
for health. I have made an exception in favour of Panchgani for
it is so near Bombay and especially Poona. But I want to avoid
even Panchgani if I can. Thus if I do not go to Mysore or
anywhere else you know why.
2. As to the election I am not enamoured of them. The more you
avoid them the better. The more you silently follow the
constructive programme the nearer you are to swaraj. But after
all I have said, you must follow your own mind. You may weigh,
if you like all I say. But my saying should never replace your
mind.
3. As to Yashodara2 she should stay till cured and till she has good
command over Hindi. She should not hurry. Ramdas3 of course
is a fixture. As to Dr. M[ahmud], you have done your part; you
need not worry now.
I have given you my mental state. Now let us leave it to fate. I
shall not pull.
About the Maharaja you should make no overtures but of
course you should lose no opportunity of seeing him, if he will see
you.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

482. LETTER TO AMRITLAL V. THAKKAR
S EVAGRAM ,
January 17, 1945
BAPA,

I have your letter. It is not certain that I shall be going to
1

Dasappa; President, Mysore Congress Committee, had met Gandhiji and
invited him to spend the summer in Mysore State.
2
Addressee’s wife and son
3
ibid

294

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Panchgani. February 22 will have passed. That dismisses the question
of inauguration. I have to suit everyone’s convenience. Therefore I
shall present myself wherever the meeting is held. You ought to give
up considering my
convenience. You should consider
everyone’sconvenience as my convenience. In this lies the good of
the memorial, and my own too. If you do not wish to carry the
responsibility you may consult others and do as the majority wishes.
BAPU
THAKKAR BAPA
P OONA
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

483. LETTER TO RATILAL M. VORA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 17, 1945
BHAI RATILAL,

Your letter dated 5-10-1944 has been lying around and came
into my hands only today. Such things happened while I have been ill
and moving about. I hope your son-in-law is there and has recovered
too. I would be happy if you could give me his news. I have sent the
photograph along with my blessings.
Blessings from

BAPU
R ATILAL MAGANLAL VORA
2ND F LOOR, R OOM 62, 47 GOSWAMI BUILDING
P INJARAPOLE LANE
BOMBAY 4
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

484. DISCUSSION WITH PRAHLAD MEHTA1
January 17, 1945
PRAHLAD MEHTA :

What should the students and Congressmen do at the present

juncture?
GANDHIJI: They must find out ways and means to achieve
freedom as soon as possible and devote themselves to the constructive
1

Of the All-India Students’ Congress

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

295

programme.
P. M.

What should the students do to strengthen the Congress?

G.

The students must identify themselves with the aims and
ideals of the National Congress and, by being part and parcel of it,
they must continue to struggle against the foreign rule.
P. M. Should the students’ organizations have a separate identity or should they
align themselves with the different political parties?

G.

Students should do in this case what they think proper and
advantageous for their organization and if experience proves
otherwise, they must give up party affiliations. Students should not
indulge in unnecessary abuse of students belonging to a different
ideology. However, they must strengthen the Indian National
Congress and prepare it for the final fight for freedom by doing silent
service.
The Hindu, 19-1-1945

485. INTERVIEW TO T. V. KUNHIKRISHNAN 1
January 17, 1945
T. V. KUNHIKRISHNAN: You know the Communists took an attitude of hostility
to the political activities of students in 1942 and afterwards. The Indian Students’
Congress embodies to some extent the faith and aspirations of students
who are opposed to the attitude of the Communist section. Here are some of our
questions:
Have we the right to exclude Communists and oppose their attitude and tactics?
Please do not tell us that this is a minor provincial question. We want your guidance
in this matter.
GANDHIJI: I dislike the idea of excluding anybody because of his

label. But use your independent judgment.
T. V. K. Are we right in building up a new all-India organization for
students?
G. You [are]2 , if it fits in with the Congress idea3 .
T. V. K. What particular item of the Constructive Programme do you think can
best be done by students?
G. So many items to choose from. Students must make their
1

President, Kerala Students’ Congress. Gandhiji gave written replies to the
questions put to him.
2
The source has ‘have’.
3
The source has “India”.

296

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

choice.
T. V. K.

Can the Indian Students’ Congress have a flag of its own? Can you
suggest some flag for us?
G. I cannot suggest a better flag than the Congress flag. It is
all-sufficing.
T. V. K.

You had said that Congress workers should take charge of students
below 12. Can you amplify the statement?
G.

Quote my exact words and you will know the meaning.

You had asked students to observe the 9th of every month 1 . This has
been characterized as an advice for ‘back-door satyagraha’ by Communists. Would
you allow students to abstain from classes on the 9th?
T. V. K.

G. I must see my own statement. I do not think I have said any
such thing. There must be something else. As a student and
newspaperman you should be quite accurate. Send my own
statements.
From a photostat: G.N. 5678

486. TELEGRAM TO CHANDRAPAL SINGH DATTA
January 18, 1945
C HANDRAPAL S INGH DATTA
P ILLARS
S IALKOT
WIRE RECEIVED.

HOPE

FATHER

BETTER.

REPORT

PROGRESS.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

487. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
S EVAGRAM ,

January 18, 1945
CHI. MIRA,

Your letter just received. I hope you had my fairly full letter
before this.
Balvant Sinha is not here. He is with Satis Babu. I have no hope
1

Vide footnote to “Letter to Lilavati Asar”, 12-1-1945.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

297

of his coming to you. I should encourage him, if he at all felt
inclined. I know he will be the man for you.
Anyway you should come and see if you can pick up anyone
permanently or even for a time. There are many people here.
Therefore you should come whenever you can.
There seems only a small chance of my coming to Delhi
towards the end of February. If you come, the sooner the better. For
the weather is daily becoming hotter.
Love.
BAPU
From the original: C.W. 6503. Courtesy: Mirabehn. Also G.N. 9898

488. LETTER TO H. S. L. POLAK
January 18, 1945
MY DEAR HENRY,

I have an unfinished part of your letter of November 4, 1944.
The other part cannot be had.
From your letter I gather that you are correctly reported. And
that is, in my opinion, damaging.1
I do not recall your previous letter or letters. But there was no
intentional negligence. In any event I never said anything against you
publicly. On the contrary, on suspicion arising, my first approach was
to you. But if you think that it was unnecessary for you even to refer
to me before attacking me, of course I have nothing to say.
Love to you all.
BHAI
H. S. L. P OLAK , E SQ.
11 H ARTFIELD R OAD
LONDON S.W. 19
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

298

Vide “Letter to Agatha Harrison”, 15-10-1944.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

489. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
January 18, 1945
I have read the whole thing. You have poured out your heart in
it, which was the right thing to do. You are still unsteady. For the
unsteadiness to go you must remain in the institution and give
yourself wholly to it. So it should be the same to you whether it is
Jajuji or Chimanlal or I. You should obey the head whoever he be.
Therein lies your training. If, however, that is not possible for you, I
shall not mind if you two live together away from the Ashram. I
doubt, though, whether you will then be able to observe
brahmacharya. But what even if you cannot? It will be no crime. You
two are married and should be free to do as you like. Whatever you
do, you should do together and with deliberation and determination.
Even while remaining in the institution you will continue to
serve the people. In fact you will then do it better. But even here you
must do as you think best. If you wish me to guide you, you will of
course have my guidance whenever you ask it.
If you can be more specific about the difficulties you mention, I
may perhaps be able to solve them. The irregularity you mention
cannot be tolerated. Give me the details. If something is unavoidable
we shall put up with it, but we will do that with our eyes open. I can
understand about Nanavati. He is ill, but he is a tried worker. I believe
that one should not eat for the pleasure of the palate.
Chimanlal is an old-timer. Well or ill he has stuck on. He goes
on working silently. You should have regard for his services. The
secret of good life is strictness with oneself and generosity to
co-workers. Why need you keep anything private?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5814. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

299

490. LETTER TO VASUMATI D. PANDIT
S EVAGRAM ,

January 18, 1945
CHI. VASUMATI,

I have your letter. I had your previous letters too. I am giving
this to Zohra.
I am all right. Do not at all worry about me.
It is good you went. You will get a lot of experience. Akbar will
no doubt look after you. It is all the better that you have not carried
with you a lot of medicines. A number of ailments disappear with very
slight treatment. It is superstition to insist on drugs. Local herbs are a
different matter. For stomach-ache one should fast, drink hot water
and take hot water fomentation. If there are loose motions fasting is
imperative. If the patient insists he may be given a pinch of soda
bi-carb or powdered neem leaves. If anybody has a headache, he
should have a mud-pack on the head and drink lots of water and so
on. This is just to point the way. Have patience, think for yourself,
repeat Ramanama and persuade others to do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
VASUMATIBEHN P ANDIT
S AMAU
P. O. OLD DEESA, N ORTH GUJARAT
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

491. LETTER TO SHIV SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 18, 1945
BHAI SHIV SHARMA,

I read your letter to Khurshedbehn. Let me tell you that I
cannot lose faith in you or Ayurveda because of banafsha 1 or the
baramula preparation. Ayurveda for me has a value independently
of everything. I am in search of a true practitioner of Ayurveda.
You are one of those few but your field is among rich people.I have
to see how far I can persuade you to go to the villages.
1

300

Viola cineria

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Improve your health and come down here when you are
free. . . .1 is trying out his experiment an Balkrishna and Hari-chchha.
He has gone to his patients for two days.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Sarika, April 1964

492. ASHRAM NOTE
January 19, 1945
The thing is that we should bring deliberation into our lives. If
we want to work less, we may work less. But what we do should as far
as possible be perfect. That is why I have said that if we could mould
our lives as we sing in the bhajan and make Sevagram an ideal village,
we would have done everything.
BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Chhayamen, p. 388

493. LETTER TO ABDUL MAJID KHAN
January 19, 1945
MY DEAR PROF. ABDUL MAJID KHAN,

You should boldly stand for the coming Panjab University
Fellowship elections.2 They will choose you for your worth as a
nationalist. My hearty blessings to you.
Since you have the support of all the eminent Congressmen, if
you are defeated it will be because the majority of graduate voters are
not Congress-minded. It will also show that in your province at least
the Congress hold on the educated men is not as great as it should be.
I hope you will win.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
P ROF. A BDUL MAJID KHAN
6 B KAPURTHALA HOUSE
LAKE R OAD , L AHORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

Illegible in the source
Vide “Letter to Abdul Majid Khan”, 12-1-1945.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

301

494. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
January 19, 1945
It was good you wrote. You could have said all that in one
paragraph. Brevity is an art. If you cultivate that art you will have a
means of achieving steadiness of mind. Of course, if you cannot be
brief, you have to say what you must, even if you are long-winded.
I understand about privacy.1 The reason you give does not
appeal to me. Let critics say what they like. I shall, however, respect
your wish so long as it remains your wish.
I do not wish that you should hide Chimanlal’s defects as long
as you see any in him. I only expressed my opinion. It may perhaps
be of some help. The same about Nanavati. What you say surprises
me. I would ask him further if he were here. I do think he will come
back.
It would be good if you addressed brief notes to those who
make mistakes or shirk work. I only wish to help. But would it not
make it difficult to improve things if I did not mention what you
wrote, did not know the names nor what lapses had occurred?
You should have definite work. I assume you have. But if that is
not so, I am willing to give you whatever help you ask for.
You should welcome any new suggestions I make. They may
seem new, but in fact they are not new. They are at the very root of
our way of life. If I am not to make such suggestions, my presence
here is useless. How many of the suggestions I make can be
implemented is of course another matter and that is for you to decide.
I was indeed very happy to read about brahmacharya.2 I believe
it applies to both of you. What you say is news to me and I rejoice at
it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5816. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

1

Vide “Letter tro Munnalal G. Shah”, 18-1-1945.
The addressee had written that though he was confident of observing
brahmacharya even staying outside the Ashram, with his wife; he had no intention of
setting up house separately.
2

302

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

495. LETTER TO JAISUKHLAL GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 19, 1945
CHI. JAISUKHLAL,

There has been delay in writing to you.
Chi. Manu is getting along well. She is learning nursing with
great diligence. There are two other girls with her. She likes the work
very much. She is taught by Sushilabehn and Prabhashanker. Along
with nursing, she also takes lessons in English, etc., from Bhansalibhai
and others. But she is still careless, I am not fully satisfied. I had her
sleep with me for three nights. I wanted to continue the practice. I
would then have been able to correct her sleeping posture. But she
caught cold. Now she goes and sleeps with Mataji. Let me see when
she comes back to me. There is no cause for worry, though. She still
suffers from constipation. I am watching how she progresses.
Do not send any dried fruit till I ask for it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

496. LETTER TO MANGALDAS
S EVAGRAM ,
January 19, 1945
BHAI MANGALDAS,

I have your letter and the cheque. It is good that your
blood-pressure is cured. How did it happen? Hereafter try to avoid it.
Blessings from

BAPU
MESSRS MANGALDAS & S ONS, B OOKSELLERS
BHAGA TALAO
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

303

497. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 19, 1945
CHI. SHARMA,

I have your letter. I have not yet conveyed to Gadodiaji1 all that
you had said. The reason was lack of time. But do you wish to place
yourself under him in spite of everything? Is it not better that you
should stay as you are and not let them interfere? You can continue to
earn money from your wealthy patients, you can do your work there
and move forward.
Do come here if you so wish. But I think it is unnecessary. We
can manage everything through correspondence.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh,
between pp. 326 and 327

498. LETTER TO SONJA SCHLESIN
S EVAGRAM ,

January 20, 1945
DEAR MISS SCHLESIN2 ,

I do not think there is any chance of my coming to S[outh]
Africa or going to America. But whether I do or not, of course I
expect you one day to drop in here and pass the rest of your days in
India. Of course it may be that the climate here does not suit you as it
did neither Kallenbach nor Hannah3 .
I quite agree with you about Manilal and his wife. Sita is
working hard for her examination.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
MISS S. S CHLESIN
P. O. BOX 2234
JOHANESBURG , S OUTH AFRICA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Lakshminarayan Gadodia
A Jewish woman; she worked as Gandhiji’s steno-typist and private secretary
in South Africa
3
Niece of H. Kallenbach
2

304

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

499. LETTER TO RICHARD B. GREGG
S EVAGRAM ,

January 20, 1945
MY DEAR GREGG,

Your letter makes me glad and sad. Glad because of your faith
and enthusiasm and sad because of Radha’s1 illness which you say is
beyond recall. I am hoping that in this at least you will prove wrong.
Nevertheless you and I can say, “His will not ours be done.” I believe
also that what passes for misfortune is not always really so. Of these
things, in spite of scientific advance, we know so little.
When your revised book2 comes, of course if I do not read it
Pyarelal or others will and I shall know.
Love to you both.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 6760

500. LETTER TO JEHANGIR PATEL
January 20, 1945
DEAR JEHANGIRJI,

Bapu had your letter of 11th inst. He is glad you enjoyed the
charming scenery and climate of Ooty.
Thanks for the honey and the eucalyptus which you have sent.
The parcel was received yesterday.
Bapu was very sorry to hear about the demise of Zabair’s wife. He
hopes Zubair will take the bereavement bravely. So-called adversities
are sent to us to test our faith. Is not life itself a discipline and a
probation ?
Bapu is very much on the mend as you guess. The illness is all
gone. The weakness is still there but he is slowly regaining lost
strength and the whole day silence is serving as his strong shield.
Without it one wonders how he would have fared.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy : Beladevil Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1
2

Gandhiji used to call the addressee and his wife Govind and Radha.
Economics of Khaddar, the second edition of which came out in December,

1946

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

305

501. LETTER TO JAMSHEDJI N. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 20, 1945
1

BHAI JAMSHEDJI ,

Yesterday I was shown what you had written to Khurshedbehn.
What you say is correct. The matter took a turn for the worse because
the Government of Sind interfered. They ought to withdraw the
ordinance. Only then can people like you and me work. For my part I
have talked to the Arya Samajists on the subject at great length. But it
was not the business of the Government. We have therefore to
consider the development.
Blessings from

BAPU
JAMSHEDJI NUSSERWANJI
BONUS R OAD , K ARACHI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

502. LETTER TO RAMKUMAR BHUWALKA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 20, 1945
BHAI RAMKUMAR,

Of course my blessings are with the bride and the groom. May
both be true servants of the country.
Blessings from

BAPU
R. K. BHUWALKA
C ALCUTTA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

306

Parsi industrialist and philanthropist

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

503. LETTER TO KAMALA BENKEL
S EVAGRAM ,
January 21, 1945
MY DEAR KAMALA,

I see you are taking a further course. I am satisfied so long as
you fit yourself for full service and settle down.
I did see Donald and he knew all about me.
Hope you will keep well. Love.
BAPU
KAMALABAI BENKEL
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

504. LETTER TO K. G. SAIYIDAIN
S EVAGRAM ,

January 21, 1945
DEAR E FRIEND,

I had your note. I missed you at the conference which was a
good success. I know the worth of your word.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. K. G. S AIYIDAIN
HEAD , E D. D EPT.
S HRINAGAR
KASHMIR
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

505. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EVAGRAM ,
January 21, 1945
CHI. AMRIT,

Got your letter today and I reply. A copy of letters is being
made for you. Your letter has been seen by K. and S. Really it does

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

307

not matter who sees it here. It is altogether worthy of you. . . .1
You have gone through suffering during the snow-time. I envy.
Although it was bad while it lasted, the experience was worth having.
The attendants were also marvellous. That is human nature at its best.
The more you suffer bravely and smilingly the stronger you will
become. You will meet me in God’s good time. Meanwhile cart-loads
of love.
Blessings from

BAPU2
From the original: C.W. 4150. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 7785

506. LETTER TO J. SIVASHANMUGAM PILLAI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 21, 1945
DEAR PILLAI,

I have your letter of 13th instant. I can only repeat what I have
said. 3 I cannot go further. I have no authority. I would therefore
dissuade you from bringing a deputation. You should know too that
my silence continues. Therefore I do all my work by writing which
necessarily must be as little as possible.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI J. S IVASHANMUGAM P ILLAI,
EX-MAYOR OF MADRAS
LAKSHMI VILAS, K UTTY S TREET
NUNGAMBAKAM , M ADRAS
S. INDIA

M. A., M. L. A.

From a photostat: G.N. 9256. Also C.W. 5066. Courtesy: J. Sivashanmugam
Pillai

1

The rest of the paragraph has been scored out.
The superscription and subscription are in Hindi.
3
Vide “Letter to J. Sivashanmugam Pillai”, 4-10-1944.
2

308

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

507. LETTER TO MURIEL LESTER
S EVAGRAM ,

January 21, 1945
MY DEAR MURIEL,

I have your chatty letter filled with news. Most of those you
mention are in prison and beyond me even through letters. But of
course such is the lot of satyagrahis.
Of course Doris is a tower of strength to you. I can well picture
her standing to her post in all weathers.
I am fairly well.
The rest from Pyarelal.
Love to you all.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

508. LETTER TO SAHAJANAND
S EVAGRAM ,

January 21, 1945
DEAR SWAMIJI,

Many thanks for your letter. Indulal has seen me. 1 He had
nothing new to say beyond giving your letter. I have known Prof.
Ranga 2 for a long time. When he mentioned the kisan work in Andhra
in co-operation with Congressmen I had no hesitation in approving of
his project. Of your activity I know nothing except through
papers. You would please put yourself in touch with the Bihar
Congressmen.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S WAMI S AHAJANAND S ARASWATI
P RESIDENT , A LL-INDIA KISAN S ABHA
S ITARAM ASHRAM, B IHTA , P ATNA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

Vide “Note to Indulal Yajnik”, 16-1-1945.
N. G. Ranga

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

309

509. LETTER TO L. KAMESWARARAO SARMA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 21, 1945
DEAR KAMESWARA SARMA,

I have read the whole of your letter. You can come here when
you like. I am silent but you will see Dr. Sushila Nayyar and the
patients. You may try your remedies.
I adhere to all Dr. Nayyar has said of me. What I have said is a
result of hard experience. I had the pleasure of meeting your father. I
had sent for him for Sardar Vallabhbhai. He could not help. His
admissions were revealing. I have met most naturopaths. They do not
agree and they are obstinate and even lazy.
You will now see why I cannot preside or be at your conference
even if I was able to do all that work. Nor can I send you any helpful
message. It will be critical. But you may make what private use you
like of this. I want naturopathy to make real progress.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. L. KAMESWARA S ARMA, M. A., B. SC.
THE INDIAN INSTITUTE OF NATURAL THERAPEUTICS
P UDUKOTTAI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

510. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
SEVAGRAM,
January 21, 1945
DEAR,

Bapu had your letter of 18th inst. He has also received the
typescript of the Practice and Precepts of Jesus and will certainly go
through it1 . For the rest, more when the prodigal returns.
Yours sincerely,

P YARELAL
P ROF. J. C. K UMARAPPA
C/ O S HOORJI VALLABHDAS
C UTCH C ASTLE
S ANDHURST BRIDGE
GIRGAON , B OMBAY
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1

310

Vide “Letter to J. C. Kumarappa”, 25-1-1945.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

511. LETTER TO MAHENDRA B. DAVE
S EVAGRAM ,

January 21, 1945
1

CHI. MAHENDRA ,

I have your letter. Send me Bhogibhai’s full name and
address so that I can write to him. What do you do? How many
brothers and sisters are you? You should not rush to a court of law. I
will do what I can. How far have you studied?2
Blessings from

BAPU
MAHENDRA BHOGIBHAI
KEVALRAM MAVJI ’S BUILDING
R AJKOT
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

512. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 21, 1945
CHI. DINSHAW,

I have your letter. I am all right. I observe silence during the
day to conserve my energy.
I have not yet come to have faith in milk therapy. But if I had
an opportunity to stay with you I would certainly take it, watched
byyou. At the moment I have no wish to leave this place. I am also
attending to the work here. I shall come to you when God takes me
there.
There are some differences between us. But that does not worry
me. That I can take work from you is enough for me.
Your letter to Devdas is sharp but you did right in writing it.
You could only have written what you did. In fact I had written 3 to
him before you did. The trust will be formed. But whether it is formed
or not, we propose to start the work if we can have just enough land
1

Grandson of Kevalram Mavji Dave
Vide also “Letter to Shamaldas Gandhi”, 10-2-1945.
3
Vide “Letter to Devdas Gandhi”, 1-1-1945.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

311

for it. Even otherwise you are not sitting idle.
Ardeshir will be making good progress. I understand what you
say about Jinnah Saheb.
Blessings from

BAPU
DR. D INSHAW MEHTA
6 T ODDYWALLAH R OAD
P OONA
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

513. LETTER TO SARALADEVI SARABHAI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 21, 1945
DEAR SISTER1 ,

I read both your pieces from beginning to end. I like them.
They show how careful and neat you are. If you have worked on it all
by yourself one can see how much time you must have devoted to it.
Of course I know sister Montessori very well although I may say I
have not read any of her writings.
Your writing would be more useful to Ashadevi and Nayakumji
and so I have given it to them. Afterwards I shall send it to Bapa.
Get a Hindustani version made, if you can, and send it to me.
Otherwise I shall get it done here.
Blessings from

M. K. GANDHI
S ARALADEVI S ARABHAI
[THE ] R ETREAT
S HAHIBAGH
AHMEDABAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

312

Wife of Ambalal Sarabhai

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

514. LETTER TO JOYADEVI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 21, 1945
CHI. JOYADEVI,

I had promised to send you my blessings on the 1st but it
slipped my mind. The girl whom I had asked to remind me did so
only today. I hope you are all well.
Blessings from

BAPU
JOYADEVI
8 E XCHANGE P LACE
C ALCUTTA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

515. LETTER TO DR. SYED MAHMUD
S EVAGRAM ,

January 22, 1945
DEAR MAHMUD,

I do not mind your long letter. It opens out your heart. That is
good enough for you.
No Leaguer need come to me. Sir N. 1 has but to write that I
could enter Bengal including Midnapore and Chittagong2 and that no
one would interfere with me and I would go, weak or strong. But he
has sent me the message that he could not welcome me and that he
had no influence with the Government.
As to the Communists, you should see the papers. I went out of
my way to meet them and to befriend them. But Joshi wrote
peremptorily that I should not write to him any more.3 He wanted me
to speak to him thro[ugh] Bhulabhai, Mrs. Naidu or C. R. The latter
declined. Bhulabhai has the case. There is a hitch. Anyway I
declaredpublicly that they could not be kept out of primary
1

Khwaja Nazimuddin, Premier of Bengal since April 1943
Midnapore and Chittagong had been among the districts worst affected by
famine and consequent breakdown of economic order.
3
For Gandhiji’s discussion and correspondence with P. C. Joshi, and “Letter to
P. C. Joshi”, 5-2-1945.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

313

membership if they signed the Congress pledge. Personally I would
have here any of them as I have Habib.1 They can convert me. Some
of them have come here and stayed. Can I do more? Must I?
As to Nariman, you do not know what I have done.2 I must not
give you the whole story. You may get it from P. Now I can do
nothing. Working Committee alone can act. I think N. has himself the
remedy in his hands.
I think this is all you want to know from me. If there is anything
left over please ask. Write or speak. Tonight has been given to Hiralal
Sastri of Jaipur State.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 5067

516. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 22, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I have read your letter. I am not at all disappointed. You are
giving me what you can. . . .3 You must certainly work in the Sangh.
Your account is good. Do whatever you can in the Talimi Sangh. I
think you must put in some reading and spare some time for it. Do
spare some time for weaving for yourself. This is all that you should
try to do. There is scope for improvement in the quern, but that is
beyond your province for the present. What you are doing is enough.
Keep writing to me. Ask me whatever you want to.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4457

1

Addressee’s son
For the details of the Nariman case, vide “Statement to the Press”, 20-81937, “Note in Nariman-Sardar Case”, 14-10-1937, “Statement to the Press”, 16-101937 and “Letter to K. F. Nariman”, 29-10-1937 and “Letter to Perinbehn Captain”,
7-8-1938.
3
A word is illegible here.
2

314

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

517. LETTER TO VASANTLAL MORARKA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 22, 1945
BHAI VASANTLAL,

Do you want my blessing for February 111 ? Anything done for
Jamnalalji has my blessing. Do whatever you can yourself or get it
done by others.
Blessings from

BAPU
VASANTLAL MORARKA
NAVAJIVAN S ANGH
1321 HARRISON R OAD
C ALCUTTA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

518. CABLE TO V. K. KRISHNA MENON2
Express

January 23, 1945

KRISHNA MENON
INDIA LEAGUE , 165 STRAND
LONDON, W. C. 2
INDEPENDENCE
FOR

ESSENTIAL

INDIA’S.

ENGLAND
INFORM

IT

AND
MOHIUDDIN

FOR
MUST

OTHER
PULIN

WORLD
COME

POWERS

PEACE
BUT
SEE

AS

ALSO

EARLIER
THE

IF

OBVIOUS.

SEAL.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal. Also The Hindu, 26-1-1945

1

Death anniversary of Jamnalal Bajaj
This was sent in connection with the observance of Independence Day
(January 26) in London.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

315

519. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
S EVAGRAM ,

January 23, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

The matter about newspapers has been brought to my notice. It
seems they are being bought and sold. It is, therefore, very necessary
that they should be returned according to instructions. Here, of
course, I watch the time of their arrival. Explain the matter to me. I
will do as you advise. Everything should be above board. This is a
matter which can be quickly set right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8467. Also C.W. 7182. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

520. LETTER TO SHARDA G. CHOKHAWALA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 23, 1945
CHI. BABUDI,

What you say is correct. Nevertheless I would certainly pay
some attention. And Shakaribehn is bound to look after you. I know,
however, that the right place for you is where Chokhawala lives. And I
can have nothing to say if you keep good health. After knowing my
mind, therefore, you may do as you wish. But please bear in mind that
whenever you wish to come here you can do so without hesitation.
You need not feel hesitant about coming to me.
Blessings to you both from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10051. Courtesy: Sharda G. Chokhawala

316

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

521. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 23, 1945
CHI. RAMDAS,

I got your letter. I am opening the Superintendent’s letter. We
will now see what Sumi wishes. A letter from her is due. I have no
trace of cough at all. I cannot say, either, how weak I am. I observe
silence the whole day just to save time. And it agrees with me. I speak
at night.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Mrs. Sumitra Kulkarni Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

522. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
January 23, 1945
Go on giving. Keep me informed. The Talimi Sangh should go
on. I mean I shall not send you away from the Sangh. Having started
work in the Sangh, you cannot leave it so soon. It could not be done
now but you should restrict your activities only after explaining things
to them. Under all circumstances we must direct all our efforts towards
Nayee Talim. This is how I view the loom too. Every activity should
fit into the framework of Nayee Talim. Great. . . . 1 If it is available
whenever required, it will be all right. I understand from your letter
that it is only for eight hours. . .2
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4458

523. LETTER TO A. N. SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 24, 1945
MY DEAR SHARMA,

You are going to pick up Hindi soon I hope. I understand what
you mean. I want our friend to treat all patients equally in the sense
1
2

The meaning of the sentences is not clear in the source.
ibid

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

317

that each should be treated according to his wants. None can have
special care because of his status, therefore our friend ought not to go
beyond his capacity even in the matter of assistants and attendants. I
want some naturecure man to show that perfection which is humanly
possible. Describe to me at your leisure the whole of his treatment.
My own nature cure has proved quite efficacious for me.
Love.
Yours,

A. N. SHARMA
BHIMAVARAM
From a copy. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T. Hingorani

524. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
S EVAGRAM ,

January 24, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I am returning the accompanying with some lines underlined.
Those portions are bad in both. One must not be in a hurry to accuse
anybody. That is a sign of impatience and irritability. This I write in
the few minutes I have free. Come and see me in the evening or
before 8.15 in the morning. We shall discuss the matter then and clear
up other things.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8645

525. LETTER TO BHULABHAI J. DESAI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 24, 1945
BHAI BHULABHAI,

Newspaper reports startle me. Jinnah says one thing and Liaquat
Ali another. About me also it is reported that bypassing the Working
Committee I want a coalition government to be formed. What do these
reports mean? I have complete trust in you. Please see that nothing is
done without the approval of the Working Committee. I go by what I
wrote to you in Gujarati.1 It contains nothing which would support the
1

318

Vide “Note to Bhulabhai J. Desai”, 5-1-1945.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

newspaper reports.
I can understand everything happening together. But please
make it clear that we cannot go a single step without the consent of the
Working Committee.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Bhulabhai Desai Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

526. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 24, 1945
CHI. GHANSHYAMDAS,

I have your letter. My cough was cured a long time ago. The
weakness persists, but that too is slowly going. This time I have been
taking only nature-cure treatment. I do not have much urge for a
change of air. If it becomes necessary I shall go.
I do not insist on any particular place for the meeting of the
Sangh. I shall go wherever it is held. I am in touch with Bapa and
Mridu.
I shall hear your views about Nayee Talim when we meet. I have
discussed the subject with the teachers. Education through crafts has
to be self-supporting.
Why wait for the details from Dinshaw? It was evident from what
you said. It would be a matter of only a thousand rupees. It will be
increased to the extent necessary.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Hindi original: C.W. 8064. Courtesy: G. D. Birla. Also Pyarelal
Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

527. A NOTE
January 24, 1945
Tell Kakasaheb to make himself thoroughly fit. There should be
no ulcers in the mouth. Let him report the effect of the medicine sent
by the vaidya from here. Bring full details of his ailment.
I like the study he is engaged in; but I want him to have a full
grasp of the Urdu script and to learn the Urdu language. Amritlal is

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

319

doing good work only in Kaka’s name and regarding it as Kaka’s
work. So when he comes out he will have to work for Hindi and Urdu.
But he should not think about it in jail. I am not in a hurry. The
Government will release him when it wants. It is a different matter
if it does so under the pressure of the peaceful non-violent power
ofthe people. I see no such possibility for the present. But a satyagrahi
has nothing at all to do with the question of his release. If he is
released, well and good; it is the same to him if he is not. I find that
Vinoba and Kaka have worked hard. I am also glad that they are both
together. I do wish them both to keep well and come out refreshed
when they are released. I feel sorry that I could not remain so. I am
ashamed of it. Let this not be the lot of others I had expected seven
years for all, in any case certainly for me. But the fever 1 brought
about my release. I do not wish this to happen in the case of Kaka and
Vinoba.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5611

528. LETTER TO VITHAL V. DASTANE
S EVAGRAM ,
January 24, 1945
BHAI DASTANE,

I have gone through your programme. I like it and it has my
blessings. You must have received another letter of mine.
Blessings from

BAPU
DASTANE VAKIL
BHUSAVAL
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

529. TELEGRAM TO CHANDI PRASAD VAIDYA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 25, 1945
C HANDI P RASAD VAIDYA
BIRLA MANDIR DISPENSARY
N[EA ]R BIRLA MANDIR
NEW DELHI
YOU

HAVE

OVERSTAYED.

HARI-ICHCHHA

NOT

IMPROVING.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

320

Gandhiji had an attack of Malaria.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

530. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 25, 1945
MY DEAR K.,

I have read your booklet 1 from beginning to end. You shall
have the foreword2 or whatever you call it. I like it very much.
Get quite well quick. How is Bharatanand?
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10168

531. LETTER TO WILLIAM Q. LASH
S EVAGRAM ,

January 25, 1945
MY DEAR FATHER LASH,

I am so glad you came. Please tell all our English friends that we
all do our duty regardless of result. Has not an English divine said that
“duty will be merit when debt becomes a donation”? Non-violence,
translated ‘love’, is the supreme law for human beings. It knows no
exception. I have tried all these years to live by that law and hope to
die in that state.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 41

532. LETTER TO CHHAGANLAL JOSHI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 25, 1945
CHI. CHHAGANLAL,

You want my blessings for your success in the future, don’t
you? That you will attain success implies my blessings. On the one
hand you are rendering great service to the avarnas, on the other you
1
2

Practice and Precepts of Jesus
Vide “A word”, 21-3-1945.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

321

are serving the savarnas, that is, you are trying to make avarnas of
them. What face have they to brag? Have they set out to bury
Hinduism?
Blessings from

BAPU
C HHAGANLAL JOSHI
R AJKOT
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

533. LETTER TO RAJDEV
S EVAGRAM ,

January 25, 1945
BHAI RAJDEV,

You have my blessings of course. Ours is to make the effort.
Whether finally you are sent to the gallows or are released is
something over which we have no control.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

534. LETTER TO RAM NARESH TRIPATHI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 25, 1945
1

BHAI RAMNARESH ,

Why should I bless you on your daughter’s wedding? For you
and me birth, death and marriage are just different forms of the same
thing, are they not? Still, if you want my blessings you have them.
Blessings from

BAPU
R AM NARESH TRIPATHI
S ULTANPUR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

322

A Hindi poet

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

535. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 25, 1945
CHI. ANAND,

I have your letter. Let us hope that in the end you will all benefit
by having gone there. I am not able to make out anything. Sharma 1
has written a long letter. He is very confident. But if the doctor says
that you can leave him and can continue the treatment at home then
by all means come in February. You may do what you
think proper. I am not going anywhere in February, but it is another
matter.
I am well. You three are in my thoughts.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

536. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 25, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

You are more closely connected with Talimi Sangh. You can
relieve yourself to the extent they allow you to do. There in lies your
good and theirs. From the spiritual point of view you must decrease
not increase your commitment. But do it after consulting them.
I shall give instructions when necessary. Maintain a diary. You
must stop worrying. You have to get complete mastery of Nayee
Talim.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4459

1

A. N. Sharma

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

323

537. LETTER TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN
S EVAGRAM ,

January 25, 1945
CHI. SHRIMAN,

The love of you two is indescribable. I feel like coming to you
if only for the sake of that love. 1 However I cannot leave this place
while the Camp2 is on. Silence is welcome for I can spare myself. You
can take it that I have resumed work. Nevertheless I would like to
come.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 303

538. NOTE TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN
[After January 25, 1945] 3
You understand the position about my coming, don’t you? The
earliest I can come is on the 23rd—25th of course certainly.4 Then I
shall see how long I can stay. There is a lot to be done here. I want to
go to your place for its own sake. I like it that way.
Discuss things fully with Sunderlalji. Some names were
tentatively suggested but I asked them to be referred to you and said
that I would accept only those approved by you. Somebody
mentioned that your book5 had been of help to them.
[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 303

1

The addressee and his wife Madalasa had invited Gandhiji to their house in
Wardha for a change of air.
2
Samagra Gramseva Shibir organized by Kanu Gandhi
3
The source places this letter after the letter to the addressee, dated January 25,
1945, the preceding item.
4
The Hindustani Prachar Sabha Conference was scheduled to be held on
February 25 and 26 at Wardha.
5
The Gandhian Plan of Economic Development for India

324

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

539. LETTER TO G. SITARAMA SASTRY
S EVAGRAM ,

Independence Day, January 26, 1945
MY DEAR S. SASTRY,

Deshabhakta Venkatappayya1 is older than I am. But he shows
the same intellect and energy as before. May he live long and die in
harness. He deserves it.
Love,
Yours,

BAPU
S ITARAMA S ASTRY
VINAYA ASHRAM
DIST. G UNTUR
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

540. LETTER TO RANGANAYAKI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 26, 1945
CHI. RANGANAYAKI,

Your good letter. I wish you could be your daughter’s first and
apt pupil. Then you would write to me in Hindustani.
I am glad you have lost your gloom.
I do think that a woman has the same civic rights as a man and
[may] still enjoy the leave when she is carrying. A good woman
carries not for herself but for the world; hence the leave will be no
privilege.
I return the photo with my blessings on it.
Amtul Salaam is in Calcutta doing great service.
When you come, you will see the place much extended. Love.
BAPU
R ANGANAYAKI
S RIRANGAM
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Who was soon to be eighty

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

325

541. LETTER TO JAIL SUPERINTENDENT,
GORAKHPUR
S EVAGRAM ,

January 26, 1945
S UPERINTENDENT
JAIL , G ORAKHPUR (U.P.)
DEAR SIR,

Persistent letters are being received that Baba Raghavdas is in
your custody and is suffering from insanity. I shall be obliged if you
will kindly inform me of the true situation and if I may be allowed to
send a physician or a vaidya.
Yours faithfully,

M. K. GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

542. LETTER TO M. NARAYANAN
January 26, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,

Gandhiji has your letter of 19th inst. You should see the two letters he has
written to Shri Sivashanmugam Pillai, copies of which are enclosed herewith.1
Yours sincerely,
PYARELAL

Encls : 2
S HRI M. N ARAYANAN
NUNGAMBAKKAM UNITED C LUB
15 N UNGAMBAKKAM HIGH R OAD
MADRAS
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

Vide “Letter to J. Sivashanmugam Pillai”, 4-10-1944 and “Letter to J.
Sivashanmugam Pillai”, 21-1-1945.

326

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

543. LETTER TO VITHAL L. PHADKE
S EVAGRAM ,
January 26, 1945
CHI. MAMA,

I got your letter. What you say about Shantikumar and his wife1
is correct. God alone can reward his services. Neither you nor I can.
You may come when you wish. You may do as you wish.
All watches are costly. I would be glad if you gave up the desire
for one. Andrews managed without a watch.
There are other workers also like him. One can easily tell when
it is morning, noon and evening. If, however, you cannot overcome
your craving for a watch, write to me. I shall procure one for you. If
you do want it please let me know what type.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 3846

544. LETTER TO MATHURADAS TRIKUMJI
VAGRA S EM,
January 26, 1945
CHI. MATHURADAS,

I have your letter. Why do you have so much attachment? How
nice it would be if you entrusted everything to Harkishan and stopped
worrying! Why should you take it upon yourself to translate the
Shakuntala? What will Jyotsna do with it? And how? After all it is but
a play. A lot of it is very sweet. Plays are of no use for the kind of life
we are living these days. This life is the real thing. At the most you
should ask her to read the relevant portion from the available
translations. But you have taken pains over it, so now I shall only say
that it may bear fruit. And there can be no doubt that I should like
Jyotsna to learn from it. And that is my blessing for her. Get well.I am
all right. How can Pyarelal or Sushila attend the wedding? Both of
them are immersed in work. We are having a camp.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

Sumati S. Morarjee

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

327

545. LETTER TO GAJANAN NAIK
S EVAGRAM ,

January 26, 1945
CHI. GAJANAN,

Are you concerned with ownership or use? What if we could
have the use of the building for a certain rent? I hope you have not
assumed that I can do or get done anything that I fancy.
Blessings from

BAPU
GAJANAN NAIK
GULWADI
S EVAGRAM
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

546. LETTER TO SHEELA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 26, 1945
CHI. SHEELA,

I have your postcard. Your description is good. Today is
Independence Day, do you remember? Do you write Urdu? If not,
learn it. You will not have letters from me for some time.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HEELA
C/ O NIRMAL S WARUP
P REMPURI, R AILWAY R OAD
MEERUT, U. P.
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

547. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
S EVAGRAM

January 26, 1945
With the independence of India is bound up freedom for the
whole of exploited humanity in the world—for even exploiters i.e.,

328

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

imperialist England and other imperialisms.
Referring to an incident that occurred that morning in front of the Ashram,
when the police attempted to interfere with the normal village cleaning programme of
the workers, Gandhiji said that it had been repeatedly announced that there was to be
no militant programme on the Independence Day and after that it was not possible for
anyone to offer civil resistance. Members of the various institutions in Sevagram
worked under his guidance.
Gandhiji said he had placed the Constructive Programme before the country
years ago and it was the only way of attaining swaraj, i.e., full freedom through truth
and non-violence. While he did not want a militant programme he had also said that if
anyone interfered with the execution of constructive work, he expected the people to
die rather than turn back. One such occasion arose that morning when a batch 1
proceeding mutely with pickaxes, shovels, broomsticks and baskets was stopped.
They were not carrying fighting weapons and yet the police would allow them to
proceed only if they broke up file. In such circumstances, non-violence would be
sheer cowardice if they yielded and bent before authority. Their hymn for that evening
was exceptionally appropriate, Gandhiji continuing said, and its central theme was,
that true happiness lay only in the womb of unhappiness. For the hearers it meant
that true happiness, i.e., swaraj, came only through unhappiness, i.e., self-suffering.
The volunteers did right in refusing to break up file and at the same time not breaking
through the police cordon. Though the police had fire-arms they were rendered useless
through the dignified and yet firm attitude of the volunteers. 2 They were neither to
invite firing nor avoid it and for them real authority was the dictate of their hearts
which Gandhiji would call God or Truth.

For me, true independence is convertible with God. Tilak has
given a mantra that “Swaraj is our birthright”. It is a simple one. I
will only add that the way to realize the mantra is through truth
andnon-violence and I claim that that way is possible only if millions
work the Constructive Programme.
Concluding, Gandhiji warned the volunteers not to gloat over their success,
for, if they did so, that very pride would prove their destruction. Humility, he said,
should be their touchstone.

The Hindu, 29-1-1945

1

250 members of various institutions in Sevagram
After two hours the police withdrew and the cleaning programme was
completed.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

329

548. LETTER TO BHARATAN KUMARAPPA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 27, 1945
MY DEAR BHARATAN,

Your doctor sister has done well in giving up her post. 1 Do
please stay as long as is necessary to put things in order. Yes, I seem to
be improving.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 3598

549. LETTER TO JAGJIVAN RAM
SEVAGRAM,

January 28, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,

I have your letter of 22nd inst.
Gandhiji says you can come and see him at your convenience. But you should
know that he maintains silence during daytime these days. You will please send
intimation of your arrival in advance.
Regarding Gandhiji’s correspondence with Shri Sivashanmugam Pillai of
Madras, it will be necessary to obtain his permission first as his letters were marked
personal.
Yours sincerely,
PYARELAL

S HRI JAGJIVAN R AM
KADAM KUAN
P ATNA
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

1

Dr. Prema Kumarappa had given up her job at the tea plantations, Nilgiris, on
account of ill health.

330

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

550. LETTER TO G. V. MAVALANKAR
S EVAGRAM ,
January 28, 1945
BHAI DADA,

I could finish your essay1 on Anandshankarbhai2 only
yesterday. I also liked Chi. Purushottam’s translation.3 It is only on
reading your tribute that I realized how greatly you admired him. I
trust everything is going on well.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI GANESH VASUDEV MAVALANKAR
S PEAKER, A SSEMBLY
AHMEDABAD
From a photostat of Gujarati: G.N. 1718

551. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
January 28, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I have gone through your letter from beginning to end. I have
made some arrangement for the newspapers. You want other
newspapers besides the Bombay papers. Even among the Bombay
papers you do not get the Chronicle on the same day. Many persons
want it, and it is not possible to refuse them. The same is true about
the Patrika. You will get both of them but late. And if you get the
Gujarati, Hindi and Marathi papers, you ought not to insist on the
English ones.
If I could have your whole letter shown to the persons
concerned it would have made my task easier. Since you have
forbidden it I have not shown it to anybody.
I do understand your problem, but I cannot offer you much
guidance unless I go deeper into the matter. What took place before
me today was a spectacle worth watching. Both of you had lost your
tempers. You were not aware of it, either of you. Each could see the
other party’s error, but neither his own. This is true of everyone of us
1

Written in Marathi for the magazine Samajapatrika; it was later published as
a pamphlet.
2
Anandshankar Bapubhai Dhruva, Gujarati man of letters and Sanskrit scholar
3
Vide “Letter to P. G. Mavalankar”, 6-11-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

331

and that includes me. I do not ask you to go and live in the village.
The atmosphere in Sevagram having become vitiated I do not wish
that you should go there. I myself am waiting and watching. I have
already suggested that it would be enough if someone from the Talimi
Sangh goes. He must be given the first place. He may do what he can.
If he does not, then we shall see. But I see that co-workers have not
been able to put up with your nature. They cannot fully appreciate
your worth. I, therefore, do wish that since you both are now capable
of observing brahmacharya even though living together and alone
with each other, you should select a village within about four miles
from here, settle down there and take up some work. I will continue to
guide you in whatever matters you wish. So much for my wish. The
decision will have to be made by you two on your own, even if it
should go against my wish.
You can use turmeric and salt. I am not sure about
pepper. If anybody wishes to add it later, he may do so. What the
vaidya 1 says is for ordinary men and women. In my view, a
brahmachari should shun all these things, including even salt and
turmeric. If absolutely necessary, he may take them as medicine but
not for the pleasure of the six flavours. But I do not insist; I do not
forbid them. My observation may even be erroneous. I have lived for
more than forty years without condiments, and for nearly thirty
without salt. It might have been a mistake on my part.
What is the matter with Ramdas ?
Let me know if I have left out anything.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5818. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

552. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
January 28, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

Keep this pin. Take the letter. You should not spend so much
time in chewing sugar-cane. As much as you can easily chew in 15
minutes should be enough.
Why do you have to evacuate the bowels three times in a day? I
hope it does not take long every time.
1

Ganesh Shastri Joshi who had advised that diet should include the six
flavours” viz., sweet, salty, bitter, pungent, astringent and sour

332

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Do learn the Malayalam script. If you feel inclined learn all the
scripts. You have of course to study Urdu thoroughly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4460

553. LETTER TO H. L. SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,

January 28, 1945
CHI. SHARMA,

I have your letter. If you want to hand over everything to
Gadodiaji, you may do so. But in that case do not involve me in the
matter. I can write to him only on the lines I have indicated. But I
shall not write anything now. Do what pleases you. I shall certainly
write if you permit me. And then he will give up the management. I
shall do as you say.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a facsimile of the Hindi: Bapuki Chhayamen Mere Jivanke Solah Varsh,
between pp. 326 and 327

554. LETTER TO J. SIVASHANMUGAM PILLAI
SEVAGRAM,

January 29, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,

Some Harijan M.L.A.s in Bihar have asked Gandhiji for copies of the
correspondence you had with him1 . Gandhiji would like to know whether you have
any objection to the copies in question being supplied to them. It was necessary to
ask for this formal permission because one of your letters is marked personal.
Yours sincerely,
PYARELAL

J. Sivashanmugam Pillai
Madras
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

333

555. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
January 29, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I have gone through everything. I have also made an inquiry. I
understand your letters but others may not. Therefore it is as well that
ordinarily they should be only for me. Remember that improvement
in the behaviour of persons whom we have engaged as friends, though
on wages, depends entirely on ourselves, i.e., principally on you and
Chi[manlal]. This deserves to be given thought. I am not writing
anything more. Nor have I the time. If you ask me anything, I shall
reply.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5820. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

556. LETTER TO JAYA
S EVAGRAM ,
January 29, 1945
CHI. JAYA,

There is no cause at all for fear of Vasant1 succumbing Typhoid
is not a very serious matter. With proper care the patient recovers.
Hate courage. Cheer up Vasant.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIII

557. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
January 29, 1945
There is something wrong if you have [to go to the privy]2 three
[times] 3 even as a matter of habit. I too once thought as you do. The
vaidyas pointed out my mistake. Let me know . . . 4 the little of the
book you have read. I do not believe in those who want to save time.
But, about this, later.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4461
1

Addressee’s son
Some words are illegible here.
3
ibid
4
ibid
2

334

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

558. LETTER TO KAMALA LELE
S EVAGRAM ,

January 30, 1945
CHI. KAMALA,

I have your letter. Since the patient here, who was under Chandi
Prasad’s treatment, had also become very ill I wired him.1 He was due
yesterday. Let us see if he comes today. His address is:
Lakshminarayan Mandir, New Delhi. Get well.
Blessings from

BAPU
KAMALA LELE
MAHILA ASHRAM
WARDHA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

559. LETTER TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 30, 1945
CHI. ANAND,

I read your letter to Chi[manlal]. Why should you write in Hindi
only to me? It is unnatural. You have time. Write in Hindi to those
who know Hindi, in Sindhi to Sindhis and to others in English if you
so wish.
I have written to you that you may come by all means. And in
my opinion it would be better if Gokhale and Babaji also came. Since
it is all the same, why should we leave those two there? They also look
upon that place as a prison. I have not sent them to jail. All three of
you should come. Probably Amtul will arrive tomorrow.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

1

Vide “Telegram to Chandi Prasad Vaidya”, 25-1-1945.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

335

560. LETTER TO SHRIPAD JOSHI
WARDHA ,

[After January 30, 1945] 1
I have read what Kakasaheb wrote. I like it. I have read this letter
just now. I thought that the typed matter was a copy of it. Ask me
whatever doubts come to your mind. You will write to me. Won’t
you? I will also reply only in writing.2
BAPU

[From Hindi]
Gandhiji: Ek Jhalak, p. 49

561. LETTER TO GAURI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 31, 1945
DEAR GAURI,

I know you only through your father. He informs me of your
forthcoming marriage. May you and yours be happy and jointly serve
the country.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
GAURIBEHN
81 VIVEKANAND R OAD
C ALCUTTA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

562. LETTER TO KHURSHED NAOROJI
S EVAGRAM ,
January 31, 1945
VAHLA BEHN3 ,

Your two letters. Of course you will stay as long as is necessary
but no longer. I agree with you. There is and should be no question
1

This was in reply to the addressee’s letter dated January 30, 1945.
Vide “Note to Shripad Joshi”, 22-2-1945.
3
The superscription is in Gujarati which means ‘Dear sister’.
2

336

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

of compromise by us. But letting others go their way is part of
ahimsa. I think we agree here. I am well. Love to you and all the
sisters.
BAPU
S MT. K HURSHEDBEHN
BOMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. courtesy: Pyarelal

563. LETTER TO RUKMINI BAJAJ
S EVAGRAM ,
January 31, 1945
CHI. RUKMINI1 ,

I got your letter only today. At last you have come. You write
about Dr. Jussawala. I am glad to learn that. You have enough money
for it. By all means put yourself under Jussawala’s treatment in
Bombay and get well. I follow your argument. We want your health to
improve, no matter whether in Bombay or Poona.
I shall be happy if you write to me regularly.
I am well.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS]
I am also glad to learn that Radhika’s2 health is improving.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9065

564. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 31, 1945
CHI. KANTI,

I got your letter. I understand your need. I should advise you to
write to Devdas about the books, too. If you are positively disinclined
to do that, you may write to Kamalnayan3 . He will consult me. If I go
and tell him, he will not refuse me. You should either send a list of the
1
2
3

Maganlal Gandhi’s daughter
Addressee’s sister Radha Choudhri
Son of Jamnalal Bajaj

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

337

books to Kamalnayan or tell him the amount you need. A list of
books with their prices will look more respectable. I would like you
not to take any help from Amritlal Sheth. He will certainly send you
whatever you ask for. Your present need shows that this is not going
to be your last request. This is significant for me, for it shows how
costly present-day education is. And at the end of it, you won’t earn
anything more than your livelihood. I have heard of many doctors
who are unable to make both ends meet. Only a few have made good
on their own strength. A good many have had to resort to influence
even after passing their examination. In writing this it is not at all my
purpose to persuade you to give up your study. You must finish it
now. I do wish to suggest, though, that the knowledge you acquire at
such a great cost should be used for service of the people.
I am glad that you are keeping Suru from the lure of ornaments,
etc. It remains to be seen how long you will succeed.
Let Bali1 pay a visit to you, though I cannot bring myself to
approve of it. It will mean unnecessary expenditure over a long
journey, with no benefit except momentary satisfaction. But she has
done a great deal for you. She is a very affectionate woman. Do,
therefore, welcome her. I tried to dissuade her by suggesting, instead,
that she should come here. I have, however, permitted her to go to
you.
You may come whenever you wish and live here as long as you
like.
You have been doing excellent work as regards spinning, etc.
Keep up your strictness. Sincere men, however few, are the best.
I should certainly like to go there, but somehow I do not feel the
urge.
If Kanu wishes to go there, I will let him. I do not know, though,
what help he will give you.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS]
I am well. I observe silence the whole day.
Give up the idea of going to Bombay. Personally I should like
you to remain where you are and learn all the four languages of the
South. You will perhaps be the only one from the North to have done
so. But what if there are others too?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7370. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi
1

338

Balibehn M. Adalaja, sister of addressee’s mother

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

565. LETTER TO BHULABHAI J. DESAI
S EVAGRAM ,

January 31, 1945
BHAI BHULABHAI,

You must have seen the report of Liaquat Saheb’s speech 1 at
Tinnevelli. How can we reach an understanding with him? In public
he speaks as he likes and then talks to you in a different tone
altogether. And you are obliged to hold your tongue. This is just to
inform you and caution you. Do what you think best. I may only let
you know what I observe from a distance. I can see nothing else, and
what I see frightens me.2
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Bhulabhai Desai Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

566. LETTER TO SURESH CHANDRA DAS GUPTA
January 31, 1945
DEAR SURESH BABU,

I received your letter in three languages. Hindi would have been
sufficient. May Chi. Annapurna and her husband be happy and may
they continue to render sincere service to the country.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 8019

1

Wherein he had denied that there had been any ‘pact’ between himself and
Bhulabhai Desai
2
The addressee replied that he would again have a talk with Liaquat Ali and
then see Gandhiji.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

339

567. DISCUSSION WITH ANUGRAHA NARAYAN
SINHA
WARDHA ,

January 31, 1945
Mr. Sinha1 discussed with Mahatma Gandhi the qualifications of constructive
workers whether they choose to work among the labour or among the students. The
following appear to be the minimum qualifications for such workers:
(1) Spinning of certain quantity of yarn regularly each month.
(2) Giving preference to such articles for personal consumption as are locally
manufactured on the basis of cottage industries.
(3) To have full and active faith in non-violence and truth as understood by
Mahatmaji.
Mahatmaji, it is understood, told Mr. Sinha that the above test was good and it
could easily be made stiffer.
The Bombay Chronicle, 1-2-1945

568. NOTE TO BHULABHAI DESAI2
[January 1945] 3
BHULABHAI DESAI,

I understand that the steps would be somewhat as follows :
The League agrees with us as to the composition of the interim
Government at the Centre. (The agreed nominees will be responsible
to the elected legislature.)The League agrees that if the proposal is
accepted by the G[overnor] G[eneral] the first step to be taken by the
new Government will be to release the Working Committee. On this
being done, the G. G. will be requested to accept the composition
agreed upon (with the addition of members representing the elected
parties or elements). On the G.G. agreeing, an interim Government
would be formed and when the Working Committee is thereafter
released, you will be good enough to tell them that this step was taken
with your approval.

1

Ex-Finance Minister of Bihar
(1877-1946); Leader of the Congress Party in the Central Assembly;
President, Bombay Provincial Congress Committee; Member, Congress Working
Committee.
3
Bhulabhai Desai initiated the move for a Congress-League coalition at the
Centre in early January 1845; vide “Note to Bhulabhai J. Desai”, 5-1-1945 and
Appendix “Guidelines for Proposed Interim Government”, 5-1-1945.
2

340

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

QUESTIONS : Is the agreement of the League to release the Working
Committee as the first step of the new provisional Government
(preliminary) proof of their bona fides ?
ANSWER : Yes.
Q. If the new provisional Government is formed while the
Working Committee is still in detention and if the new Government
releases them, why do you see danger in the way of a permanent
solution of the Hindu-Muslim question ?
A : The danger lies with the Quaid-e-Azam being equivocal
and two-faced.1

From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

569. LETTER TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 1, 1945
MY DEAR DESHBHAKTA,

I do not appreciate your appeal. There is no hurry. It should be
revised. Give the assets of the ashramam, the liabilities,
yearlydonations, the concrete activities, the income therefrom. Then
give the prospective expenditure in detail.
Has the ashramam enough workers for the different tasks? Who
is the doctor for general work, who is the veterinary surgeon, who is
the matron? Are all these experts to be brought in? The thing reads
visionary. It must be businesslike. If the burden cannot be borne, the
appeal should wait. You will get the funds. Let them not be a curse.
Money won’t produce men. The latter will produce as much as you
need.
Love.
BAPU
DESHBHAKTA KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA
GUNTUR
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarela

1

Vide also “Silence-Day Note to Bhulabhai Desai”, 11-6-1945.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

341

570. LETTER TO JAYA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 1, 1945
CHI. JAYA,

I got your telegram. Does it not seem like a dream that Vasant
has passed away? However, I feel nothing. I have seen many deaths
and many births. They are two sides of the same coin. If on one side
there is death, on the other side there is birth. Both the sides are equal
in worth. They always, therefore, go side by side. Why then rejoice at
one and grieve over the other ? Moreover it is certain to happen to all.
Besides getting married and rejoicing is nothing but a part of the
game of life. You may resume this game. Will the wedding 1 be put
off? If it were in my hands, I would not put it off. I would let the
ceremony take place, but drop the celebration part completely. But
you know better what is proper. Keep up your courage.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIII

571. LETTER TO NRISINHPRASAD K. BHATT
S EVAGRAM ,

February 1, 1945
CHI. NANABHAI,

I have your letter. I understand what you say regarding Bachu.
The sea is close to Ghogha and to Bhavnagar. Will not its cooling
effect be enough?
I shall consider how much I should leave over for you after
Manubhai2 and Vijaya 3 arrive. I shall do my utmost to lighten your
burden.
Blessings from

BAPU
NANABHAI BHATT
AMBALA, K ATHIAWAR
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
2
3

342

Bindu and Chandrakant; vide “Letter to Jaya”, 1-12-1944.
Manubhai Pancholi and his wife
ibid

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

572. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
February 1, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

You tried to be brief but failed. I am sure you have omitted
something. To be brief means that you should say everything you
want to in as few words as possible. I will show you how to do this
when I have the time and the opportunity to do so.
It was not in anger that I wrote what I did about Burhanpur. I
was not happy about you or Kanchan going there. But knowing your
limitation, I agreed unreservedly. After you had gone there, I saw
from your letters that your going there had been fruitful. You made
your family happy and you could also improve things to some extent.
Besides, there is certainly work to do in the town. Hence, in order to
see you become steady and have the proper environment, I also
suggested your taking up work there. My intention of course is
that you should stay on here and learn through experience. But
evenfor doing that, you must have equipoise and you must live in
conformity with social norms. If you do not do that, you will not
mature. I, therefore, included that also in my suggestions.
You may forgive Gopalrao and others, but you must know their
mistake. I saw sarcasm in Pandurang’s letter. I did not like the letter.
Their explanation for all this lies chiefly in what you two, perhaps
four, namely, you and Kanchan, Chimanlal and Shakaribehn, are by
nature. These two women cannot be considered different from other
women. Perhaps you do not know how many of my plans came to
nothing because of Ba’s limitations. I exercised as much strictness as I
could. But the limitation would always show itself. You may be sure it
will be the same in this case. I have explained the rule to you. If, after
understanding it, you come to the conclusion that you two should run
the Ashram, I would consent to your doing so. Even if you run it in a
way different from the way it is run at present, I would let you do so.
Or if you decide that the Ashram should be disbanded, I would
consent to that too. The correct and best thing would be that all four
of you should wake up now while carrying on your present work, and
do the best you can. You may seek from me whatever help I can give
you.
If Chimanlal also did not understand about Prahlad, ask me
when I have free time and when both are present; I will tell you.
Writing about it will make the letter too long.
I will see about the newspapers.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: C.W. 5890. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

343

573. LETTER TO DAMAYANTI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 1, 1945
CHI. DAMAYANTI,

I have your letter. It is good you wrote. I should like to invite
you but I am not doing so. Why undertake hardships of a journey and
spend money when you can achieve your aim through correspondence. So cancel the trip.
What does your husband do? How many children do you
have?
Pass on the enclosed letter to Bhogibhai.1 I do not have his
address. If the letter will not produce any result, you and your brother
should act as you think proper.
Look me up when I happen to go to Bombay.
Blessings from

BAPU
DAMAYANTIBEHN
GANDHI NIWAS
GHODBUNDER R OAD
S ANTACRUZ , B. B. & C. I. RLY .
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

574. LETTER TO V. G. SAHASRABUDDHE
S EVAGRAM ,
February 1, 1945
BHAI SAHASRABUDDHE,

A letter of authority is one which is duly signed by both the
parties. Perhaps it requires a stamp also. I shall give the verdict if I get
the claim of the T. M. E., your reply and the claimant’s rejoinder
either in the national language or the State language or even in
Marathi. Out of the six months some time has already passed. I want
everything in writing. No one need personally appear before me. I am
sorry about your daughter. My silence continues. Though I have no
1

344

The letter is not available.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

time I can yet offer some suggestions if I see the girl. It is a difficult
task.
Blessings from

BAPU
V. G. SAHASRABUDDHE
MAHAL
NAGPUR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

575. LETTER TO E. S. PATWARDHAN
S EVAGRAM ,

February 1, 1945
BHAI PATWARDHAN,

I have your letter. Send me the letter of authority duly signed
by both the parties, as also your claim, Anna’s reply, your rejoinder
and the necessary evidence. Out of the six months quite a few days
have already passed. Send the documents either by post or through
someone. There will be no need for you to come. I have said that I
shall give the verdict in writing on the basis of the written documents,
haven’t I? Why should Bhai Mahalkar take the trouble? My silence, of
course, continues. Time passes somehow. Still, do come if you want
to.
Blessings from

BAPU
E.S. P ATWARDHAN
“TARUN BHARAT ”, N AGPUR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

576. LETTER TO SANKARAN NAIR
S EVAGRAM ,
February 1, 1945
CHI. SANKARAN,

I have your letter. Tell me your views whenever you feel
like it.
It is enough that you visited the samadhis of Ba and Mahadev
once. Your duty is to immerse yourself in your studies.
Keep yourself fit.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

345

The boy is happy. He lives with Shakaribehn and goes to the
T[alimi] S[angh].
Blessings from

BAPU
S ANKARAN NAIR
R OOM 30, T HIRD F LOOR
MORARJEE GOKULDAS S ANATORIUM, P OONA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

577. ADVICE TO MAHOMED BEG1
S EVAGRAM ,

[Before February 2, 1945] 2
If you really desire to serve the Muslim masses, my only advice
to you is that you should totally abstain from being in touch with
communal bodies.
The Hindu, 3-2-1945

578. LETTER FO BHULABHAI J. DESAI
S EVAGPBAM,

February 2, 1945
BHAI BHULABHAI,

What you say is correct. Come whenever you wish. I have
no fear. It is the newspaper reports that impelled me to caution
you. 3
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Bhulabhai Desai Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

1

A Congress leader from Kheda who had a prolonged discussion with Gandhiji
The report appeared under the date-line “Surat, February 2, 1945”.
3
Vide “Letter to Bhulabhai J. Desai”, 31-1-1945.
2

346

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

579. LETTER TO BHOLA NATH
February 2, 1945
(1) You are free to do anything, but should do nothing at my
instance. My advice is that you should make your own decision in the
context of the situation prevailing there.
(2) Sarojini Devi has fallen ill. Take the help of somebody else.
(3) Launch a pure satyagraha against the landlords if there are
people who can offer satyagraha. If they are not ready for it do
whatever is possible.
(4) I shall certainly meet the people of Alwar if I am able to go
to Delhi.
(5) There is nothing at all to prevent our meeting the rulers if
they are ready to help us.
Nothing of this is meant for publication under my name. It is
meant only for your understanding.
BHOLA NATH MASTER
P RAJAMANDAL
ALWAR , R AJPUTANA
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1312

580. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 2, 1945
The incident of sugar-cane shows how we should be generous
towards others and strict with ourselves and what should be the right
qualification for handling child education.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4463

581. LETTER TO SHRIKRISHNA SINHA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 2, 1945
BHAI SHRIKRISHNA SINHA,

You ought not to need comforting. Death inevitably follows
birth. Why grieve over it? Your wife is released from suffering. Now

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

347

you have only service to devote yourself to. So do it.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRIKRISHNA S INHA
P REMIER
P ATNA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

582. LETTER TO KAMALESH
S EVAGRAM ,

February 2, 1945
BHAI KAMALESH,

I have your letter. I can’t help it if my article has caused a
commotion. I am not satisfied with your work. I do not wish to go
into the reasons. The Rashtrabhasha Sammelan is narrow in its scope
since it does not teach Urdu. Had Urdu continued to enjoy the place
which it deserves and which I tried to give it, the propagation of
Hindustani would have become redundant. To me this is self-evident.
But why should I argue? If everyone does what he likes where is the
room for contention ?
Blessings from

BAPU
KAMALESH
GU[JARAT] P RA[DESH] R A[SHTRABHASHA] P RACHAR S AMITI
KHADIA, A HMEDABAD
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

583. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
Unrevised

S EVAGRAM ,

February 3, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I didn’t follow your story about Dwarkanath. Explain it to
me.
I understand your difficulties. They are all unavoidable. Find
your way patiently through them. You can talk to everyone politely.

348

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Yashodhara1 is a very good woman. You can speak to her. She has
supported many of our workers. For instance, she has been helping
Narayan and Kanti. Her house is open to any of our workers whogoes
there. They are big people. It is very good indeed that Dr. Mahmud is
there as also Ramachandran2 . You may request them and even if they
are not able to help, you may find some other way. If you do not
know how to broach the subject to them, do not embark upon the
venture. It is surprising that Kanchan does not help as much as she
can. Is that intentional or is there some other reason? If you tell me
which members of the Ashram refuse to help, I may do something
about it.
The only remedy for all the difficulties is patience. Forget about
Sevagram for the time being. Assume that Shantabehn has taken over
responsibility from today. You may, if you can, give her whatever
help she asks for.
I intend to write separately regarding Mahadevi. I hope Vatsala
helps you. If you have anything more to ask me, you may.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8466. Also C.W. 7181. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

584. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,
February 3, 1945
CHI. DINSHAW,

I have your letter, the cheque, the photograph, etc. I shall return
the photograph with my next letter. No one prevents me. I just cannot
bring myself to believe in the efficacy of milk therapy. For the rest I
would certainly like to stay with you.
Our differences, such as they are, will disappear of their own
accord.
The contribution from Ghanshyamdas at any rate ought
to remain anonymous. We may not even identify it by some name.
He will continue to pay us till the figure is reached. The amount
will not come to us in a lump sum. The records will of course show
1
2

Yashodhara Dassappa
G. Ramachandran

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

349

a small amount. I should like to include the names of Bhiwandiwala
and Fikriyar Jung. I shall write to you about it. I can’t think
ofanything more to write at the moment. I think I am working a bit
too much.
Blessings from

BAPU
DR. D INSHAW MEHTA
P OONA
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

585. LETTER TO BAJRANG SINGH
S EVAGRAM ,
February 3, 1945
BHAI BAJRANG SINGH1 ,

I have your letter. May God save you. If you have to go to the
gallows, face it cheerfully.
Blessings from

M. K. GANDHI
BAJRANG S INGH
C ONDEMNED C ELL , C ENTRAL JAIL
NAINI, U. P.
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarclal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

586. LETTER TO LADY CHHOTURAM
S EVAGRAM ,

February 3, 1945
DEAR SISTER,

I am grieved that Sir Chhoturam 2 has passed away. Only a few
months back he had written to me. He had love for me. What
consolation can I offer you? Let us live as God ordains.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
LADY C HHOTURAM
C/ O DR. G OPI C HAND
LAHORE
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

350

The addressee was involved in the Kanpur Central Station bomb case.
A prominent Unionist leader and Revenue Minister of the Punjab

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

587. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 3, 1945
It would be best if you gave up sugar-cane altogether for two or
three days.
Select some book for reading. I can choose one for you if you
wish. Your acquaintance with Malayalam will be of great help in
Nayee Talim. Do not resort to English under any circumstances. It is
surprising you do not understand this simple thing.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4569

588. LETTER TO BHARATAN KUMARAPPA
February 4, 1945
MY DEAR BHARATAN,

I have heard from both of you simultaneously. Do stay as long
as your sister needs you. You will be working for A.I.V.I.A. wherever
you are.
My love to you all.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 3597

589. LETTER TO Y. VENKATASUBBAIAH
February 4, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,

I got your letter only today. Please send me your detailed
budget and if it commends itself to me, I shall submit it to the Trust.
As to the scheme for an institute, will naturopaths agree? If you are
young enough I would like you to come here by appointment and
treat patients according to naturopathy. Naturopathy here works but I
am sorry to confess that only allopathy flourishes.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S HRI V. V ENKATASUBBAIAH,
KASTURIDEVINAGAR
NELLORE (ANDHRA )

M. L. A.

From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

351

590. NOTE TO SUB-INSPECTOR OF POLICE, WARDHA1
S EVAGRAM ,

February 4, 1945
He (the wanted person) came and said he believed in me and my
teachings and had decided to surrender himself. Hence the note he
wrote. I must add that even if he had admitted his guilt to me I would
be bound not to disclose it to the police. I could not be reformer and
informer at the same time.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book I, pp. 40-2

591. LETTER TO ARUN CHANDRA GUHA
February 4, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,

Yours of 26th ultimo2 to Gandhiji. He was very much pleased to read that even
in jail you were able to renew the pledge and the oath of allegiance. As regards his
going to Bengal, though he would very much like to go there, the circumstances are
such that he does not think it advisable at present to venture to go to Bengal.
Yours sincerely,
NARAHARI PARIKH

S HRI ARUN C HANDRA GUHA , S ECURITY P RISONER,
S PECIAL R ESERVE JAIL
P. O. BAKSADUAR (DT. J ALPAIGURI )
From a photostat: G.N. 8671

592. LETTER TO AMRITLAL T. NANAVATI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 4, 1945
CHI. AMRITLAL,

I have your letter. You are scared for nothing. Let all the people
come together. I do not think it proper to change the programme
after everything has been decided. On my part I have no misgivings.
After all we only want to do our work. You and Maganbhai should
1
According to the source an underground worker wanted by the police had met
Gandhiji and left a note. The police learning of this wanted the note.
2
The source has “inst.”.

352

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

come over. Hope you have completely recovered.
Blessings from

BAPU
AMRITLAL NANAVATI
GUJARAT VIDYAPITH
AHMEDABAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

593. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
S EVAGRAM ,
February 4, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

It is well that you have taken a vow about sugar-cane. If you
were to take it for the sake of your health, it would not be necessary to
give it up for good. If it were to control the palate you would have to
give it up. In this case, both health and palate are involved. That is
why I suggested a time-limit.
As for the books, you can read Marx’s Das Kapital, all my
articles on economics and also Shrimanji’s and two books by
Sampurnanand. The rest I shall tell you later.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4464

594. LETTER TO CHANDRAPRAKASH
S EVAGRAM ,
February 4, 1945
CHI. CHANDRAPRAKASH,

I have your two postcards. Although Father is still not out of
danger, it is good that he has survived the crisis. May God cure him
completely.
Blessings from

M. K. GANDHI
C HANDRAPRAKASH
P ILLARS
S IALKOT
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

353

595. LETTER TO P. C. JOSHI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 5, 1945
BROTHER JOSHI,

Received your letter.1 Shall I reply in the national language?2
I did not write to you because you yourself had asked me not to
do so. Yes, you are right, complaint was mine. I wanted to come near
you. To clear up that I asked, I wrote. In that there was no reason for
anger.
I have given everything to Bhulabhai. There was some difficulty
about one thing. Rajaji refused, because he is considered a partisan. I
have already expressed my view. You must have seen it. I want to
come still nearer to the Communists. But complaints continue coming
to me. I have told everything to brother Habib. Mohan 3 need not
come. But if he wants, he can come.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
Correspondence between Mahatma Gandhi and P. C. Joshi, PP. 39-40

596. LETTER TO MANU GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 5, 1945
CHI. MANU,

I am very much worried about you. You are always crying and
seem restless. You do tell me that you regard me both as your mother
and father. Will a child be ever afraid of talking to her parents, or feel
shy? You do both. I, therefore, wonder what your real feelings are.
Why should you have any secrets? You should not object to others
reading your letters. Therefore while I have returned them to you, I
did not like doing so. You should have the courage to say whatever
you wish in front of everybody. One hides one’s guilt even when it is
small. He who has acted truthfully hides nothing. If there is any
suspicion that truth is being kept back, it comes out.
1

Vide Appendix “Letter from P. C. Joshi”, 1-2-1945.
The Hindi original is not available.
3
Mohan Kumaramangalam
2

354

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Tell Sushila whatever you wish to say. Why should you be afraid
of her? Tell her boldly whatever it is. She tells me that she has not
stopped you from attending the class because you share the bed with
me. She told you for your own convenience that you might take leave
if you wished and get well. She will help you to make up for what you
miss.
You may show this letter to Pyarelal, Sushila or anyone else you
wish. Get well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./XXIV

597. LETTER TO MANILAL GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,
February 5, 1945
CHI. MANILAL,

I have your letter written from Mombasa. You worry too much
about me. Stop doing that. Leave me in God’s hands. At present I am
all right. I am active as usual and take my normal food. The
blood-pressure is not measured daily now. Khurshedbehn has been
inBombay for the last ten days. She will be there a few more days.
Neither she nor anyone else will ever disappoint you. Just now Chi.
Kishorelal also is here, and so is Narahari. Narahari’s son has got
engaged to Anasuya, Rami’s daughter. It was a mutual choice.
I should like it if all of you could make proper arrangements
for your work there and then come here, but I do not think that will
be possible. It can be done if Sita gets herself trained and goes there.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4946

598. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
S EVAGRAM ,
February 5, 1945
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

I did not ask for the balance-sheet. I only wanted to know the
names of those who lived in the Ashram including the servants and the
others and the expense per head. This should not be difficult. What I

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

355

have written about Mahadevi is one-sided. If you or the others know
anything that goes against her, I should like to know that too. You
need not believe as perfect truth all that I say. It may be that I know
only one side of the story.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10615

599. LETTER TO L. KAMESWARARAO SARMA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 5, 1945
BHAI KAMESHWAR SARMA,

I have your letter of January 31, 1945.
My complaint remains. Your letter has, if anything, aggravated
it.1
All your office-bearers are your own men. So must be the
members. This is not the way to unite people.
All your work will be carried on in English. What has this got to
do with nature? You have dug up the very foundations of nature. Why
inflict English on poor Tandonji who is an advocate of the
Rashtrabhasha ? If you did not want the Rashtrabhasha it would have
been better if you had chosen one of the South Indian languages.
Father’s letter is full of wisdom. What could Dr. Sapru do?
There is nothing to obstruct a nature-cure practitioner in India.
Yours, 2

KAMESWARA S ARMA
P UDUKKOTTAI
TRICHY
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide also “Letter to L. Kameswararao Sarma”, 21-1-1945.
The letter carries the following note in Gujarati: “Sent after a Tamil
translation had been made.”
2

356

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

600. LETTER TO G. D. BIRLA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 5, 1945
CHI. GHANSHYAMDAS,

Dinshaw has sent the draft to De[vdas]. He wants Bhiwandiwala,
who had helped him and who has faith in nature cure, as also Fikriyar
Jung, who was Finance Minister to the Nizam and believes in these
remedies, to be included among the trustees. I think there is no harm
in it. About the rest I have written to Dinshaw. If you will show this to
Devdas I shall make do with this one letter.
If you take me to Delhi I shall have to visit Pilani, Mira’s place
and also Dharmadev’s. I shall stay at the Harijan Nivas.
Blessings from

BAPU
BIRLAJI
N. D.
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

601. LETTER TO BRIJLAL NEHRU
S EVAGRAM ,

February 5, 1945
BHAI BRIJLAL,

I have your affectionate telegram. Keep me posted in this way.
So far I have not taken anything. But what is to be done if the
Ayurvedic as well as the nature-cure people are not able to do
anything? That is the question. Allopathic doctors take no less time.
Tell me, what should we do?
Blessings from

BAPU
BRIJLAL NEHRU
ACCOUNTANT GENERAL
KASHMIR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

357

602. LETTER TO CHANDRANI
February 5, 1945
CHI. CHAND,

This is foreign—certainly mill-made. Why should you have it?
You ought to have a notebook of hand-made paper. You can keep
this. You could use it for some other purpose or give it away. Anyway,
you should do only what you wish, not what I suggest.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: Chandrani Papers. Courtesy: Gandhi National
Museum and Library

603. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 5, 1945
The very fact that Malayalam appears distant is the reason why it
should be learnt. There is no difficulty after one learns the grammar
of a language, Asanas1 and water are the remedies for constipation.
Instead of sugar-cane, try taking sugar-cane juice.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4466

604. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 5, 1945
An intelligent man will not stop with just learning a script. He
who stops there will be defeated. However, a script can certainly be of
great help in learning a language. The opposite of it is also true. It is
proper to write everything in Hindi. But we want to be practical in our
1

358

Yogic exercises

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

approach. As we want to achieve unity we should learn as many scripts
as there are languages here. By doing so we would be moving nearer
the goal. Considered from even this point of view all these things fit
into the scheme of Nayee Talim.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4465

605. LETTER TO P. SRIRAMULU
February 6, 1945
DEAR RAMULU,

You are right. By mistake your letters were not shown to me. I
am glad of the reformed remarriage. I hope both are happy and
doing well. Do report about your progress. I know you have
difficulties to contend with.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 111

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

359

606. LETTER TO SHARDA G. CHOKHAWALA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 6, 1945
CHI. BABUDI,

The doctor’s advice is not correct. You can give Anand 1
mosambi juice in warm water. Or you can warm it by putting the
vessel containing it in hot water and give it to him. You can give him
honey mixed in hot water, or pure jaggery. Honey would be better.
You can give him vegetable soup. This will clear the bowels and
normalize motions and then he may drink milk with relish. The cough
and the cold must disappear. There was no harm in giving him
Santogen. You will soon observe its effect. All children fall ill. You
should not worry. You should not give him just any medicine. All
children are endowed with the power of self-recovery. Watch what he
eats.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10052. Courtesy: Sharda G. Chokhawala

607. LETTER TO ZABAKBEHN
S EVAGRAM ,

February 6, 1945
CHI. ZABAKBEHN,

There is a letter from Chi. Rasik. Trambaklal has passed away. I
had not been in much contact with him. But Popatbhai moved a lot
with me and so I remember him well. What Consolation shall I offer
you? God looks after everybody and protects everyone. We are all
subject to our karma. We should patiently submit to whatever
happens.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS]
I am not writing separately to Chi. Rasik. I got his letter only
today.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10218

1

360

Addressee’ son
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

608. LETTER TO RAOJIBHAI M. PATEL
S EVAGRAM ,

February 6, 1945
CHI. RAOJIBHAI,

Bhai Gokuldas is gone. Condole with the family on their loss.
Truly speaking, what is there to condole about such a death? He has
done a lot of work. I knew him well. He will certainly be missed. It is
the duty of those whom he leaves behind to fill the void.
Blessings from

BAPU
R AOJIBHAI MANIBHAI P ATEL
VITTHAL KANYA VIDYALAYA
NADIAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

609. LETTER TO ABHAY KUMAR
S EVAGRAM ,

February 6, 1945
BHAI ABHAY,

I have heard enough of such wise talk. I do accept its general
purpose. But it does not mean that we may have no difference of
opinion or see no faults in anyone. I have learnt to love people in
spite of their faults. I do it and I feel satisfied.
Is it not enough that I dwell on truth? I follow truth as I see it.
We do not all see truth the same way. Outlooks differ.
Blessings from

BAPU
ABHAY KUMAR
P. B OX 85
NEW DELHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

361

610. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 6, 1945
Where is the swelling? Change the time of working on the
quern; do not give it up. There is much to be gained by doing the
work methodically. You will find wonderful nuances in Malayalam. It
is easy to understand. Learn Grimm’s Law if you are not already
familiar with it.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4467

611. LETTER TO CHAKRAYYA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 6, 1945
CHI. CHAKRAYYA,

Your letter. Do not give in to difficulties. You are a little
distance away but there are advantages in this too. It is certainly good
to collect some children and train them. Acquire some knowledge
about Nayee Talim. Your way will be clear if you increase your skill
in weaving. Krishnadas1 has evolved an easy process of double
twisting. Learn it through letters and then follow it in practice. Then
hand-spun yarn can compete with mill yarn. You can overcome all
your difficulties by patience, knowledge and diligence.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 9114. Also C.W. 9183

612. LETTER TO AMRIT KAUR
S EVAGRAM , 2

February 7, 1945
CHI. AMRIT,

I wanted to write to you in Urdu. I was crowded out for want of
time.
Now I have your question in English. I am quite of opinion that
the children of mixed marriage should be taught in the male parent’s
religion. This seems to me to be self-obvious for common happiness
1
2

362

Son of Chhaganlal Gandhi
This is in Devanagari
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

and interest. That the instruction should be liberal goeswithout saying.
I am considering merely the question of the choice of religion. The
children cannot profess two religions. They must respect the female
parent’s religion. If the female parent has not that much discretion
and regard for her husband’s religion, the marriage becomes
superficial. Of course it is another thing where the husband is wholly
indifferent. I know such a case. Am I clear? Tell B. she should not be
silent.
Love.
Blessings from

BAPU1
From the original: C.W. 3695. Courtesy: Amrit Kaur. Also G.N. 6504

613. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
S EVAGRAM ,

February 7, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

It seems the jowar dalia2 was not cooked well. I ate it for two
days. Though it was put in the cooker again, I didn’t find it soft
enough. I found it even hard. I suggest that all food should be cooked
so well that even a person like me with false teeth can eat it. My
second suggestion is that you should cook jowar ghensh instead of
dalia. To cook ghensh the jowar should be turned into flour and the
flour should then be cooked. I wish to try it. In prison they serve such
ghensh and it is easy to digest.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8465. Also C.W. 7183. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

614. LETTER TO JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
S EVAGRAM ,

February 7, 1945
CHI. JAYAPRAKASH,

It is a pleasure to read your letters. Be happy and keep yourself
in perfect health.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 2220
1
2

The subscription is in Devanagari script.
Gruel made from milk

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

363

615. LETTER TO RAMASWAMI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 7, 1945
CHI. RAMASWAMI,

Why should I now write to you in English? You ought to know
Hindi by this time.
So you have resolved to go. If the Government don’t send you,
you will adopt other means. That too is a way. By all means go. Keep
whatever links you can. Be a true servant.
Blessings from

BAPU
R AMASWAMI
TALIMI S ANGH
S EVAGRAM
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

616. LETTER TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN
S EVAGRAM ,

February 7, 1945
CHI. SHRIMAN,

I have gone through what you wrote about the Mahila Ashram.
It is good.
You can explain the objective in two or three lines. Do so.
In doing it keep in mind the promise made by Jamnalalji. So far
as possible we should consider and implement it.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 304

364

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

617. A NOTE
February 7, 1945
I am surprised and sorry that such questions are being
repeatedly asked and that workers spend money to come here and
take up my time which is valuable. They should look up the answers
to all their questions which have already been covered in some form
or other.
M. K. GANDHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

618. NOTE TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN
[After February 7, 1945] 1
I like it.2 It is good to divide the Mahila Ashram into sections. I
do not know whether or not there will be somebody, man or woman,
at the head of every section. If all sections are under you and if you
remain responsible to Shantabehn, I think everything will be all right.
Let the three-member committee stay, but Shantabehn should consult
only you and you should take up the entire responsibility. Everything
will then run smoothly.
[From Hindi]
Panchven Putrako Bapuke Ashirvad, p. 304

619. LETTER TO T. B. SAPRU
S EVAGRAM ,

February 8, 1945
DEAR DR. SAPRU,

Though I am supposed to be resting and silent between 8.15
a.m. to 8.15 p.m. I am working intensely. Hence the delay in sending
you a reply.3
If it is no great trouble I should like you to put me specific
1

In the source this note is placed after the letter to the addressee dated February
7, 1945.
2
Addressee’s scheme for the Mahila Ashram
3
For the addressee’s letter, vide Appendix “Letter from T. B. Sapru”,
13-1-1945.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

365

questions about my talks with Q[uid-e] A[zam]1 . I would like to
confine myself to that question alone.
I see you have entered upon an ambitious programme. 2 I wish
you all success and full strength for the work.
I hope the patient3 is quite out of the wood.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
Gandhi-Sapru
G.N. 7571

Papers.

Courtesy:

National

Library,

Calcutta.

Also

620. LETTER TO LILAVATI ASAR
S EVAGRAM ,

February 8, 1945
CHI. LILI,

I have already written to you; nevertheless, since a letter of yours
is lying before me, I am writing this. Do not under any circumstances
give up your studies even if you should find them tedious. I have
purposely sent you there for studies. If you succeed, I shall not
grudge the expense and the time spent. Having started a thing one
may give it up only if it is found to be basically wrong. That is not so
in the present case. We knew what it would involve. You should not
have any attachment about serving me, nor any for the Ashram. If
afterwards you again merge in the Ashram, what you are doing just
now is for the Ashram as well as for me. Now do not give up. Stop
thinking and engross yourself in your studies. I am well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9600. Also C.W. 6572. Courtesy:
Lilavati Asar

1

In reply the addressee sent a set of questions along with his letter dated
February 16, 1945. Vide “Answers to T. B. Sapru’s Questions”, 26-2-1945.
2
The reference is to the Conciliation Committee formed under the
chairmanship of the addressee to examine “the whole communal and minorities
question from a constitutional and political point of view, putting itself in touch of
different parties and their leaders including minorities interested in the question and
present a solution within two months to Standing Committee” of the Non-party
Conference. The other members were Jayakar, S. Radhakrishnan, Gopalaswamy
Iyengar and Maharaj Singh.
3
Addressee’s son

366

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

621. FRAGMENT OF LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH1
[February 8, 1945] 2
. . . then it should be available in the account-books. That is why
I thought it should be possible, and easy, to get that figure.
Let me know about any inconsistencies you find in Mahadevi’s
character. There is a reason why I should know them.
You are likely to lose the money which Sarojini owes you. You
may let the thing go and write it off. Read the letter I am writing to
her.
Credit to the hospital account the sum of Rs. 5,000 received
from Anupama and sent to you from here. Only now I came to know
that the money was earmarked for that purpose. I was told about it, of
course, but probably I was thinking of something else at the time. It is
good that the money has been credited to my account, for now it can
be easily transferred to any other account.
Sharda and Anand seem to be unlucky. They always suffer
from something or other.
Kanu has written [to you] about the money received from the
Bajaj Company.
I have now replied to all the points raised in your letter.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10616

622. LETTER TO KANAM GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 8, 1945
CHI. KANAM,

I could not reply to your letter at once. If you are convinced
that ghosts do not exist, then the article in the Times should have no
effect on you. There are some good things in newspapers but there isa
lot of nonsense too. The readers of newspapers, therefore, should be
always on their guard. Your method of doing algebra is good. This
1
This appears below a statement of accounts of the Charkha Sangh
under Prabhudas Gandhi’s signature. The earlier part of the letter is not available.
2
From the G.N. Register

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

367

shows that your intelligence is developing. That method is actually
used in arithmetic. You should develop the habit of assuming ‘x’ as a
quantity. You will realize the value of this as you go on.
Improve your handwriting still further.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 9516. Courtesy: Kanam Gandhi

623. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 8, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

You can easily obviate disappointment among the teachers.
Their main fault or handicap is that they are not hard-working
craftsmen, nor do they have faith in craftsmanship.
Tell Dr. Mahmud that you have no time to spare. Why does he
at all want to talk to anyone? Why does he not engage himself in some
craft? He can certainly do something. He may do some carding and
spinning and clean the vegetables. Along with this he may teach Urdu
and acquire a good knowledge of Hindi. He may read Tulsidas.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4468

624. LETTER TO DR. SYED MAHMUD
S EVAGRAM ,

February 8, 1945
BHAI MAHMUD,

Why did you write to me in English? From now on write in
Hindustani. Why do you hate to apologize? We are all members of the
same family. Do not be unhappy; be cheerful. Regain your health.
Yours,

GANDHI
From a photostat of the Urdu: G.N. 5093

368

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

625. LETTER TO MADELEINE ROLLAND
S EVAGRAM ,

February 9, 1945
DEAR MADELEINE,

My whole heart goes out to you now that the one 1 for whom
you seemed to be living has gone. Nevertheless the true position is
that you should work ever so much more than before assuming of
course that your physical condition makes work at all possible.
Love.
BAPU
MLLE . R OLLAND
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

626. LETTER TO JALBHAI RUSTOMJEE
S EVAGRAM ,

February 9, 1945
CHI. JALBHAI 2 ,

I have your letter. I might have skipped a reply but I was
shocked at the news of Sorab’s3 illness. This illness comes on through
carelessness. It is sure to disappear if he observes the rules. My
blessings are of course with him. Manilal’s work is going on well.
Blessings to you all from

BAPU
JALBHAI R USTOMJI
74 VICTORIA S TREET
DURBAN, N ATAL
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2
3

Addressee’s brother Romain Rolland
Sons of Parsi Rustomji
ibid

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

369

627. LETTER TO RASIKLAL U. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 9, 1945
CHI. RASIKLAL,

Go to S. A. and do as much public service as you can. You
should not hanker after money.
Blessings from

BAPU
R ASIKLAL UMIYASHANKAR MEHTA
G/20 S IKKANAGAR
VITHALBHAI P ATEL R OAD
BOMBAY 4
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

628. LETTER TO HARSHADA DIWANJI
February 9, 1945
CHI. HARSHADABEHN,

I got all the yarn as well as your letter. Only today it was
discovered in the bag. My blessings are always with you. Why do you
make the servants spin? If they spin willingly, and with proper
understanding of the meaning of spinning, then it is a different
matter. It is enough for me that you yourself spin regularly and with
both hands.
I spin on Diwanji’s spinning-wheel daily. I like it. It has a few
defects, but I get them repaired or repair them myself. If I got more
time, I should examine it more carefully.
Blessings from

BAPU
S MT. H ARSHADABEHN DIWANJI
15TH R OAD , K HAR
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10222

370

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

629. LETTER TO BABA MOGHE
February 10, 1945
BHAI BABAJI,

Sharmaji writes, 1 that doctor Rajuji also wants that you should
stay on there. There has been some improvement and there will be
more. All three of you are dear to me, you are sensible. I have no
doubt given you permission to come here but since Gokhaleji is there
I shall be glad if you also stay on there and are cured of your
complaint. You will not always get such an opportunity. Anand alone
may come.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

630. LETTER TO A. N. SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 10, 1945
CHI. SHARMAJI,2

I hope you have made some progress in Hindi.
In accordance with your advice, I have asked3 Babaji to stay and
give himself and nature-cure a full chance.
Yours,
From a copy. Courtesy: National Archives of India and Anand T. Hingorani

631. LETTER TO SHAMALDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 10, 1945
CHI. SHAMALDAS,

Read the enclosed letter.4 If you could bring justice to the case,
it will gladden the soul of Kevalrambhai, wherever it is. In his last days
1

Vide the following item.
The superscription is in the Devanagari script.
3
Vide the preceding item.
4
This was from Mahendra B. Dave; vide also “Letter to Mahendra B. Dave”,
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

371

he had been in touch with me over spiritual matters, as had been your
father. They were both prepared to go to [South] Africa but they
passed away. I had even prepared the ground for them to reach S. A.
But isn’t fate always a couple of steps ahead of us?
Blessings from

BAPU
S HAMALDAS GANDHI
C/ O “VANDEMATARAM ”
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

632. LETTER TO KAMALNAYAN BAJAJ
February 10, 1945
CHI. KAMALNAYAN,

Read the enclosed 1 and act upon it. Already there has been
inordinate delay. Return the paper to me after you have acted on it. I
have to send a reply.
Blessings from

BAPU
KAMALNAYAN BAJAJ
WARDHA
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

633. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 10, 1945
It is surprising. Those who have had Western education or those
who are not craftsmen will not be inclined or eager to become
craftsmen. I have seen quite a number of such cases.
2. Things will continue to happen sporadically. They will not
follow any sequence. That is all right.
3. You should not in any case despair. Remember [what the Gita
says] about a sthitaprajna2 .
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4469

1
2

372

This was a letter written by Rathindranath Tagore from Santiniketan.
One of steadfast understanding. Bhagavad Gita, II 55 et seq.
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

634. ADVICE TO LEPROSY RELIEF WORKERS1
February 10, 1945
You have preached to the converted. My interest in leper work is
as old as my residence in South Africa. I take it that you have seen the
institution (Dattapur Colony run by Manhar Diwan) here. 2 I would
like you to send a detailed plan with expenditure to go to the Board.
No thanks needed.
The Hindu, 12-2-1945

635. SPEECH AT SEVAGRAM
February 10, 1945
Mahatma Gandhi addressed a few words to the gathering.3 He told them he had
accidentally seen the address which they had presented to Shri Kanu Gandhi, the
organizer of the camp. They had said some very nice things in it, but if, as it often
happened, it all began and ended with the presentation of the address, without their
carrying back with them something of enduring value from the camp, theirs would be
merely love’s labour lost. He expected them to develop what they had gained during
their month of training a hundredfold and become true gramsevaks, servants of the
villagers in deed as well as in name. They had been selected for training out of a large
number of applicants. It was for them to vindicate their selection by going back as
messengers and torch-bearers of samagra gramseva to their respective provinces.
They should go to villages as scavengers and sweep them and clean them and serve
the villagers as their humble servants. They should teach those who wished to learn
spinning and other village handicrafts in the best way they could. They should never
feel helpless in the absence of outside help. In their work, if they had really
assimilated the spirit of the teaching that had been imparted to them, it ought to
develop their intellect and heart no less than their bodies. Therefore it should develop
their character. Their success would depend more on the purity of their hearts than on
their skill and knowledge. If they lacked moral purity they would prove a blight
instead of a blessing to the villagers among whom they might settle.

1

T. N. Jagadisan, leprosy relief worker of Madras, and Dr. M. R. G. Cochrane
of Vellore met Gandhiji and presented to him a proposal for organizing under the
Kasturba Memorial Fund rural leprosy work for the benefit of women and children.
Since Gandhiji was observing silence he wrote out his reply.
2
Vide also “Remark in Visitor’s Book”, 12-12-1944.
3
On the death anniversary, according to the Indian calendar, of Kasturba
Gandhi, a twenty-four-hour spinning yajna was organized in which Gandhiji
participated. Kanu Gandhi’s Samagra Gramseva Shibir also concluded on this day.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

373

He was glad to note, Gandhiji went on, that though they came from different
provinces, they had all been able to take and flourish on the same diet. It should lead
to a better realization of our oneness as a nation. Customs, dress, food and language
were bound to be to a certain extent different in different provinces, but the essential
unity underneath this apparent diversity had to be fully grasped and a working
uniform standard evolved if they were to realize their destiny as a nation.
Lastly, Mahatma Gandhi exhorted them all to learn Hindustani and acquire
proficiency in both the Urdu and the Hindi scripts. Hindustani meant not a highflown
Sanskritized Hindi or Persianized Urdu, but a simple dialect which both Hindus and
Muslims spoke in the villages of the North. The villagers did not
understandhighflown Hindi or Urdu. Their language was either simple and plain
Hindustani or a provincial dialect irrespective of their caste or creed. Highflown and
sophisticated style in Hindi and Urdu were the disease of cities, bred of mutual
distrust. So long as that state lasted it was incumbent on them to learn both the Hindi
and Urdu scripts. The third party was there no doubt to accentuate and exploit their
differences, but, if they really felt that Hindus and Muslims were kith and kin, blood
brethren, no one on earth could divide them or keep them divided. There was a popular
saying that it needed two to start a quarrel. He was there to tell them that true ahimsa
did not need to wait for a gesture from the other side. If they understood their own part
of the duty and acted accordingly, success would assuredly be theirs.

The Hindu, 14-2-1945

636. ASHRAM NOTE
February 11, 1945
I learnt yesterday that Nagu, who has been working in the
Ashram for the last six years, has no knowledge of the directions or of
the geography and history of India. If this is so, it calls for serious
reflection on our part. . . .1
BAPU

[From Hindi]
Bapuki Chhayamen, p. 388

637. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 11, 1945
It is with some purpose that I have asked you to give it up. It
1

374

Omission as in the source
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

does not mean that you should give up your work. But it does mean
that you are free if you find your promise burdensome. That is to say
faith gives us greater strength every day, never diminishes it. This is
what discipline means. The teachers have not entered the hearts of the
pupils. They have not been able to give up their old ways. If there is
concentration in work, discipline follows automatically. Discipline
should not be regarded as something apart.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4471

638. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 11, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

Why this panic? I only wrote something generally acceptable. I
protected your freedom. But it does not mean anything more. Go on
doing what you are doing and improve upon it. Become a good
scientific weaver. I think what you are doing in the Ashram is
sufficient. Take my writing in its plain meaning. It can have no other.
Wake up.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4470

639. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
February 11, 1945
CHI. KUMARAPPA,

Come on the 15th at 5 p.m. Then we shall see about the
rest.
Ask me about Mrs. Hoffman then. I hope you don’t mind my
writing in Hindi.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 10169

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

375

640. LETTER TO MRS. DAS
S EVAGRAM ,

February 11, 1945
DEAR SISTER,

Only yesterday Mahesh showed me the telegram saying Dasji
had passed away. Do not grieve over it. His mission was over and he
cast off the body. But though the body has perished, he lives on.We
can keep him alive if we carry on his work. Take it that this
responsibility rests mainly on you. You cannot bring him back into
your life by grieving over his death or by donning white. You can do
so only by leading a simple life by learning nature-cure treatment and
vanquishing the enemies1 in the form of anger, etc. Write to me what
you are doing and how things are. What does Nimai do? I had a letter
from Das recently.
Blessings from

BAPU
MRS. D AS
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

641. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 12, 1945
MY DEAR KU.,

S[ushila] has gone to Nagpur for a patient. She is likely to
return tonight. If you want to catch her at the station, you can do so.
I know the remedy. But let the doctors speak. Then if necessary,
I shall put in my word.
I had your note about your book. I hope to produce something
worth while.
Yours,

BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10170

1

376

The six enemies, viz., desire, anger, greed, attachment, pride and envy
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

642. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 12, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

After reading the enclosed, pass it on to Krishnadas. After
reading he should return it to me.
1. In regard to myself, I have taken the position that even when
[a particular form of personal service] may not be necessary a
personmay be allowed to offer it after he has been told so—just for
his satisfaction. That is why I let the girls massage my legs. I would
not let any others do so. I don’t mind what Bhansali does, for I have
complete faith in him. Nobody is privileged. Nobody can be
privileged. This must be clear.
2. The responsibility for anything that you may permit Champa
to do will be yours. I will not guide you. You are free to be as strict as
you like. I have told Champa that she may secure from you whatever
liberty she wants, but must not ask for my permission, since the daily
supervision over her is not mine.
3. The Ashram manager should be a sthitaprajna, a gunatita1
and a bhakta. For this see Chapter II, XII and XIV [of the Gita].
4. For learning English, why should anybody want to hear it
read by someone else? One may read it for oneself. Bhansali may
read from Ramakrishna and explain in Gujarati. Nobody is forbidden
to read English by himself. One may learn any Indian language, and
Bhansali may teach it. I would never say that those who knew English
should forget their knowledge, except perhaps sarcastically. I myself
know English and love the language. But the language must be used
only when necessary and not other wise.
5. Omprakash should hand over his watch to the Ashram. I
think I shall be able to get Rs. 30 for it. This would be the right thing
to do. But if O. prefers to pay that sum to the Ashram and keep the
watch himself, he may do so.
6. Certainly, it is one’s duty to learn an Indian language, i.e.,
one’s mother tongue.
7. Ordinarily it is desirable that the class should be conducted at
the place fixed for the purpose.
This has been written in Gujarati unconsciously. I hope you will
follow it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 4576
1

One who has transcended the three gunas, viz., sattva, rajas and tamas

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

377

643. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 12, 1945
Read about Grimm’s Law from the grammar book in the
Library. Ask Pyarelal or Shriman.
A machine does not go wrong so soon. Learn to repair it.
is right.
It is not necessary to chew sugar-cane after seven days. If your
body does not need it a twig of neem or babul should do for the
teeth.
Come and sit with me. The best thing would be to come and sit
when you do your spinning. Do have a talk about labour.
You must not fall ill.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4473

644. INTERVIEW TO GOVIND SAHAY1
February 12, 1945
It is understood that Mahatma Gandhi was not able to give an opinion
without proper investigation of allegations and without a definite proof. So he
advises everyone to act according to his judgment. He said:

This may create some confusion but there is no harm.
The Hitavada, 13-2-1945

645. LETTER TO MAULANA SULEMAN NADVI
S EVAGRAM , W ARDHA ,

February 13, 1945
BHAI SAHEB,

A Conference of Hindustani Prachar Sabha will be held on
February 26 and 27. 2 I should like you to attend it and make your
contribution towards finding a solution to the problem. I hope you
1

Member of A. I. C. C. who had sought Gandhiji’s advice regarding the
attitude to be adopted towards the Communists
2
Vide “Speech at All-India Hindustani Prachar Sabha Conference-I”,
26-2-1945 and “Speech at All-India Hindustani Prachar Sabha Conference-II & III”,
27-2-1945.

378

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

will come. Inform me about the time and date of your arrival.
M. K. GANDHI
MAULANA S ULEMAN NADAVI
S HIBLI MANZIL
AZAMGADH (U.P.)
From a photostat of the Urdu : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

646. TELEGRAM TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
Express

February 14, 1945

DINSHAW MEHTA
C ARE NATURECURE
P OONA
COME

ANY

TIME.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

647. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
S EVAGRAM ,

February 14, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

A discussion was going on between Shakaribehn and you when
I was in the bathroom. Both of you were talking at the top of your
voices. Why? The discussion was between you two only, and was not
meant for anybody else to hear. How can this be tolerated? You
should try and somehow learn to exercise control over your voice. It
is a matter of common sense how loudly one should talk on what
occasion. Please bear in mind that others will do what you do. What
you preach will be like so much writing on water.
You were to send me the dalia cooked at your place. Did you
forget to do so, or was the dalia not good enough to send? Why not
try to make ghensh or raab of jowar flour? Are you afraid that
nobody will like it? Are all the people so fastidious?
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS]
I have still to write about one thing more. But that next time.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8464. Also C.W. 7184. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

379

648. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 14, 1945
Sitting and talking with me would depend on your and other
people’s convenience. Come any time you feel like it. Withdraw
yourself when somebody wishes to be alone [with me].
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi; G.N. 4474

649. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
S EVAGRAM ,

February 15, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I tasted the dalia. I had asked for a sample only from what was
cooked in the kitchen. What was sent had been left in the cooker for
two hours. It had puffed up but even then it tasted half-cooked. There
were hard grains, and bran stuck-in the mouth. I think we cannot cook
dalia from jowar as we can from wheat. After the flour has been
removed, no nutrient is left. The jowar, therefore, should be turned
into fine flour and soaked in water, and then ghensh or raab should
be prepared from it. Your reading of the Gita is too slow. This also is
an art. You should read it faster.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8463. Also C.W. 7185. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

650. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 15, 1945
You must write and tell me why the Paunar [programme] was
postponed.
I think it is not auza but auz 1 . Find out from some Muslim
friend studying there.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4475
1

Presumably Gandhiji meant the expression wuzoo which means
ceremonial washing of hands and feet before offering namaz.

380

the

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

651. A NOTE
February 15, 1945
Celibacy is obligatory only for the inmates of the Ashram. It is
not meant for others and it would not apply to servants. It should
apply to Ram Prasad; he is not an inmate of the Ashram. Our Ashram
is no more an ashram in the real sense. But wherever I stay becomes a
kind of an ashram. I had even objected to calling it an ashram; but
everybody started referring to it by that name and I acquiesced. This
does not in any way mean that those who have taken the vow can
break it.
BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: C.W. 5903. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

652. LETTER TO BALTHUSNA1
February 15, 1945
BALTHUSNA,

I have your letter. I am sorry I cannot come. I cannot support
Urdu or Hindi exclusively. I want them both to progress. Indeed I like
them both. I hope you will understand.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Urdu: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

653. LETTER TO SIBTE HASAN
S EVAGRAM ,
“VIA ” WARDHA (C.P.),

February 15, 1945
BHAI SIBTE HASAN,

I have your letter. I just cannot attend the Anjuman 2 . I cannot
promote exclusively either Urdu or Hindi. I want both the languages
to develop. But I certainly want that both should blend together. I
1

This was in reply to an invitation to attend a conference of
Anjuman-i-Taraqqi Urdu which was to begin in Bombay on February 23. Later it was
read out by Allama Kaifi at the Conference of All-India Hindustani Prachar Sabha on
February 26.
2
Presumably, Anjuman Taraqqui-e-Urdu
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

381

hope you have understood my viewpoint.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Urdu : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

654. NOTE FOR ANJANA CHAUDHARY
[After February 15, 1945] 1
Write to her that Ram Narayan should make a confession in
writing, exactly describing his role. If doing so invites greater
punishment, he should accept it. That will be his atonement. But he
should do it only if it is acceptable to his mind and heart.
Notwithstanding what is said above, if there is any legal loophole
and he can be acquitted, he should take the opportunity. In his
statement he should say that the statement is by way of atonement. If
there is a legal escape, he will certainly be freed. The Government will
not misinterpret his statement. Ram Narayan’s confession should not
be taken to mean that because he admits his offence he should be
detained or given stricter punishment. This cannot be done, at least
legally.
From the Gujarati original : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

655. SPEECH AT SEVAGRAM2
February 15, 1945
Referring to the amount of one crore and twenty-four lakhs that had been
collected, Gandhiji remarked that though he was impatient to speed up the work, he
was not going to allow the Fund to be squandered away or loosely handled. It had been
collected in the name of an illiterate and simple-hearted woman. He had his detractors,
not so Ba. Therefore, the work done in her memory must be cent per cent honest. He

1

The addressee in her letter dated February 5, 1945, had mentioned that her
husband, Ram Narayan Chaudhary, had in 1942 advised a student that sabotage
activities would be in conformity with non-violence and had now discovered, after
Gandhiji’s clarification of the matter, that he was mistaken. He was anxious to atone
for the mistake.
2
Gandhiji Addressed the Secretaries of the Provincial Committees of the
Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Fund.

382

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

did not care for numbers of workers. If he could find even two capable men or women
in the meeting he would begin work with their help and expand it as more suitable
workers came forward. So far as he was concerned he would like to exclude men
altogether from the various Provincial Committees formed under the Trust and fill
them with women. But he would not have them unless they were at least as capable if
not better than men. Otherwise he would be exploiting them. He had never done so.
One crore and twenty-four lakhs was a mere drop in the ocean when distributed among
seven lakhs of India’s villages. India was spending more than a crore a day on the
war, but one crore and twenty-four lakhs for the service of women and children
appeared a big sum in the eyes of everybody. That gave only a measure of the
topsyturvydom to which they had got used.
Referring to the way in which the money was to be spent, Gandhiji divided it
into three heads. The first in order was medical relief for women and children in the
villages. From the schemes that had come everybody seemed to think in terms of
maternity homes and free hospitals for women and children. He recognized the need of
this kind of work but he frankly confessed that he had yet to feel his way to it. What
kind of medical institutions they were to have and what system of medicine they were
to adopt was a ticklish question. It was taxing his mind and he requested them all to
give their serious attention to it. So far as he was concerned, “prevention is better
than cure” was his motto. If he had his way he would make sanitation and hygiene
work the principal activity under this head. It did not matter if in doing so they had to
exclude a certain class of hard and difficult cases. Some of the patients might even die.
He could steel his heart to lose them. But it broke his heart to see even one
healthyman fall sick.Our village folk must be taught to look after their health. The
root causes were poverty and ignorance. In order of importance these two came first.
Education was to be along the lines of Nayee Talim. As a matter of fact,
everything else was included in and was an essential part of Nayee Talim as he
conceived its scope.
They had to better their economic condition through khadi and village
industries. Today, the sole occupation of woman amongst us was supposed to be to
bear children, cook for her husband and otherwise drudge for the household. This was
a shame. Not only was woman condemned to domestic slavery, but when she went out
as a labourer to earn wages, though she worked harder than the man, she was paid less.
Children were forced to go to work at an early age. Some of them worked often as
much as the men but were paid even less than women. This state of affairs must be put
an end to. He had received no scheme for this kind of work so far. The children in the
villages began to earn at an early age. Their parents could not afford to send them to
school and spend on their education like the city folk. Their education should fit them
for some useful industry or other and it should help to put them on their legs.
The work outlined by him was original and difficult. There were very few men
fit to carry it out. Many of them even lacked the desire to train themselves for it. Such
men should not come on the Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Fund Committees
and if they were on them already they should resign and make way for others.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

383

At the end, he invited questions but appealed to the audience to spare. him as
far as possible. His energy was limited. He observed silence, he told them, practically
for the whole day these days from 3.15 a.m. to 8.15 p. m. He broke it for a short time
during the meeting days.
A friend asked what should be considered the maximum population of a
village. Gandhiji replied that for the present he would set the outside limit at 2,000.
This was subject to adjustments later on. He knew an overwhelming majority of
villages in India had a population between 500 and 1,000 or even less. He would like
them to begin with the smallest village and then work upwards. He knew of some
villages in Gujarat which were miniature towns. Rich towns folk had gone and settled
there with their wealth. The money of the Fund was not to be spent on such villages.
Q.

What means would you suggest for the economic-uplift of the villagers?

A.

True all-round uplift of the villages cannot but result in their
economic betterment. Except maternity work, all the other items
outlined by me would directly result in their economic uplift as well.
Q.

If you were in charge of a district how would you set about the

work?
A. A district is too big a bite for me. If I can successfully
organize work in one village I would be satisfied. It will serve as a
model for the rest of the seven lakhs of villages to follow. We have not
set about village work in right earnest so far. We have only tinkered
with it here and there amateurishly. I myself was an amateur. But now
we are determined to do better.
Q. Some people engage in constructive work only as a side line to their
political work. The result is that they can do justice to neither. There should be proper
supervision to prevent it.

A. I entirely agree that constructive work and political work
should not be mixed. To me constructive work done properly is all
sufficient. It leaves no necessity for any other programme. As for
supervision, there is the old man who is your Secretary and the young
woman, the Organizing Secretary of the Trust—I mean Thakkar Bapa
and Mridulabehn.
Q. Today the Provincial Committees have an overwhelming majority of men.
In how much time do you hope to be able to replace them by women?
A. I would, if I could, turn out all the men today and myself

follow suit. But I would take women on their merit, not merely
because they were women. If we could find suitable workers I would
certainly wish to spend the money in our hands fairly fast. Anyway, I
do hope and expect that by the time the present fund is expended,
women would have become capable of managing their own affairs.
Q.

384

If you do not find suitable women workers, why should not the Fund be used
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to train them up?
A. That is exactly our object and it is for that purpose that you
are all here. But everything must be done in a way befitting the
memory of her in whose name the Fund has been collected.
Q. What is to be done in a province like Sind where it is too unsafe for any
woman to venture out and work in the villages?

A. So long as women do not come forward, it goes without
saying that men have to work in their place. But I have no doubt that
you should be able to find women to go to work in the villages.
Muslim women at any rate should have nothing to fear in Sind.
Anyway the worst that can happen to a woman is that she might lose
her life. I am convinced that no one can molest a woman if she has the
determination and will to resist and is not afraid of dying. I know of a
young missionary girl who went all alone in the midst of Negroes
inthe wilds of Africa. Yet she was not afraid and no one ever cast an
evil eye on her. We have such women amongst us also. One of them
was with me only two days ago. She went to Dacca all alone when
Hindus and Muslims had run amok. No one dared to touch her. To
enable women to shed their cowardice and to face danger undaunted
should in fact be one of the results of our activity under the Kasturba
Gandhi National Memorial Fund scheme.
Q. If we take up work just in one village the pressure of the surrounding area
would swamp our work. We can’t make any headway unless we tackle the whole area at
once.

A. My experience is different. If we put off taking a necessary
step till everyone else is ready for it we shall never make a move on.
We must have the courage to take the plunge even if we are all alone.
There are certain difficulties in the way but we have to overcome
them. Many of the difficulties that deter us are imaginary. For
instance, no one hinders my work here in Sevagram.
If I can only move the hearts of the people of Sevagram that is
all that I need to do. If we cannot succeed in one village we cannot
possibly do so in a hundred. Even if we can get a certain law passed
by the State, who is going to enforce it in the villages unless there is
awakening among the people themselves. For that we have to begin
with one village and then extend our field farther and farther.
Q. Those that are already doing constructive work are being drafted for work
under the Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Fund. There are no new workers
forthcoming. In order to do justice to the Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Fund
work those who take up work under the Trust should not be burdened with other
preoccupations.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

385

A. It is true that for many years we have not been able to draw
sufficient fresh workers but Mridulabehn tells me that there is no
dearth of women workers, if only the men folk remove the
stranglehold. I have told her that I would take her side and help her to
produce as many women workers as she can.
Q. Many people who have collected large amounts for the Fund or have
contributed substantially to it want to be included in the Provincial Committees.
Should we take them on?

A. The golden rule is that collecting money or contributing
money should neither qualify nor disqualify a man from becoming a
member of the Provincial Committee if he is otherwise fitted for it.But
if anyone thinks that he has a right to be on the committee because of
what he has contributed or collected, such a claim cannot be
entertained and he should be excluded. We must not have unwieldy
bodies and we must not draw men who are already engaged in one
sphere of work into another. There are some men who are good at
parliamentary work. I would not like them to be stigmatized for it. But
if they leave it for something for which they have no aptitude merely
because it is the fashion of the hour, I would take them to task for it
just as I would take them to task if they sought to advance their
parliamentary ambitions under cover of constructive work.
Q. The custom of slavery of women is still prevalent in some States. Can’t the
Fund be used to do something for them? Anyone who tries to help these women is
clapped into prison under trumped-up charges.
A. Send these women to me and I shall look after them. They

can all perform an exodus from the States where their elementary
rights are denied.
The Hitavada, 20-2-1945

656. LETTER TO MRIDULA SARABHAI
February 16, 1945
CHI. MRIDULA,

Since I have nothing to say now, I wish to take advantage of
the freedom I have secured. Tomorrow we shall be meeting at
Sevagram, shan’t we ? My presence in Durgabehn’s room between 3
and 4.30 should be sufficient. But if Bapa and others wish something
else, please let me know. The Mandal can meet for a longer time and
carry on routine business.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the original : C.W. 11231. Courtesy : Sarabhai Foundation

386

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

657. LETTER TO LAKSHMINARAYAN
S EVAGRAM ,

February 16, 1945
BHAI LAKSHMI BABU,

We cannot accept even one of the three conditions even though
we concede that the speech was provocative. The constructive
programme of today has nothing to do with any movement such as
that of 1942. Even if we are opposed to the violent activities of Shri
Jayaprakash, we cannot accept any of the three conditions. In other
words, we shall not get those things done by coercion. If freedom of
India is common cause between us and the Government, why this
discrimination ? The truth of the matter is that the Bihar government
has committed a mistake in arresting people1 and instead of admitting
the mistake, it wants to throw the responsibility on us. We shall not
accept that responsibility even if they destroy us. Even if they seek to
prevent us from carrying on our peaceful work, we shall march ahead.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

658. LETTER TO BALVANT SINHA
February 16, 1945
CHI. BALVANT SINHA,

I am not going to Delhi. I shall have to go to Bombay, and that
too towards the end of March.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1952

1

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 17-2-1945.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

387

659. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 16, 1945
(1) Do not give up your work among the children. It will be a
test of your understanding of Nayee Talim
(2) You are not dull but slow. The reason evidently is that you
have not done much thinking or useful reading. You have to come
out of yourself, and get immersed in your work. That is to say, you
must put in the reading required to attain perfection in it.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4476

660. LETTER TO SHARDA G. CHOKHAWALA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 17, 1945
CHI. BABUDI,

I read Gordhandas’s letter. Since Anand is very ill Shakaribehn
is going there. She has been crying. Let her come. I do hope that
Anand will get well. Neither you nor Gordhandas should worry.
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: C.W. 10053. Courtesy: Sharda G. Chokhawala

661. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 17, 1945
When it is closely woven, it is beautiful. And then it is straight.
The first roll is not normally straight and is close in some places and
loose in other places, because the cross threads are not straight and
even.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4477

388

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

662. STATEMENT TO THE PRESS
WARDHA ,

February 17, 1945
I have delayed giving my opinion on the Bihar Government’s
challenge to Congress workers 1 in the hope that the storm was an
isolated mistake and that it will correct itself. I find I was mistaken.On
top of the happenings in Bihar comes news that Shri Purushottamdas
Tandon has been rearrested. The workers in Bihar are well known, and
of them one is an ex-Prime Minister and another is ex-Finance
Minister. Tandonji is the Speaker of the U. P. Assembly. Now comes
news that Shri Gopabandhu Chowdhury of Orissa, equally well known
too, has been rearrested.
This is one picture. The other is, the Viceroy holds talks with Sjt.
Bhulabhai Desai. The air is thick with rumours of big changes. The
rumour hardly squares with the news I have summarized and which
the public knows already.
Congressmen in Bihar were busy devising concerted measures to
give effect to the fifteen-point constructive programme sketched by
me and in a manner suggested by me when the principal men were
arrested though the programme has no political fIavour, using the
term politics in its understood sense. I have not hesitated to say that
the universal adoption in practice in India of the programme must
lead to the attainment of complete independence without either civil
non-violent disobedience or even a parliamentary programme. There
would then be no necessity for either. The British would not find it
worth while to stay in India to rule. They would stay, if they do, as full
citizens. In the language of 1942, as rulers they would quit India; for
their soldiers would be without occupation, their huge industries
without use. That day may not come, but it should be the non-violent
soldier’s dream which he must try daily to realize and if in its pursuit
he is thwarted, he has his non-violent resistance to fall back upon,
otherwise called civil disobedience and non-co-operation. Mass civil
disobedience is nobody’s responsibility except, as yet, mine. It was
not offered in 1942. Nobody who has not permeated the masses can
1

On January 28, 1945, the Bihar Government interned Srikrishna Sinha,
ex-Premier, Bihar, Anugraha Narayan Sinha, ex-Finance Minister, Prof. Abdul
Bari, Dy. Speaker, Bihar Legislative Assembly, Murli Manohar Prasad, Editor,
Searchlight, and Prajapati Mishra on the charge of open preparation for another
struggle.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

389

shoulder it. Indeed, the masses simply will not move. That is my
conviction based on the experience I have gained. Hitherto the action
in Bihar is defended on the ground of an alleged speech by Shri
Prajapati Mishra. The text of that speech has been suppressed.
There is no question of his or any Congressman making
exciting speeches in the prosecution of the constructive programme or
about non-violent resistance or much less about resorting to violence
or even approving of it. That there is no plan under the present
conditions to offer any form of mass civil disobedience has been
clearly stated by me and I know that Congressmen all over the
country are acting on the advice I have offered. But abstention even
from referring to the theoretical possibility of resistance and the like
cannot be forced or even made a condition of prosecuting
theconstructive programme. It has undoubtedly independence—
political, social and economic—as its aim. It is a moral non-violent
revolution in all the departments of life of a big nation, at the end of
which caste and untouchability and such other superstitions must
vanish, differences between Hindu and Muslim must become things of
the past, enmity against Englishmen or Europeans must be wholly
forgotten and Princes and capitalists must live as perfect friends with
the whole mass of India as the real and legal trustees of the people for
all the wealth they may possess. Is there anything wrong in the
attempt? What are Government protestations about Indian
independence if they will not tolerate the movement I have sketched
except on conditions impossible of acceptance? Are they not satisfied
with the extraordinary power they possess? Must they keep without
trial the best known as well as the least known Indians in their custody,
lest the latter should preach independence from one end of the
country to the other and non-violent acts in pursuit thereof? Must
they rearrest released persons the moment they speak and act as free
men, if their speech or act does not please the authority?
Another painful experience I am undergoing which I must share
with the public is the number of reports of assault and torture resorted
to for purposes of extorting confessions from prisoners. Some cases
are already before the public, such as the notable one at Kolhapur. 1
Many other instances of comparatively recent occurrence have been
brought to my notice. One particular case I have in mind related to a
young lad who, on my advice, gave himself up to the police because
he had been wanted. If some of the reports that one hears are not well
1
It was alleged that Kashibai Hanbar was stripped and tortured by a police
officer of Kolhapur State to extract information about her son who was declared a
political absconder.

390

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

founded, I am satisfied several others are perfectly genuine. Is it not
time this practice of torture and ill-treatment of people held in
captivity is firmly discountenanced and put an end to by the powers
that be?
In August 1942, instead of needlessly precipitating a quarrel
with the people, if the authority had listened to the pleading of the
Congress, India would have enjoyed independence and the war would
have already ended with honour for the Allies and happiness for the
suppressed peoples of the earth. That is my retrospection. If things go
on as they are doing in India, the victory that the Allies will have will
be only so called, because they will also have India and other nations
in the same plight bleeding at their feet. Such a victory can only lead
in the near future to a bloodier war if possible than the one that will
have closed. For, as I have said elsewhere, victory won at the expense
of India will mean that, out of the ashes of Fascism, Nazism and
Japanese militarism will have risen a new monster that will seek to eat
all it sees and in the attempt will be eaten up, leaving I know not what.
It has given me no pleasure to pen this statement. There is much
more I can say but I shall say no more for the present.
The Hindu, 19-2-1945

663. FOREWORD TO “AMARAN BA”1
Narahari Parikh is one of those who joined the Satyagraha
Ashram when it was first founded at Kochrab. Whatever, therefore,
Chi. Vanamala has learnt, she has learnt at the Ashram. She is
untouched by any Government school and the education imparted
there. It can therefore be said that she knows how to work hard. She
has however gone out to collect material for Kasturba’s biography. In
this she has also secured contributions from others. Up to the time of
writing I have not been able to look at these. It was Chi. Vanamala’s
wish that I should go through what she has written. Poor girl, she
would write about Kasturba but how could she forget me, with whom
she romped around and played as a child? I see she has painstakingly
collected her facts and ordered them neatly. Her language is homely
and simple. I see no artificiality in it. Whether Chi. Vanamala has been
successful in this her first effort is solely for the readers to judge.
Chi. Sushilabehn, sister of Chi. Pyarelal, has written about Ba’s
1

This is also available as a draft under C.W. 3069 and G.N. 5946 under the date
December 3, 1944, and bears the following note by Gandhiji: “I have not revised the
above. This should be sent only if Narahari passes it. In any case Vanamala must pass
it.”
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

391

experiences in jail. Chi. Vanamala thought of taking something from
this. But on reading Sushilabehn’s account she found that
Sushilabehn’s writing had a natural flow which she could not disturb.
The original is in Hindi and its Gujarati translation is reproduced
in this collection. Sushilabehn after all holds a doctor’s degree. She
has besides an interest in vocal and instrumental music, painting
andliterature. She takes interest in public affairs too. The late
Mahadev noticed these qualities of her and took a keen interest in
them. But he has departed from us. His life is ended. Readers should
keep this in mind when they read Sushilabehn’s article.
So much for the authors.
But they both assert that if I myself do not say something about
Ba the work will remain incomplete. Since I am writing this foreword
to the book perhaps it will be appropriate if I say something about Ba.
I certainly intend to write more fully about Ba when I have the time.
Here I shall only answer the question, if I can, why Ba was able to
attract people to her. Ba’s chief virtue was her voluntary identification
of herself with me. I did not draw her forth. The quality blossomed in
Ba on its own when the time came. I never knew that Ba had this thing
hidden in her. My earlier experience showed her a very stubborn
person. If I tried to compel her in any way she would do exactly what
she herself wanted. This led to bitterness between us—short or
prolonged. But as my public life gradually developed, Ba blossomed
more and more and freely merged herself in me, that is, in my work.
In time no distinction remained between me and my work—which was
service. Ba too became one with that work. This quality perhaps most
naturally arises from the Indian soil. At least that seems to me the
chief reason for Ba’s sentiments.
The reason why this virtue reached its pinnacle in Ba is to be
found in our brahmacharya. It came more naturally to Ba than to me.
In the beginning Ba was not even aware of it. The idea came to me
and Ba took it up and made it her own. In the result the relationship
between us was as one between true friends. Since 1906—in fact since
1901—all the time Ba was with me, she had nothing outside of my
work. She could have lived apart. There would have been no difficulty
in her living apart from me. But being a friend she yet considered it
her duty as a woman and a wife to merge herself in my work. Ba gave
the paramount place to the service of my person and till death never
ceased from the task of attending on me.
M. K. GANDHI
S EVAGRAM , February 18, 1945

[From Gujarati]
392

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

664. LETTER TO ARUN CHANDRA GUHA
February 18, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,

I duly received a khadi chadar1 whose yarn was spun by you.
For this many thanks.
Yours,

M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat: G.N. 8672

665. LETTER TO SUMITRA GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 18, 1945
CHI. SUMI,

I will not say that you wrote the letter; Nimu did it because you
wrote it at her instance. What is the point in writing a letter unless you
are prompted by the heart? If you are happy why should I need any
letters from you? When I get the urge I shall write to you without
waiting for a letter from you.
Blessings from

BAPU
S UMITRA GANDHI
P ILANI
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

666. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
S EVAGRAM ,

February 18, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I got your note today. I tasted the wheat [dalia]. I find a great
difference between wheat and jowar [dalia]. I stick to what I have said
about the latter. The wheat dalia didn’t seem half cooked. You may
certainly add jaggery to jowar ghensh or raab. The jaggery should be
added only after the ghensh or the raab is ready and is being
1

Shawl

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

393

removed from the fire.
I follow what you say about the Gita. If you do not know the
rules about where the stress should fall, learn them from somebody.
Pyarelal and Sushila know them. For correct pronunciation, it is
absolutely necessary to learn to read fast. Without that the tongue does
not move smoothly. Don’t suppose that your voice can never
improve. If you don’t know the story about Demosthenes, ask
Pyarelal. If you do not follow it, ask me.
About rotlis it is like this. One great disadvantage of folding
them is that they do not then require to be properly chewed. Crisp
rotlis are preferable. It should be made a regular practice to serve a
fixed quantity to everybody.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8461. Also C.W. 5569. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

667. NOTE TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA1
[February 18, 1945] 2
We are sure to meet in April. Ask Gulbehn3 to continue to write
till then. Kisses to Ardeshir.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8461. Also C.W. 5569. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

668. LETTER TO BABA MOGHE
S EVAGRAM ,

February 18, 1945
BHAI BABA,

I have just read your letter. In my view your decision is faulty.
In my view it would be wrong for you to go to Khandesh now. Your
duty is to improve your body. If the body is the temple of God it is
sacred. Spinning should not be taken literally; its implications should
1

This is written in the margin to the letter to Munnalal G. Shah dated February
18; vide the preceding item. From the contents it is obvious that this must have been
addressed to Dinshaw K. Mehta.
2
ibid
3
Addressee’s wife

394

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

be understood. This is my view. If this does not appeal to you, you are
entitled to your view.
What I said on your return was only a joke.
Blessings from

BAPU
C/ O PRABHAKAR
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 9020

669. LETTER TO J. C. KUMARAPPA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 19, 1945
MY DEAR KU.,

You can have the meeting on the date mentioned. I have not
commenced the foreword or whatever you call it. I will return the
book as soon as I am ready. It is good you have not to go to Bombay
in March.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 10171

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

395

670. LETTER TO GULZARILAL NANDA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 19, 1945
CHI. GULZARILAL,

I can say that I have carefully read your letter to Narahari and
the papers enclosed with it.
The English pamphlet contains comments and suggestions. Go
through it. Revise where necessary. Reject anything I say if it does not
appeal to your heart or mind.
How and when did the system of arbitration come to be
discontinued? However it be, if it is necessary to fight for it, you must
do so. Estimate your strength. Consult Dada Mavalankar about it.
Maybe you have already done that. If you want I am prepared to write
about this to Kasturbhai1 and the other mill-owners.
I understood that the necessary figure was reached with the
release of Profulla Babu.
My health is not so bad that I cannot attend to the urgent work
that daily comes up. It is true that I continue to observe silence. I do
most of my work through writing. It is no trouble.
I hope you are well. How are Shankerlal and Anasuyabehn?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

671. LETTER TO KANTA R. VYAS
February 19, 1945
CHI. KANTA,

I think of you often. Only today I have come to know that you
have not been keeping good health. I did not like letting you leave
this place but I was helpless. May God protect you and your child.
Write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
KANTA R AMPRASAD VYAS
DOHAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

396

Kasturbhai Lalbhai of the Lalbhai Group of Mills
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

672. LETTER TO BALBHADRA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 19, 1945
BHAI BALBHADRA,

I have your postcard. It is good that you wrote. Of course
Satyavatibehn has my blessings. Let us see what happens now. Keep
me informed. Chand is well.
Blessings from

BAPU
BALBHADRA
6 P YARELAL BUILDING
KASHMIRI GATE
DELHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

673. INTERVIEW TO N.W.F.P. DEPUTATION1
[February 19, 1945] 2
Gandhiji told the deputation that whatever might be the case with other
provinces, he was firmly of opinion that in the Frontier Province Congressmen
should form an alternative Ministry if the no-confidence motion was successful. They
could make their full contribution to the struggle for freedom without creating a
deadlock. He would have asked them—and all Congressmen—to withdraw from the
Assembly and resort to total non-co-operation if they had made greater progress in
non-violence than he judged they had. As things stood, such a course was fraught with
grave risk. There was no atmosphere for it. They could, therefore, go ahead with the
no-confidence motion and form a Congress Ministry.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book I, p. 122

1

A deputation from the Frontier Province, headed by Mehar Chand Khanna,
came to Sevagram and told Gandhiji that a majority of the members were ready to
support a no-confidence motion against the Aurangzeb Khan Ministry. The Governor
had promised that he would allow the no-confidence motion to be brought in if Dr.
Khan Saheb was prepared to form an alternative Ministry.
2
From The Hindu, 21-2-1945
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

397

674. TELEGRAM TO AMTUSSALAAM
Express

February 20, 1945

AMTULSALAAM
KASTURBA S EVA MANDIR
BARKANTHA
BLESSINGS.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

675. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
MY DEAR C. R.,

As D. 1 is going to you I send you this love letter. With this
intention I went to the bathroom and P. put yours in my hands. I
know you thoroughly. I know you are not touched by what the crowd
says or does not about you. We two must go on as we are till we see
alike. That is what real love demands. Keep well.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2101

676. LETTER TO LAJ RALLIA RAM
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
MY DEAR LAJ,

I was pleased to have your letter. Are you the daughter of the
Rallia Ram I know? You have made a fine choice or has Yunus?
I know about Mehrtaj2 .
I am glad Yunus is with Badshah Khan3 . I am writing to Yunus.
Love.
BAPU
KUMARI LAJ R ALLIA R AM
5 M ASSON R D.
LAHORE
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
2
3

398

Devdas Gandhi
Daughter of Abdul Ghaffar Khan
Abdul Ghaffar Khan
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

677. LETTER TO MOHAMMAD YUNUS
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
MY DEAR YUNUS,

This is to greet you and to express my pleasure at your
engagement. Laj writes to me about you and Mehrtaj. Hope you are
well and so is Badshah Khan. Do come when you are married, i. e.,
when you are free.
Love.
BAPU
MOHAMMAD YUNUS
C ENTRAL JAIL
HARIPUR
HAZARA
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

678. LETTER TO BHULABHAI J. DESAI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
BHAI BHULABHAI,

Devdas has talked to me fully. He will report to you in detail.
Liaquat Saheb’s performances and things going on in the country
frighten me. 1 They should frighten you too. Do what is just and
proper. It does not matter if the thing fizzles out.2 Once the consent of
the Working Committee is obtained, the form you want to give it shall
be all right. Your English should harmonize with my Gujarati. Don’t
you agree?
Blessings from

BAPU
From the Gujarati original: Bhulabhai Desai Papers. Courtesy: Nehru
Memorial Museum and Library

1

Vide “Statement to the Press”, 17-2-1945.
Earlier, Gandhiji had remarked in the course of his talks with a friend:
“Arrests have again started and that is a bad sign. Bhulabhai must take a firm line and
tell the Viceroy that this will not do.”
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

399

679. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
CHI. NARANDAS,

Your statement is good. Yes, organize a camp. Everybody must
pay the full amount, and that in advance. That is what was done here.
Those who cannot pay may not come. Don’t mind that. If such
persons have influence with anybody in their areas, the latter may
send the money. If you permit outsiders to join, they will feel
uncomfortable. If any such persons turn up though not invited
through a notice, consider at that time what to do. You have not sent
the conditions, etc., to be fulfilled by the candidates. I should like to
see them. Bhai Kher1 is undoubtedly a priceless jewel. If your body
cannot stand the strain do not take a leading part.
Prabhu2 still keeps indifferent health. He is going to Nagpur
tomorrow to get himself examined. He should, therefore, be spared at
present. Kanaiyo3 is busy trying to finish his own work. The speeches
made are to be printed. I have also suggested to him that he should
take charge of the kitchen here. He will be involved in that, too. It will,
therefore, be difficult for him to go there in the immediate future. If a
camp is started, I assume that Khersaheb will spend a month there.
Show the statement to him before printing it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8619. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

680. LETTER TO KANTILAL GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
CHI. KANTI,

I got your letter. You should follow my advice. I had not
expected that the expenses incurred on you and Lilavati would come
1
2
3

400

B. G. Kher, ex-Premier of Bombay
Addressee’s nephew Prabhudas Gandhi
Addressee’s son Kanu Gandhi
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

to as much as they do.1 But what even if I had known? I am confident
that you will prove your worth. If you do I shall be happy.
There are many other instances like the two you have
mentioned. There is no limit to my disappointments. But “a ray of
immortal hope lies hidden among hundreds and thousands of
disappointments”. 2 And so I am still sanguine in spite of the
disappointments. There may be more in store.
Whether or not what you write about Kanu and Narayan is
correct, only experience will show. I don’t cling to that hope, either.
What if they too decide to go in for modern education? I am prepared
for all that. It will be enough for me if I myself am not carried away.
Go on doing your work without worrying. If Kanu wishes to go there,
I am certainly not going to stop him. Blessings to you all.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS]
Ramachandran’s mother has come. Sundaram too is here.
Tomorrow they will all leave.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 7371. Courtesy: Kantilal Gandhi

681. LETTER TO RAMDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
CHI. RAMDAS,

The enclosed letter is for all of you to see and then pass on to
Sumi. How well written it is! Sita is making progress.
I have a letter from Sumi but I regard it as one from Nimu
because although in Sumi’s hand it was written at Nimu’s instance. 3
Sumi is bound to me by a promise. But being a child she has
forgotten about it. I have not a minute to spare or I should have
written separately to her. I have Kanam’s letter. I don’t have the time
to write to him separately. Dr. Mahmud has fever. Kanam should write
to him.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1

The two had taken up a university course in medicine.
A quotation from Manibhai Nabubhai Dwivedi
3
Vide “Letter to Sumitra Gandhi”, 18-2-1945.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

401

682. LETTER TO DINSHAW K. MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
CHI. DINSHAW,

Of course I could see your unhappiness. But Sushilabehn made
me realize that you were even more unhappy than I had thought.
There is no cause for it. Nothing has been spoilt. The matter has been
talked out, which is only to the good. We have got to look for the
land. All that has happened is that the matter has been somewhat
delayed. We are meeting in Bombay. If our talks there are doomed to
break down let it be so. We don’t want to keep anyone by force. And
would a forced association bring credit? It is a stupendous task. I am
not at all scared even though it is mainly my work. What you have
created will of course go on. I am not so much interested in it. But I
am certainly interested in what is being done in Andhra, because it
islike village work. Now I learn that even that has defects. But if the
finding is correct it is a great discovery. I don’t like your drawing
conclusions so hastily. If you persist in it you will not be able to
achieve anything great. Certainly you will not be able to serve the
villages.
Please bear in mind that as from today you are in possession of
the Sevagram land. It is not to be thrown away. That experiment is to
be conducted directly under my supervision. You should understand
the work being done and bring credit to it. Only then can you be said
to have made an advance. However, for this you will have to take to
simplicity.
I think the Bangalore venture is no good. We must not break up
our establishment in Poona. It is impossible to build up in Bangalore
without breaking up in Poona. Gulbai must write to me.
Blessings from

BAPU
DR. D INSHAW MEHTA
TODDYWALLAH R OAD
P OONA
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

402

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

683. LETTER TO P. C. GHOSH
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
CHI. PROFULLA,

I have your letter. Get well. I shall not send for Bibi A[mtul]
S[alaam] unless you all relieve her. It is your duty not to detain her
longer than it is necessary.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

684. LETTER TO MAHADEV A. HINGORANI
February 20, 1945
CHI. MAHADEV,

I was glad to read your letter. There are some mistakes in it.
1
2
Never mind. It is not
but
and not
but
. It is good to
3
read Jap Saheb at night. I have seen your photograph. I wrote my
blessing on it too.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS]
Your legs have no muscles. Do some exercise. You seem to be
weak.
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

1

Examination
Health
3
The introductory chapter of Japji, a Sikh scripture, which is a condensation
of the Granth Saheb
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

403

685. LETTER TO AMTUSSALAAM
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
DAUGHTER A. S.,

Your letter. I am sending the telegram. Sir Nazimuddin is quite
right, isn’t he, when he says that he will carry out the orders of those
above him.1 Whatever has been left out is immaterial, because there is
no room for it now. It is for him to say: “Gandhi is my friend and I
want to invite him. Will there be any objection from your side? If he
goes to Midnapur or Chittagong, I shall let him go.” This is how he
should put the matter.
You have to be there for the time being. Come here when things
there are cleared up. Speak to Bhagirathji and P. Babu2 . You can think
of leaving Bengal only when they permit.
I cannot write to Kanchan today.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 491

686. LETTER TO CHANDI PRASAD VAIDYA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
BHAI CHANDIPRASAD,

Chi. Balkrishna showed me your letter. He is getting a bit fed up
with milk. He fasted. He will perhaps lose some weight also. Come if
you have faith. B. K. is going on with it. He takes 7 lb. Of milk. Also
a few dates. Chi. Hari-ichchha’s condition has deteriorated. The
treatment has brought no improvement. Now I am sending her to
Nagpur for artificial pneumothorax. It would have been better if I had
sent her earlier.
Blessings from

BAPU
VAIDYARAJ C HANDIPRASAD
BIRLA MANDIR
NEW DELHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
2

404

Vide “Letter to Syed Mahmud”, 22-1-1945.
Profulla Chandra Ghosh
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

687. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 20, 1945
Shall I talk it over with Shantabehn? You did well in speaking
out frankly.
I do not wish to drag you into the management of the Ashram.
Carry on the work you are doing.
Do not simply glance through books. Think rather of what you
can get out of them.
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4478

688. LETTER TO SHRIRAM PODDAR
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
CHI. SHRIRAM1 ,

Your letter is clear enough.
Should I ask a person who is fond of drinking to drink? I shall
not suggest what you should do. Do what your heart prompts you to
do. Do not listen to your father, or to me or to anyone else. Follow
only the promptings of your heart. Perhaps in that alone lies your
good.
It is not at all necessary for you to come here. I shall however
say that when even the educated are resorting to artificial therapy who
is going to find fault with you?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: C.W. 812

689. TALK WITH DEVDAS GANDHI2
S EVAGRAM ,

February 20, 1945
I told Bapu that Sjt. Bhulabhai has received his letter regarding consultations
with the Working Committee members. I drew his attention to the fact that the above
was there in his Gujarati draft, but was not there in Bhulabhai’s latest English draft.
Bapu said that the Gujarati draft only could be considered correct because the English
version followed as an explanatory one.
1
2

Son of Rameshwardas Poddar
As reported by Devdas, Gandhiji’s fourth and youngest son

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

405

However Bapu’s independent opinion was that to meet and consult the
Working Committee should be considered as an inevitable condition to act upon.
QUESTION : But if the new government releases the Working
Committee immediately and at that time if the Working Committee is
free to give its independent opinion, and at present as prisoners if they
don’t give any opinion, will it not be more beneficial ?
ANSWER: No. In that case Bhulabhai will not be able to carry
public opinion with him. And also it will not be fair to the Working
Committee.
Q. If it is possible to meet the Working Committee, will you
accompany Bhulabhai or not ?
A. If Bhulabhai wishes so, I am prepared to go with him.
Q. Will you try to persuade the Working Committee to accept
this plan ?
A. Yes.
Q. What are your arguments in favour of this plan ?
A. If the League is prepared to work together with the
Congress in any way it is desirable. After the Bombay talks, Jinnah has
told many people that Gandhi did not even mention about the interim
government. Bhulabhai’s efforts are in themselves a reply to him. But
if the intentions of the League are not genuine, nothing will come out.
I am surprised at the Statement of Jinnah and Liaquat Khan. In case
Liaquat Khan has not even asked Jinnah, then it is a question how far
we can rely on Liaquat’s talks. Arrests have again started and that is a
bad sign. Now Bhulabhai must talk in a firm tone and tell the Viceroy
that this will not do.
Q. Do we keep aside the question of the Viceroy’s veto ?
A. Bhulabhai says that it is a question of procedure and I have
accepted it. However, it means that the Government will not act with
Viceroy’s veto against the vote of the Assembly.
Q. But if the Viceroy uses his veto and function ?
A. In that case there will be an understanding between
Bhulabhai and Liaquat that the Government will resign. Even now this
fact must be made perfectly clear between them.
Q. On the basis of 4-4-2 will you even include the nationalist
Muslims amongst the four of the Congress ?
A. No. But Bhulabhai should tell Liaquat that amongst his
four he should take nationalist Muslims.
Q. Hindu Mahasabha ?
A. Viceroy will create Hindu Mahasabha and other such
parties. But we are not accepting them. There are two parties—
Congress and League. Sikhs and Harijans, we have accepted as a
concession.
Q. Can we include persons like Shyamaprasad Mukherji
amongst the four ?

406

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

A. If Bhulabhai wants to take them, then I would not raise any
objection.
Q. If previous consultation with the Working Committee which
is in jail is essential, then why should not the Working Committee
members in jail form the Government ?
A. That time has not yet come. At present the talk is only
limited to Assembly members.
Q. But what about the Whites ?
A. The white, black, all-only those who are appointed by the
Congress and League can come, except the Commander-in-Chief.
Others will be responsible to them.
From a copy : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library.
Courtesy: Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

690. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
February 21, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

The programme on the 22nd 1 must be carried out. They have
already consulted me. The Gita and spinning in the morning is the
right thing, also the Ramayana. I have never believed, let alone saying,
any such thing about Kanchan as you attribute to me. I did explain to
you what I believed, and you have also accepted its truth. Kanchan
told Sushilabehn that she wants to live with you and have children. I
asked her on the very day she left and my impression is that she
admitted that it was so. If this is true, what you write is not correct. My
own view is that after having slept in the same bed with me once it was
wrong to discontinue it through ignorance. I did not know who
forbade her. I spoke neither to you nor to her about this. I am
mentioning this for the first time to you. This is all I wish to say.My
experiment, as you know, has been suspended. If any woman comes
to me now, she will do so not for the sake of my experiment but in
order to receive from me the spiritual strength I possess. I think I have
such strength, though I am not sure whether I am right or wrong in
my belief. I have no fear at all that I may take unworthy advantage of
anybody or violate my cherished vow.
You are wrong in believing that you are gaining nothing here.
But if such be your belief, now or later you must leave the Ashram.
To depend on servants for anything will be the fall of you both.
But we may engage for service a person whom we look upon as a
brother or sister, with the object of helping him or her to advance in
1

Kasturba Gandhi’s death anniversary

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

407

life. If he or she leaves us, we should do without him or her and carry
on our work as best as we can. I should welcome such a situation for
myself. We would then have neither money nor so-called servants, but
that would be a real test for us. I have already been tested in this
manner. I have been discussing this with Kanubhai and trying to
tempt him. If he can give us the benefit of his recent experience and
do something for us, all of you should welcome it.
I understand about the dalia. If you send some, I will examine
it. I am still of the view that jowar grain should not be ground coarse
and flour removed.
I think I have now said practically everything I wished to say.
Nor have I the time for more. If there is anything left out remind me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5833. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

691. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 21, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I did not talk to Shantabehn. I shall do so now for your sake. It
is as well that while living in the Ashram we do not get involved in
troubles. Do participate in the discussions. You have to do many other
things for the Ashram,
Do not buy books as long as you can manage with the books
from the Library. If books have to be bought it is another matter.
About the children we shall see.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4479

408

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

692. LETTER TO CHIMANLAL N. SHAH
February 22, 1945
CHI. CHIMANLAL,

From tomorrow morning I intend to stay for five days at
Madalasa’s place. May I go? Ask Munnalal, B. and others.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10617

693. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
February 22, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I understand about Kanchan. My judgment approves of her
opposition. For you have observed no limit in harassing her and now
you yourself tell her that from the social point of view your reason
does not approve of the thing. Kanchan is bound to interpret that you
are opposed. You also desire children, and that is why you cannot
regard either yourself or Kanchan fit for brahmacharya. You have
tested yourself much. I should advise you now to set up
house-separately so that both of you can be happy. If you give up the
thought of brahmacharya and live as a householder no harm will
follow. If you wish later to observe abstinence, you will be able to do
so. It seems to me that a separate establishment for you two and
brahmacharya go ill together. However, do what your heart bids. Chi.
Kanaiyo tells me that you like his suggestion. I have made a few
suggestions. For two days he is going to Wardha. When Sushila comes
from Nagpur, he will return here. Meanwhile, all of you may think
things over. In my absence you are bound to be under less pressure.
I understand about servants. In this matter also you should
regard my view only as a suggestion. You should do whatever all of
you like and think. About newspapers, Ramprasad tells me that these
days he himself gets them at half past one. It would be better if you
discussed the matter further with him. If you can take charge of the
newspapers, you may do so. I would not at all advise you, though, to
take it up. However, have a talk with Pyarelal.
My desire to run away from here also has at the back of it the
consideration of the convenience of you all. But we need not
think about this matter. If it is to happen it will happen in the natural
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

409

course. And then neither I nor you nor anybody else will be able to
stop it.
Are you satisfied now?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gajarati: C.W.
G. Shah

5831.

Courtesy: Munnalal

694. NOTE TO SHRIPAD JOSHI1
February 22, 1945
1. There is no need to make confessions to the Government or
anybody. One should certainly confess to friends. If reparation can be
made to those to whom damage was done, it should be made. The
institution in which they work should be informed. In specific cases
this advice can be modified.
2. I must say as to this I am doubtful. The above may be taken
to apply here too.
3. They can carry on constructive work on the above condition.
But if I am asked I shall still say that what they did was not right. It is
purely a moral question.
4. I am afraid we cannot stop them. Of course it would be good
if they kept out.
5. My answer is the same as above.
6. In a way it remains the duty of the Congress to secure their
release.
7. The critics have not read my statement carefully. I have
condemned the deeds not the doers. Violent acts have to be
1

The questions answered in this note were forwarded to Gandhiji by the
addressee in his letter of February 11. The questions were, briefly, as follows: (l)
Some constructive workers who had indulged in sabotage in 1942 have repented and
taken up constructive work. Is it the duty of such workers to volunteer confessions to
the police and be ready to accept punishment? Or should they confess only to their
friends and acquaintances? (2) Some say they had been carried away into doing what
they did and it is enough to regret it in their own hearts and get on with work. Will
this not be deceiving you? (3) Some say they had acted in the belief that what they
were doing was right and though the futility of it has become clear to them they see
no reason for regretting what they did. Can such workers take up constructive work?
(4) There are some people who have become too fond of violent activity. They think
if and when the people are ready for it, it should be taken up. Since that is not so

410

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

condemned. This should not be an obstacle to help being rendered to
the concerned families.
8. How can I stop ridicule? The best way to stop it is to ignore it.
If this is inadequate, ask again—but only if it seems inadequate
even after repeated readings.
M. K. GANDHI
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5232

.

695. NOTE TO ANAND T. HINGORANI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 22, 1945
(1) This pen belongs to Ba.1
(2) I like it but the question is how I can do it.2
(3) For you and Sarojini.3 She too is unhappy.
From a microfilm of the Hindi. Courtesy: National Archives of India and
Anand T. Hingorani

.

today they have to 1take to constructive work to reach the people. Can such people
be taken into organizations doing constructive work? (5) Some want to use
constructive work to mobilize people for violent revolution. Will they have a place
in such organizations? (6) Is it the duty of the Congress to try and secure release of
those convicted on charges of violence even if such people have not given up faith in
the ways of violence? (7) Some feel you were hasty in condemning acts of sabotage,
that you have in a way disowned workers who had indulged in these acts, with the
result that people have stopped giving help to their families. What do you have to
say? (8) Some so-called Gandhians in Maharashtra not only condemn violent
activities but even make fun of them which hurts the dignity of young men who were
involved in these activities. Would you not want to stop them being ridiculed?
1
The addressee explains that Gandhiji had selected one particular pen to
autograph for him a photograph of himself and Kasturba Gandhi.
2
The addressee had requested Gandhiji to translate into English the “Daily
Thoughts” he wrote for him.
3
The reference is to an appointment for talks.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

411

696. SPEECH AT PRAYER MEETING
S EVAGRAM ,

February 22, 1945
This day marks the end of a solar year since Ba’s departure
from the earth. According to the lunar calendar, the anniversary fell
on Mahashivaratri Day.1 This is no occasion for mourning. On the
contrary, it should be celebrated with the same joy as a day of birth. I
do not make much distinction between birth and death. The atman
has neither birth nor death. We loved Ba’s atman which is immortal.
We spend days like this outwardly in religious rites. We had 24
hours’ non-stop spinning. To me it was a religious observance. At
Balvant Sinha’s suggestion, we also have had the reading of the
Ramayana which lasted throughout the day. In the morning we
recited the Gita. But these outward acts do not satisfy us. We should
go through these rites with full consciousness and understanding and
invoke God. God is not somewhere up above or down below. He is in
our hearts. In fact He is everywhere. When scientists say that they can
create a vacuum, what they mean is that a vessel can be emptied of air
but something still remains. Physical scientists have discovered
thatthere is something subtler than air. Those with religious leanings
realize that God is everywhere and is witness to all our acts.
Yesterday, I said that we must first wipe out our sins. There was a
marriage celebration yesterday. Five minutes before [the function] I
went to inspect the latrine. It smelled. I found excreta uncovered. Is
this not a sign of our outer sin? We are guilty of a great error in
keeping the latrine thus. We might have committed other sins as well.
We have, therefore, to see that our latrines and kitchens are absolutely
clean. We have to see that the kitchen runs smoothly; we must ask why
we hurt one another, why the flies and mosquitoes breed. All these are
indicative of our sin. I have not yet succeeded in finding out the cause
of their growth but that does not absolve us of our sin.
On this sacred day we plied the charkha and observed many
other religious ceremonies. Now the test, whether we deserve to
undertake it or not, lies in the fact whether we observe cleanliness or
not. You may not call it a sin, only a shortcoming. But to me the two
are the same. We are punished for these sins not in the life to come
but in this very life. Viewed thus, life becomes simple and full of joy.

1

412

Vide “Speech at Sevagram”, 10-2-1945.
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I had a letter from Kanti. He has mentioned what two learned
persons said to him. One of them said that he did not consider
spinning to be a religious duty. If he span, it was because it had
become a convention to do so. It is obvious that spinning in imitation
of others cannot be termed a religious act. Such spinning will not win
us swaraj. We will win it only if we understand its science and
appreciate its potentiality. Spinners who spin imitatively and therefore
mechanically should not be found, of all places, in the Ashram.
Everyone here does not ply the charkha and I put up with it. I cannot
forbid those who spin just because others do. But I may as well tell
them that this is not going to help them achieve their aim.
The other learned person said that he-did not believe in prayer.
It is not his fault. The blame lies with us, for we, who believe in prayer,
do not make our prayers manifest in our lives and actions. He has
warned that those who have gathered round me are not all genuine
believers and that I am doomed to despair. But I do not find any
particular signs of despair in me. I do my duty and speak of it to
others. But if they do not care to act on it, it does not affect me. This
learned friend gives discourses on the Gita, attends the prayer but he
does so only because it is a convention.
If one’s mind wanders during prayer and does not lose itself in
meditation, it is clear that one does not fully participate in prayer not
withstanding the physical presence. There is in that case a conflict
between the body and the mind in which the mind is the winner. What
I mean to say is that if we consider this to be a sacred day then we
must with all our heart do all we can in the name of an old woman
who, though unlettered, was an embodiment of purity. Let all our
actions be sincere.
[From Hindi]
Bapuki Chhayamen, pp. 360-2

697. TELEGRAM TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
February [23] 1 , 1945
R T. H ON . S ASTRIAR
S WAGATAM
MYLAPORE, M ADRAS
YOURS
JAGADISAN’S 2
RECOVERY.
MUST
KEEP

POSTCARDS.
THANK
YOUR
RESOLUTION.
LOVE.

GOD

YOUR

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
2

The source has “24”, obviously a slip; vide the following item.
T. N. Jagadisan

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

413

698. LETTER TO V. S. SRINIVASA SASTRI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 23, 1945
DEAR BROTHER,

I never read newspapers. Pyarelal reads extracts. Someone did
say yesterday that an accident had happened. Hardly had I time to see
what it [was when] I got your most thoughtful p. c. and one from
Jagadisan to Sushila. I have wired. This is to confirm and to beseech
you to keep to your promise. You can’t afford to give your voice to
the public. Your written word should satisfy them.
Love.
LITTLE BROTHER
R T. H ON . V. S. S. S ASTRIAR
S WAGATAM
MYLAPORE, M ADRAS
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

699. LETTER TO RATHINDRANATH TAGORE
February 23, 1945
MY DEAR RATHI,

I hope the money matter is entirely fixed up.
Love.
BAPU
S HRI R ATHINDRANATH TAGORE
S ANTINIKETAN P. O.
BENGAL
From C.W. 10519. Courtesy: Visva-Bharati

700. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
WARDHA ,

February 23, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I find even five days away from the Ashram too much.
Gurbuxani and Vimalabehn seem to me to be real jewels. The
latter has resigned her post in the school where she was teaching. She
is ready to take up everything gladly. Only we should know how to
414

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

deal with her gently, i. e., in the spirit of ahimsa.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8460. Also C.W. 5570. Courtesy:
Munnalal G. Shah

701. LETTER TO KISHORELAL G. MASHRUWALA
WARDHA ,

February 23, 1945
CHI. KISHORELAL,

I have been worrying ever since you fell ill. Both of you should
think over the matter. I think both of you can be cured with treatment.
The first thing is sufficient rest, some nature cure treatment and
proper yogic exercises. Hip-bath plays a very important role in
treatment. Try it.
Blessings from

BAPU
K. M ASHRUWALA
ASHRAM
S EVAGRAM
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

702. LETTER TO NARAHARI D. PARIKH
WARDHA ,

February 23, 1945
CHI. NARAHARI,

I understand about Anand Hingorani. I think he is a very
straightforward man. He will write anything you say. He will do what
we say. I have known him from his childhood. He has also worked for
Young India.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Gujarati : Pyarelal Papers. Nehru Memorial Museum and
Library. Courtesy : Beladevi Nayyar and Dr. Sushila Nayyar

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

415

703. LETTER TO JAGGANNATH
WARDHA ,

February 23, 1945
BHAI JAGANNATH,

I have your letter. You are sure to do well. What do you get
now?
Something might be possible if I see the girls, I shall consult
Sushilabehn. The girls should write to me. What does the eldest boy
do? He should write to me. Write to me in the Devanagari or the
Persian script.
Blessings from

BAPU
JAGANNATH
C LOTH MILLS
DELHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

704. LETTER TO BALVANT SINHA
February 23, 1945
CHI. BALVANT SINHA,

I have started with Chi. Ki. since yesterday. Let us see what
happens.
You have to do your duty by reflecting on the nine ways of
bhakti1 . Lavatories and kitchen are crucial to our lives. The rest
follows if we look after these too.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1953

1

Namely, hearing, reciting, remembering, waiting upon, worshipping, doing
obeisance, serving, companionship and surrendering

416

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

705. LETTER TO SHIV SHARMA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 23, 1945
BHAI SHIV SHARMA,

It appears Hari-ichchha is nearing her end. Today I sent her to
Dr. David. He says her lungs are no longer fit for artificial
pneumothorax. Her condition was not so bad at the time she was put
under your treatment. On top of your medicine Chandi Prasad made
her take a lot of milk. Her condition further deteriorated. Now a rib
may have to be removed. Perhaps Hari-ichchha does not have the
patience required for this treatment. This is the position. Do you have
any treatment to suggest? I hope you are all right now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

706. LETTER TO MEGHADEVI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 23, 1945
CHI. MEGHADEVI,

I heard about your illness. Shri Ishwar D. has written to me. You
must not lose heart. Even incurable diseases are cured. If you are
destined to live, your illness is bound to go. And even if it does not,
what does it matter? Life and death are not in our hands, are they? Be
cheerful. Reassure your elders too.
Blessings from

BAPU
KUMARI MEGHADEVI
C/ O S ETH R AMKISHORE
DEHRA DUN , U. P.
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

417

707. A NOTE
February 24, 1945
With women men should behave as they would with men. Two
men would not deliberately embrace or kiss each other, or sleep
together. But if there is a reason, one man would touch another, sit by
his side, or sit on the same seat. We must behave with women in the
same manner. We must forget the distinction of sex as far as possible.
There is distinction between men and women but it should have no
place in our normal dealings. The consciousness of this distinction
arises either in the case of carnal desire or outside it in that of a
genuine desire for progeny. Let us forget this second category.
Probably one in a million may be resorting to intercourse for
purposes of procreation. I have not come across any such person so
far. I do not consider association with women or keeping away from
them in conformity with the conventional restraints of brahmacharya
asrealbrahmacharya. My relationships are covered by this
explanation. Whatever you may hear to the contrary must be rejected
offhand. Think of this instead of being curious about my relationships.
BAPU1
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5850

708. LETTER TO SITA GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 24, 1945
CHI. SITA,

I have your letter. You draw your matras 2 too long, as I illustrate
with js here. Draw them as I do or if you must have a knot at the end
make it very small. Consult your teacher. It will be very hot by 20th
April and hotter still in May. I don’t know where I shall be then. I
should like you to spend the hot season in a cool place. I am very
happy that you are getting along nicely.

1
The following instruction is added to the note: “Make a copy of this and pass
it on to Baba Moghe.”
2
Marks over letters to indicate the vowel sounds ‘e’ or ‘o’.

418

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I have come to Madalasabehn’s to spend five days. Blessings to
all.
Blessings from

BAPU
S ITA GANDHI
AKOLA
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

709. LETTER TO HARSHADA DIWANJI
February 24, 1945
DEAR SISTER,

I received yesterday the packet containing the skein of yarn and the
letter. Today I have another letter and a cheque for Rs. 54.
I can never remember birthdays. I have no idea how old Diwanji
is.Now I send him my blessings. And he has many more years still to
live. He has to serve with this very body.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HRI HARSHADABEHN DIWANJI
15TH S TREET, K HAR
BOMBAY
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 10223

710. LETTER TO K. M. MUNSHI
WARDHA ,

February 24, 1945
BHAI MUNSHI,

I have just finished the book Zonal Divisions sent by you. I
managed to read it piecemeal during the time for massage every day.
The very basis of your argument is brute force. How can I, therefore,
reason with you? According to me, the instances which you have cited
may go against you. But I won’t enter into that argument. Your
dharma lies in following the dictates of your conscience. We need not,
therefore, argue what is right and what is wrong. For everybody what
the conscience says is the truth. Real truth is known only to the God
of Truth.
Haven’t I already replied to your letter? I have still not seen the
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

419

rules drafted by Mavalankar. It is your right as well as your duty to
say what you have said. I, therefore, told everybody the substance of
it. Continue to point out fearlessly what you think to be right.
Blessings from

BAPU
From Gujarati: C.W. 7685. Courtesy: K. M. Munshi

711. LETTER TO Y. M. PARNERKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

February 24, 1945
CHI. PARNERKAR,

I shall not express grief. It was time for Mother to go and she
went. She had completed her work. You may go whenever you can.
Look after yourself and do your duty well.
Blessings from

BAPU
Y. M. P ARNERKAR
C/ O B. G. K ARPE
12 KRISHNAPURA, I NDORE
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

712. LETTER TO CHANDIPRASAD VAIDYA
WARDHA ,

February 24, 1945
BHAI CHANDIPRASAD,

I wrote to you about Chi. B. K. Chi. Hari-ichchha came back
from Nagpur yesterday. Her lungs have grown extremely weak, 1 so
much so that a rib has to be removed now. Three months were lost in
trying the Ayurvedic treatment. What grieves me is: why must we take
up a case about which we do not have full knowledge. [At the same
time] we cannot forsake the poor girl. I have two questions: (1) Can
you, i. e., Ayurveda, do something for Hari-chchha? (2) Why do not
the vaidyas realize their limitations?
Write to me fearlessly whatever you think right. Do come if you
want to, for the sake of H. I. or B. K. I have written a similar letter
1

420

Up to this the letter is in Gujarati.
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

about H. I. to Vaidya Shiv Sharma.1
Blessings from

BAPU
BIRLA MANDIR
NEW DELHI
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

713. NOTE TO RISHABHADAS RANKA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 25, 1945
Send the list of contents. I can read Marathi. Bring the child. I
shall think of a name.
2

Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: C.W. 10390

714. LETTER TO G. RAMACHANDRA RAO
S EVAGRAM ,

February 25, 1945
BHAI RAMACHANDRA RAO,

The enclosed is a rough draft of the scheme along with details as
to its estimated budget. Give it shape and return it to me. It will be
placed before the Committee.
Blessings from

BAPU
S EVAGRAM ASHRAM
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1

Vide “Letter to Shiv Sharma”, 23-2-1945.
The addressee had written that he had received from Ganeshshastri the list of
contents of the latter’s “Gramvaidyaka” in Marathi.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

421

715. CABLE TO VIJAYLAKSHMI PANDIT1
February 26, 1945
VIJAYALAKSHMI P ANDIT
C ARE JOHN DAY C OMPANY
40 E AST 49 S TREET
NEW YORK
NOT

INTERFERING.

NOTHING

TO

DISTURB

YOU.

LOVE.

GANDHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

716. LETTER TO MIRABEHN
February 26, 19452
CHI. MIRA,

You can have Kisan Ashram.3 But if that, why not Mazdur or its
equivalent? A kisan can be a millionaire, not so a working man, a
labourer. But I do not mind kisan, if you prefer it.
Love.
BAPU
S HRI MIRABEHN
ASHRAM, M ULDASPUR
P. O. BAHADRABAD
Via JWALAPUR , N EAR HARDWAR
From a photostat: C.W. 10518. Courtesy: Mirabehn

1

This was in reply to the addressee’s cable of February 22 which read: “Friends
consider my presence necessary San Francisco during April conference. . . . Friends
have cabled Ghanshyamdas Birla requesting him finance. . . . work under my
direction. Please endorse. . . . Recent statement disturbing. . . .”
2
The date is in Hindi numerals.
3
The addressee had suggested this name for her Ashram.

422

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

717. LETTER TO DR. NIROD MUKHERJEE
AS AT S EVAGRAM ,

February 26, 1945
DEAR MUKHERJEE,

I was able to go through your tale of woe only today. I have
pointed the remedy.1 It’s not mere medical relief. Proper food
including milk, houses and employment should be found and
everything else will follow. The moral sense of the community has to
be stirred up to do away with prostitution. If I was permitted free
entry, I should love to enter Bengal ill or well. I may be able to do
nothing. But that is nothing.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
DR. N IROD MUKERJI
1/5 FERN R OAD
BALLYGUNGE
C ALCUTTA
From a photostat: C.W. 9298

718. LETTER TO SATYANARAYAN SINHA
WARDHA ,

February 26, 1945
BHAI SATYANARAYAN SINHA,

I have all your letters. I have gone through Prajapati Mishra’s
letter. There was nothing in the speech to alarm the Government.2 In
discussing the constructive programme such a speech should be
considered irrelevant or inopportune. But what was to be done about
it? It is a different matter if the Government wants to ban even
constructive work.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

Vide “Letter to Dr. Nirod Mukherjee”, 14-1-1945.
Vide “Statement to the Press”, 17-2-1945.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

423

719. ANSWERS TO T. B. SAPRU’S QUESTIONS
AS AT S EVAGRAM ,

February 26, 19451
In your letter 2 of September 14, 1944, to Mr. Jinnah, you said as follows:
“You, ask for my conception of the basis for a provisional interim government. I
would have told you if I had any scheme in mind.” Did you never discuss even the
outlines of any scheme during the course of your conversations?
Q.

A. What I told Quaid-e-Azam was the exact truth. I had no idea
of what he meant, for he never told me what he had in mind.
Therefore I can answer your question by saying we never discussed
the outlines of any scheme of interim government except what I have
said.
Q. In answering the first question, please refer to Mr. Jinnah’s letter of
September 14, in which he said, “You, being the sponsor of this Gandhiji Rajaji
formula, should give me some rough idea and picture of it so that I may understand
what this part of the formula means.” Did you give any reply to this? If so, what? If
not, why not?

A.

The foregoing answer deals with your second question.

Q. In his letter of September 17, Mr. Jinnah says that “the word (Pakistan) has
now become synonymous with the Lahore Resolution3 ”. Did you ask him whether in
accordance with the Lahore Resolution of the All-India Muslim League, a scheme of
Constitution, in accordance with the basic principles providing for the assumption
finally by the respective regions of all powers such as Defence, External Affairs,
Communications, Customs and such other matters as may be necessary, had been
prepared? Was your attention drawn to any such scheme by Mr. Jinnah?

A. No. Quaid-e-Azam’s position unfortunately was that while he
could come as far as seeing me and trying to convince me of his
position, he, the President of the League, could not discuss details with
me, a mere individual. But so far as I could gather from our
conversations, he had no prepared scheme. As the correspondence
shows, he had referred me to two books both of which I read, but
neither of which could help me to understand Quaid-e-Azam’s
exactposition. One thing he insisted upon was that if I first accepted
the Pakistan of his conception, he could then discuss other things with
me even though I was but an individual.

1

From Gandhi-Sapru Papers
Vide “Letter to M. A. Jinnah”, 14-9-1944.
3
Vide “Resolution passed by All-India Muslim League”, 23-3-1940.
2

424

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Q . Is it true that the real breakdown between you and Mr. Jinnah came about on
the question of Central authority or Government? Please refer in this connection to
Mr. Jinnah’s letter of September 25, 1 clause (d), in which he says, “If these vital
matters (suggested in the quotation from your letter with which clause ‘d’ begins) are
to be administered by some central authority, you do not indicate what sort of
authority or machinery will be set up to administer these matters, and how and to
whom again that authority will be responsible.” Did you, at any stage, indicate to
him that you wanted a Central Government or a Central Legislature to deal with a
limited number of subjects, such as Foreign Affairs, Defence, Internal
Communications, Customs, Commerce and the like?

A. It can be said that the breakdown took place because we
could not come to an agreement of the two-nation theory of
Quaid-e-Azam’s. As the correspondence will show I wanted to avoid a
Central Government. I suggested an authority acceptable to both the
parties, but he would insist first on complete partition as between two
nations and then an agreement between them as on foreign affairs, etc.
He would not agree to anything simultaneous.
Q . In that very clause (clause ‘d’), Mr. Jinnah says, “According to the Lahore
Resolution, as I have already explained to you, all these matters, which are the
life-blood of any State, cannot be delegated to any Central authority or Government.”
Then he says that “the matter of security of the two States and the natural and mutual
obligations that may arise out of physical contiguity will be for the
constitution-making body of Pakistan and that of Hindustan, or [any] other party
concerned, to deal with on the footing of their being two independent States.” Did
you understand Mr. Jinnah’s position to be that he intended that Pakistan and
Hindustan should be completely independent sovereign States with no connection
between them except by a treaty? If so, did he tell you what was to happen if either
party broke the treaty and what was the authority which could enforce the provisions
of such a treaty?

A. Of course, he wanted two independent sovereign States with
no connection between them except by a treaty. If any party broke
the treaty, the consequence would be what has happened throughout
the world up till now, i e., war. Therefore I did not ask and he did
nottell me as to what would happen if either party broke the treaty.
As regards the C. R. Formula 2 , can you explain why Mr. Jinnah was
opposed to clause (2) of that formula, which demanded a plebiscite of all the
inhabitants on the basis of adult suffrage or other practical franchise? Did you
understand him to say that in the areas demarcated for Pakistan the minorities shall be
given a chance of expressing their choice of staying in Pakistan or not being
separated from the rest of the country?
Q.

1
2

Vide “Letter from M. A. Jinnah”, 25-9-1944.
Vide Appendix “C. Rajagopalachari’s Formula”, before 5-8-1942.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

425

A. Quaid-e-Azam would not have the plebiscite of the Muslims
because he thought the League represented the Muslims of India and
that the other communities should have no voice as to Pakistan which
was Muslims’ exclusive right wherever they were in a majority.
Q . Please refer to your proposals contained in the letter of the 24th of
September in which you said “there shall be a treaty of separation which should also
provide for the efficient and satisfactory administration of Foreign Affairs, Defence,
Internal Communications, Customs, Commerce and the like, which must necessarily
continue to be the matter of common interest between the contracting parties.” Please
explain how that treaty would provide for the efficient and satisfactory administration
of these matters, and whether you contemplated any machinery which could give
effect to the decisions embodied in that treaty. If so, what is the nature of that
machinery which you had in mind?

A. I suggested a board composed of representatives of both the
States. It was to be an arbitration board with administrative powers.
For the due carrying out of its decisions, it would largely or solely
depend upon the goodwill of the parties or States. But I should not
object to a machinery jointly devised by the two States.
Q . Have you any objection to the provinces or States enjoying the fullest
autonomy with residuary powers vested in them?

A.

None whatsoever.

How do you reconcile Mr. Jagat Narain Lal’s Resolution 1 of the All-India
Congress Committee with the line that you took in regard to the division of India in
the course of your conversations and correspondence with Mr. Jinnah?
Q.

A. I depended first upon the decisive interpretation given by the
President, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, and secondly on my own,
meaning that the Jagat Narain Lal Resolution should be read together
with the others bearing on the question. For these latter were not
cancelled by the Jagat Narain Lal Resolution.
Q. Please refer to Appendix ‘C’ of the pamphlet known as Gandhi-Jinmah
Talks, and send to the Committee a short memorandum explaining any points in that
summary which you may consider necessary. In this connection please refer to your
Press statement 2 dated September 28, 1944, in the course of which you stated as
follows: “In that respect the Lahore Resolution is quite sound. Where-there is an
obvious Muslim majority, they should be allowed to constitute a separate State by
themselves, and that has been fully conceded in the Rajaji Formula or my formula. . . .
But if it means utterly independent sovereignty so that there is to be nothing in
common between the two, I hold it is an impossible proposition. That means war to

1
2

426

Vide 5th footnote of “Note to Jagdish K. Munshi”, on or before 12-8-1944.
Vide “Interview to the Press”, 28-9-1944.
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the knife.” What did you mean by saying “war to the knife”, and why did you consider
that proposition to be an impossible proposition?
A. “War to the knife” is a simple English idiom. I have never
known it used in the literal sense. It simply means a determined
quarrel between parties. I hold that if there is nothing in common
between the two or nothing which does not come in conflict with each
others’ culture there can be no friendly mutual agreement.
Q. In your Press statement dated September 28, 1944, you said: “I urge that
apart from the two-nation theory, if I could accept the principle of division of India in
accordance with the demand of the League, he should accept it. But unfortunately it
was just there that we split.” Please explain this more clearly.

A.

I think I am explicit enough. I meant that apart from
conceding the two-nation theory, I accepted the concrete suggestion
of division of India as between members of the same family and
therefore reserving for partnership things of common interest. But
Quaid-e-Azam would have nothing short of the two-nation theory and
therefore complete dissolution amounting to full sovereignty in the
first instance. It was just here that we split as I have said herein before.
Q. Are you prepared to admit that the Muslims in India are a separate nation? If
so, then why do you deny the Muslims the right of having a separate
independentState? If you are not prepared to admit that the Muslims are a separate
nation, then on what principle do you agree to a division of India to the limited
extent to which you seem to have agreed in the course of your conversation and
correspondence with Mr. Jinnah? In this connection, please refer to your interview to
the News Chronicle on September 29, 1944, 1 which is printed at page 64 of the
pamphlet known as Gandhi-Jinnah Talks.

A. Although I could not agree to the two-nation theory, I agreed
on the basis of members of a family desiring severance of the family
tie in matters of conflict but not in all matters so as to become enemies
one of the other as if there was nothing common between the two
except enmity.
The Hindu, 10-4-1945, and Gandhi-Sapru Papers; also G.N. 7570

1

Vide “Interview to the News Chronicle”.29-9-1944

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

427

720. SPEECH AT ALL-INDIA HINDUSTANI PRACHAR
SABHA CONFERENCE-I1
WARDHA ,

February 26, 1945
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,

I am glad to see you all assembled here at the invitation of
Principal Shriman Narayan. Dr. Abdul Haq was to have arrived here
today, but he is now expected tomorrow. This association and I wish
to have his help. Likewise Sjt. Tandon was to come and I was feeling
very happy. Shriman Narayanji had wired to him also. I am sorry that
he is unable to come, being ill. Let us hope that he will recover from
his illness soon.
The task confronting you is, in one way, small, in another way
big. It is small because it requires only very small effort, and yet it
promises great consequences. Dr. Tarachand tells us that what is
known by various names today was originally one language spoken in
the North by both Hindus and Muslims. It is a sad thing that those
who were once one have become divided. Their language, too, has
either been split or is being split, into Urdu and Hindi.
As a result of the efforts of Sjt. Tandon the Congress at Kanpur2
gave the name ‘Hindustani’ to the language which is spoken by both
the communities and decided on two scripts, Devanagari and Urdu.
But the Congress could not implement the resolution. In 1942, the
Hindustani Prachar Sabha took up this work at the instance of the late
Shri Jamnalal Bajaj but he passed away soon after. In 1942, Congress
leaders and others were arrested; I was among them. I was released
later on medical grounds. Even during my illness I followed the
progress of the work that was being done by Sjt. Nanavati to
propagate Hindustani. It gave me joy to find that it held out the
prospect of success. I see no reason why what was at one time the
common language of both Hindus and Mussalmans should not again
become one. In Northern India, we are the descendants of those
Hindus and Muslims who spoke and wrote the same language. It
should not require even half the labour to revive that old common
language than it would to create two different languages, Urdu and
Hindi. Village folk in Northern India, whether Hindus or Mussalmans,
even today speak the same tongue and some even write the same
language. It is for you to decide what should be done to bring our
labours to a successful completion. The function of the Hindustani
1
Gandhiji presided over the conference and since he was observing silence,
his speech was read out by Shriman Narayan.
2
In December 1925

428

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Prachar Sabha is to implement your decisions.
I am sorry that, for reasons of health, I observe silence for the
whole day so far as possible. During the last three months I had to
break my silence during day-time only perhaps on three occasions.
Today, it being Monday, I am observing my weekly silence. I hope
that it will not interfere with our work.
I now leave the conference in your hands. Shriman Narayan will
conduct the rest of the proceedings.
Today’s proceedings will go on in my presence till 5.30 p. m.
Tomorrow our work will commence at 3 p. m. I shall then place my
thoughts before you.
You will please excuse any inconvenience which, despite
Janakidevi’s best efforts, you may have experienced in the matter of
arrangements for food and other amenities at Bajajwadi.
[From Hindi]
Rashtrabhasha Hindustani, pp. 160-2

721. TELEGRAM TO DR. KHAN SAHEB
[February 27, 1945] 1
DR. KHANSAHEB,
WHAT

ABOUT

HUNGER-STRIKER

AMIR KHAN2 ?

GANDHI
From the original: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

722. LETTER TO SITARAM SASTRI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 27, 1945
DEAR SITARAM SASTRI,

May I not now begin to write to you in Hindi?3 You may get my
letters read to you if you cannot read them yourself. My blessings to
your son and his bride. I hope you will have an additional servant of
the country and that your son will not be lost to you because he is
married. Bhansalibhai described his experiences to me.
Yours sincerely,

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyalelal

1

From the postmark
Whose son Mohamed Aslam had wired to Gandhiji on February 26 about his
critical condition
3
The Hindi version is not traceable.
2

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

429

723. LETTER TO MAURICE FRYDMAN
S EVAGRAM ,

February 27, 1945
DEAR BHARATANAND1 ,

Two lines in haste. Unless you are determined, try liver
injections and hope to live to serve. But if you regard them as sinful I
have nothing to say.
Love.
BAPU
BHARATANAND
BOMBAY
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

724. LETTER TO MANIBEHN PATEL
February 27, 1945
CHI. MANI,

Chi. Dahyabhai writes to say that you will be released tomorrow
and that your health is none too good. Do come and see me if you
can. If you cannot come, write a detailed letter. I am looking forward
to seeing you. It is long time since we met last.
Blessings from

BAPU

[From Gujarati]
Bapuna Patro— 4: Manibehn Patelne, p. 132

725. LETTER TO S. D. SATAVLEKAR
S EVAGRAM ,

February 27, 1945
BHAI SATAVLEKAR,

I have your letter. I have written to Bharatanand to take liver
extract injections if it is not contrary to his vows.2
1
A Polish Engineer interested in village reconstruction movement. Gandhiji
gave him this name.
2
Vide “Letter to Maurice Frydman”, 27-2-1945.

430

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I do have an oil-lamp. They are made in Maganwadi. Let the
friend who makes them there send me one. On seeing it I shall give
my opinion.
Blessings from

BAPU
P ANDIT S ATAVLEKAR
S WADHYAYA MANDAL
AUNDH , D IST. S ATARA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

726. LETTER TO KESHAV DEO MALAVIYA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 27, 1945
BHAI KESHAV DEO,

If in the past the A. I. C. C. looked after the repairs of the
Swaraj Bhavan it should continue to do so even now. Perhaps Chi.
Kamalnayan understands this thing better. If so, consult him. I have
an idea that you have with you some A. I. C. C. funds. The building is
in a very bad shape and it is getting worse.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

727. LETTER TO RAMESHWARDAS BIRLA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 27, 1945
CHI. RAMESHWARDAS,

I did not speak to you regarding the “Indian sufferers” but I
did to Ghanshyamdas. Today I hear that those people have
approached you. Gosibehn has come to me.
My advice is:
(1) A substantial amount should be paid to the Committee. It
should be paid annually, so that it is convenient in all ways.
(2) I would advise that the amount should be paid in such a way
that at least the Government knows about it. I see no need for the
amount to be published in the papers. The Government ought to
know that it is the duty of everyone to give such assistance. I have of
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

431

course fixed its. . . .1
Convey the purport of this letter to Ghanshyamdas and do as he
says.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

728. LETTER TO DESHPANDE
S EVAGRAM ,

February 27, 1945
BHAI DESHPANDE,

Certainly all noble efforts have my blessings. In my view
your primary duty is to work in such a way as to win the approval of
Jajuji.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

729. SPEECH AT ALL INDIA HINDUSTANI PRACHAR
SABHA CONFERENCE-II
WARDHA ,

February 27, 1945
I am sorry I cannot give you as much time as I would wish.
Please forgive me. My silence continues for the whole day. It is not
that it cannot be broken. But I want to continue it for as long as I can
and smoothly carry on my work. So I observe silence. If I squandered
my energy, I might collapse in a month. My attachment to truth and
non-violence would not permit this. But if necessity should arise I
could spend this energy with both hands. I could also be a miser.
These days I have adopted the latter course.
I want to explain to you what the Hindustani Prachar Sabha is.
Its aim is to make as many people as possible learn Hindi and Urdu
styles and the Devanagari and the Urdu scripts. There was a time when
the people of North India spoke one common language. We are their
descendants. Today we see that the gulf between Hindi and Urdu is
widening. Protagonists of Hindi use difficult words from Sanskrit and
1

432

Omission as in the source
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

the Urdu enthusiasts do the same from Arabic-Persian. I know this will
not continue for long. Villagers care for their bread only. They will
continue to speak the language which they have been used to
speaking for years.
It is the task of people like me to stop Hindi and Urdu from
running into separate orbits. I shall say to both sides that the way
adopted by them is not proper. The villagers will not understand their
bombastic words. If we learn to write both the scripts, the two
languages in the long run will become one. The problem of script is
not so complicated. Let both the scripts continue for ever. Or there is
no objection if every province started writing the national language in
its own script leaving aside these two. But the language should be one.
Today we have become slothful. Today we have on our heads the
burden of English. But English is also not so difficult. We can learn
English in six months. But we want to learn to think in English and
study the sciences. So it takes time. We waste as many as fourteen
valuable years learning English and yet cannot master it. Today if
weask a teacher of English to express his ideas in Hindustani, he
pleads inability. Because of his education through English, he is not
able to express his ideas in Hindustani. Then how can he teach
Hindustani to his students? This is our sorry plight. This also leads to
lethargy.
We should not be afraid of learning two scripts. Somebody
might say that there are other eight or ten good scripts. Why should
we not learn them? I do suggest that we learn at least one of the scripts
of the South also. There are four languages there. You should not be
frightened of them.
You are living in Hindustan. If you want to serve your
Hindustani brethren, why should you be afraid of the labour of
learning at least two scripts? We have to learn only one language. It is
our misfortune that we have to use two scripts. But I would gladly
learn all the languages of India. If we have the interest, we shall not
find the task too hard. Today your number is very small, but it does
not matter. All of you must at any rate learn the two scripts. I do not
want to speculate on what splendid consequences would follow.
It is idleness which prevents one from learning other languages.1
If anyone comes to me, I can arrange for teaching him not only
Hindustani but ten or twelve other important languages. If anyone
says ‘I can’t study Urdu (Hindustani)’, I would say ‘you are unfit for
staying in India as it is the language of many.’ I invited you for
1

This and the following paragraph are from The Hitavada.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

433

co-operating in this language (national) task which can be achieved if
we work properly and in right earnest.
Some Urdu-speaking people, while engaged in serious talks,
employ words which leave me dumb-founded although I frequently
talk with them. Why is it so? I have found a way out and it has been
placed before you.
[From Hindi]
Rashtrabhasha Hindustani, pp. 162-4, and The Hitavada, 1-3-1945

730. SPEECH ALL-INDIA HINDUSTANI PRACHAR SABHA
CONFERENCE-III
WARDHA ,

February 27, 1945
Dr. Tarachand has poured out his heart while explaining the
significance of the history of Hindustani words commonly used in the
villages.1 I was not able to ask Tarachandji to finish soon because I
myself was gripped by what he said. He said things which he could
have as well said at a gathering of pundits. I am not a pundit.
However, I was listening with interest along with others. He did not
repeat anything and that is why I did not stop him.2 Later he narrated
how he first joined the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan and left the Bharatiya
Sahitya Sammelan after the Nagpur meeting, after which he took up
the Hindustani work for making it the national language. I want and
desire real democracy even in this field.
I followed what Anand Kausalyayan said. He spoke hesitantly.
On behalf of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan he said that the burden of
two scripts should be avoided as far as possible. Even today, I happen
to be in the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan. I did not go there on my own.
Jamnalalji used to drag me with him into whatever work he happened
to do. He took me to Indore 3 where I gave a new thing to the
Sammelan. They all digested it. I said “Hindi is that language which
both Hindus and Muslims speak and which people write in both the
scripts.” The resolution moved by me was passed. I had it included in
the Sammelan’s constitution. It is a different matter that it was
later amended. Hence I should not feel sorry if now I quit the
Sammelan.
1
2
3

434

This sentence is from The Hitavada.
The rest of the paragraph is from The Hitavada.
In April 1935
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

There are many among us who are trying to unify Hindi and
Urdu. Some wonder why it is necessary. I want real democracy.
Democracy degenerates into hypocrisy if people become yes-men.
That is why I asked them not to follow others blindly but express their
true opinion.
I don’t want Hindi to die nor Urdu to be banished. What I wish
is that both should become useful to us. The law of satyagraha says
that one can clap with one hand. It may not produce sound, but what
of that? If you stretch one hand, the other one will follow
automatically. Haq Saheb had said something in Nagpur, which I
could not then understand. I did not accept his “Hindi alias Urdu”.
It would have been better if I had accepted his point. He came for
friendship, but was met with opposition and turned almost an enemy.
But I have no enemy. Then, how can Haq Saheb be one? That is why
today we are again on the same platform. An all-India literary
conference was held at Nagpur, but it was its first and last session. We
had gathered to come closer, but were divided. What was the use of
such a gathering? It was a literary conference of all India not only
Hindustani and so my speech on the occasion was full of Sanskrit
words. If I were again required to speak before such a gathering, I
should speak the same language.
Anandji says that everybody will find great difficulty in learning
two scripts. I say there is no difficulty; and if there is, it will have to be
overcome. For, if this is not overcome, how shall we be able to face
greater difficulties?
I live for Hindu-Muslim unity. I know the propagation of
Hindustani will bring about this unity. But I am not holding out this
temptation right now.
I say, let Hindi and Urdu both prosper. I have to take work from
both. Even today, Hindustani exists but we do not utilize it. This is the
age of Hindi and Urdu. These are two streams from which the third
will flow. Hence it will not do if the first two dry up.
The villagers will follow my language. They will not be able to
follow a language which is full of Sanskrit and Arabic-Persian words.
If those in the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan should say that they are going
to sponsor a Sanskritized language, then, as far as I am concerned, the
Sammelan does not exist. The language of the villages is only one.
They cannot have two languages. The champions of Hindi want me to
blow the trumpet for Hindi only and to forget Urdu. But I am a
satyagrahi believing in ahimsa. How can I do this? I cannot do this
work all alone. I need everybody’s help. I am a ‘mahatma’ precisely
because I am aware of my limitations and never go beyondthem. That
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

435

is why Moulvi Abdul Haq has come. I have no wings. The veterans are
called here so that they may give me wings. If they do I shall soar
high and say, “Look, it is well done, is it not?” Else I shall lie in the
dust and stay there.
I am considered a big man also in the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan.
Not in that capacity, but in a general way, I would like to say that
nothing will be done against the interest of the Hindi Sahitya
Sammelan. But people will have to take the trouble to learn both the
scripts. I want to take work from Anandji also.
I am told that the Muslim boys do not learn the Devanagri
script. I would say if it is so you have lost nothing but they have lost
something. What do you lose by learning one more script? Such a
little thing brings such a great gain. I had said the same thing to
Hasrat Mohani. But it did not serve the purpose at that time, because a
satyagraha had started. I did not tell all of you to court arrest but I
did. It is not just foolishness on the part of those who are in jail.
Jawahar, Vallabhbhai and Maulana Saheb are already in jail. They are
not fools. If they come out by resorting to flattery they will be dead in
my eyes, and if they die during imprisonment, I shall not shed a single
tear, I shall say they died a noble death. Because while there, they
serve India.
If Hindi and Urdu are unified Saraswati like the Hooghly will be
bigger than the Ganga and the Yamuna. The Hooghly is a dirty river,
I do not drink its water. But if this one becomes like the Hooghly it
will be a grand river.
Now the question of funds. Those who would like to contribute
may give either to me or to Shriman Narayan. Everybody should
contribute according to his capacity. Those who contribute may do so
for the cause, not to gain fame.
[From Hindi]
Rashtrabhasha Hindustani, pp. 164-7, and The Hitavada, 1-3-1945

731. LETTER TO SITA GANDHI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 27, 1945
CHI. SITA,

We are poor. We want to live with the poor, hence we should
learn to put up with sun and rain. But put up with only as much as
you can. Don’t ruin your health. I have just returned from a meeting
of the Hindustani [Prachar] Sabha; hence I happened to start the letter
436

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

in the Devanagari script. Blessings to all.
BAPU
S ITA GANDHI
C/ O NANABHAI MASHRUWALA
AKOLA
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

732. LETTER TO MAGANBHAI PAREKH
February 28, 1945
CHI. MAGANBHAI,

You will see that I have been able to correct up to page 13. The
corrections are self-explanatory.
From clause 8 onwards confusion has started. It seems as if you
felt tired or wrote piecemeal and the link was broken. Clauses 8 to 12
relating to the work to be done do not seem consistent. I have taken
this up in haste soon after the prayer. Maybe, therefore, I myself have
got confused in my mind. But I feel that you should have a separate
paragraph, with a heading, for self-purification. This can come
somewhere earlier. What follows is useful but it should be said
differently and arranged in a different manner. I can do all this for
you. But I would have to spare more time for that, which I do not
have. Nor is it right that I should do your cooking for you. It should
be enough for me to tell you whether what you have done is done
badly or indifferently. Please, therefore, revise the whole of
thatportion and, if you wish, show it to me. But it will be all right even
if you don’t. Reject what does not appeal to you from among the
suggestions I have made. Kishorelal is ill. I myself will not trouble
him. I advise you also not to do so. Do what you yourself can. I am in
better health than Kishorelal just now and so I have managed to do
this much. Otherwise I should have refused and also dissuaded you
from approaching Kishorelal. I have not revised this.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 9067

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

437

733. LETTER TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI
S EVAGRAM ,

February 28, 1945
MY DEAR C. R.,

Ramchandran read your p. c. to him. It makes bad reading. This
night fever, whatever its cause, must go. I suggest your coming here as
soon as possible. If someone should go there to fetch you that can be
done. Weather is warm and dry and is likely to be so till the middle of
May. Warmer it will be day by day. You do not mind the heat I hope.
Love.
BAPU
From a photostat: G.N. 2102

734. LETTER TO GAJANAN NAIK
S EVAGRAM ,

February 28, 1945
CHI. GAJANAN,

I got your letter today. It does not matter if Kumarappa does
not provide you the money. But should you not have his consent to
whatever you do? If you carry on your activities on the strength of
money when you don’t have the consent of the institution to which
you belong, it is sure to cause them some embarrassment. If
youcannot have Kumarappa’s consent you have only to have patience
and try to persuade him. Read my reply again.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS]
In reply to yours of February 15, 1945. It is irrelevant in whose
name the jaggery complex stands. There should be no problem for
you since you have the custody. You should make any arrangement
you want after consulting everybody. Kumarappa ought to be
informed. Obtain his consent.
Blessings from

BAPU
GAJANAN NAIK
S EVAGRAM ASHRAM
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

438

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

735. LETTER TO DR. JIVRAJ MEHTA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 28, 1945
BHAI JIVRAJ MEHTA,

Chi. Indu writes to say that the Kamala [Nehru Memorial]
Hospital committee does not meet at all. The local committee too
seems to care little. They have run short of funds. If you can, throw
some light on all this.
Blessings from

BAPU
DR . J IVRAJ MEHTA
ALTAMAN R OAD
BOMBAY
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

736. LETTER TO RAMA C. JOSHI
February 28, 1945
1

CHI. RAMA ,

I got your letter after a long time. I was glad. The children have
settled down well. Do come once when you can. Hot winds have
already started here.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 5367

737. LETTER TO SHANTILAL B. PANDYA
S EVAGRAM ,

February 28, 1945
CHI. SHANTILAL,

Your letter was read out to me from beginning to end. I am
delighted. I am passing it on to Jajuji to read. I wish you success. Try
everything. Don’t lend money to anyone. Knowledge, however,
cannot be lent. It can only be given. Your capital consists of your
1

Wife of Chhaganlal Joshi

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

439

knowledge. Increase it and make use of it.
Make use of machinery only after careful thought. You will be
happy and make others happy if you give up what the millions cannot
use.
This time I shall not write to Chi. Kanta. Convey my blessings to
her. May she have an easy delivery.
Blessings from

BAPU
S HANTILAL BALASHANKAR P ANDYA
R AILWAY F ARM
DOHAD
From a copy of the Gujarati: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

738. LETTER TO INDIRA GANDHI
February 28, 1945
CHI. INDU,

Shall I write to Dr. Katju1 ? I shall write about the Committee too.
If you can go to Kashmir, it will be good for you and Rajiv 2 . I am
well.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: C.W. 9804. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library

739. LETTER TO SITARAM
S EVAGRAM ,

February 28, 1945
BHAI SITARAM,

I have received your money. Your sending the money in itself
carries my blessings, does it not? If you still require them you have
them. I had hoped that you would come and see me.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

1
2

440

Kailash Nath Katju
Addressee’s elder son
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

740. NOTE TO KRISHNACHANDRA
February 28, 1945
You must learn weaving properly. Then alone can you become
a real teacher. But it is not necessary to be always at it like a
professional weaver. What the professional weaver learns from
practice, you have to acquire with your intelligence.
You have heard about my experiment; what do you think of it?
Why have you again stopped getting up in time for the prayers?
BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4491

741. LETTER TO M. C. DAVAR1
S EVAGRAM ,

February 28, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,

Yours of 15th inst. Gandhiji writes in reply to your questions2 :

1.
“Quit India” resolution3 so called is wholly consistent
with ahimsa and truth. I hope you see nothing wrong in the phrase.
2.
There was no question of success partly or wholly
resulting from the mere phrase or the resolution itself.
Evidently you have not studied the correspondence that
led to the fast. 4 It was wholly aimed at the misdeeds of the
Government.
1

This was written by Narahari Parikh. The addressee was the Secretary General
of the United Party of India.
2
The questions, briefly summarized, were: (i) Whether the “Quit India”
resolution was consistent with ahimsa and truth. (ii) If it was, did Gandhiji realize any
portion of his success from it or from his historic Linlithgow fast? What was in his
mind when he told Louis Fischer that he might not call off the civil disobedience
movement even if there was violence? (iii) Did it not show that he was not as firm
about ahimsa as before the August 1942 movement? (iv) Did it not show that
freedom of the country was dearer to Gandhiji than ahimsa? (v) Could not the
counter-violence of some of his associates be attributed to a decrease in his own faith
in non-violence?
3
Vide Appendix “Resolution Passed by All-India Congress Committee”,
8-8-1942.
4
Vide “Letter to Lord Linlithgow”, 29-1-1943 and passim.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

441

The fast had great results. You should study the whole event.
You should also know that a satyagrahi is never attached to results. His
acts, great or small, have their own worth.
My reply to Louis Fischer is complete.1 As years rolled on
people knew that my words carried what they meant. Therefore, I said
I might not call off the movement in future even if there was violence.
My trial never came. For, I was arrested before I could start the
movement.
3. Certainly not.
4. You are quite wrong. I would never put freedom or
anything before ahimsa and truth.
5. It is clear to me that you have only superficially studied
the movement as also ahimsa.
Gandhiji observes silence, and the above is a copy of what he has writer down.

The Bombay Chronicle, 27-3-1945

742. LETTER TO MARGARETE SPIEGEL
S EVAGRAM ,

March 1, 1945
DEAR DAUGHTER,

I have your parting letter. Of course you are brave, you are
simple. There you will pave your way, wherever you are. Keep good
health and write from your new place. Kh[urshedbehn] is here.
Love from all.
BAPU
(M. K. GANDHI)
DR. M. S PIEGEL
Spiegel Papers. Courtesy: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library

1

442

Vide Appendix “Interview with Louis Fischer”, 4-6-1942.
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

743. LETTER TO PREMA KANTAK
S EVAGRAM ,

March 1, 1945
CHI. PREMA,

I am able to reach your letter only today. I am helpless.
Do not trust the newspapers. I have given no decision. I have
stated two views which seem contradictory. The view that there should
be no enrolment is the later one and is the result of fuller thought. But
nobody is forbidden to enrol members.
I have had no talk with Patil. It is possible that Khurshedbehn or
somebody showed me the resolutions. But what does my consent
mean? Everybody, whether Gandhian or anti-Gandhian, should act
on his own responsibility. One may say there is no such thing as
Gandhism. I have met Socialists more often. Much of what they say
has appealed to me. Or you may say they have come closer to me.
But nobody should speak in my name. I do not like people
going underground but I do not condemn those who do. It is the
act of going underground that I condemn. Understand the distinction.
There was no one with me during my talks with Jinnah Saheb.1
There were so few of us. Rajaji was one. The others didn’t even know
anything about it.
I understand all the rest. But I do not have the time to go into
the details. Keep on the path you have chosen. Get as many
sincere women as you can and go on with the work. Do not take upon
yourself the burden of the whole country. Take upon yourself only
what you can do. If there are any more questions you want to ask me
you may.
Blessings from

BAPU

[PS]
There has been no such thing as despair in my life and there
never will be. I would not despair even if everybody died. What I am
saying is right and what Bhulabhai is doing is also right.2 You should
1

The reference presumably is to the talks Gandhiji had with Jinnah from
September 9 to 27, at which no agreement was reached.
2
Vide 1st footnote of “Note to Bhulabhai J. Desai”, 5-1-1945 and 2nd
footnote of “Letter to Bhulabhai J. Desai”, 20-2-1945.
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

443

go on doing your work.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 10433. Also C.W. 6872. Courtesy:
Prema Kantak

744. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
March 1, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I have read the whole thing. It seems to me I shall have to pay
attention to a few things. I will not go too deeply into it. Do not
expect any help from me but accept whatever help I can give. It is
right that I should see my faults. It keeps me vigilant. In your view it
is useless. It would be good if we could start a separate catering
service. But that will not be possible. By and large we should serve to
the guests the same food that we cook for ourselves. I understand
about Kanchan. It will be a triumph for you if you secure her
testimonial. Just now you don’t have it. Do not think that she is not
fully awake. To the extent that she is not, the fault lies with youand
me. I do not distrust you. If I did, you would have left. It should be
for me to decide what work to assign to whom, don’t you think?
“Forget Sevagram” means forget the village, not the Ashram. In
telling you that you may have a separate establishment I have shown
that such a step has my consent and my encouragement. If even then
you do not do that, I shall take it as a matter of special credit to both
of you. I cannot bear the thought of your refraining from having a
separate establishment under the slightest pressure from me. Kanchan
seems to wish to have one. I do want you to play a major role in
stabilizing the kitchen. But you should do it my way. I think I have
now replied to all your questions.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5828. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

444

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

745. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM , W ARDHA ,

March 1, 1945
CHI. NARANDAS,

If you cannot honourably take the money for Chi.
Purushottam’s1 monthly expenses from there, you may obtain it from
me. Let me know what it will come to per month. Take care of your
health. Chi. Kanaiyo and Abha 2 may be going that way shortly. If
they do, Kanaiyo will bring you another letter from me. Letters from
him will continue as of now.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II/508. Also C.W. 8690. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

746. LETTER TO VICHITRA NARAYAN SHARMA
March 1, 1945
CHI. VICHITRA,

I am answering in pencil. Later I shall have it copied out in ink.
The truth is that I want to make the beginning with the kind of
person you mention. If with his help we can achieve expansion, well
and good, but if we cannot it will not matter. Because in the long run
only the new outlook can help us to expand the work. If we stick to
the old way, the work will come to a standstill. Khadi will end up by
being merely an occupation for the poor. This will not satisfy anyone.
If workers have doubts in their hearts, we shall patiently have to
remove them.
When I say that we should sincerely believe in the Charkha
Sangh as the symbol of truth and non-violence and dedicate ourselves
to propagating the idea, it does not at all mean that what we had so far
been doing was a mistake. We have benefited from that too. But it
would be foolish to imagine that we can continue to do so, for we have
certainly gained in knowledge. If the new outlook destroys the fruits
of our past work, then we have not understood the new outlook. It is
like the elephant’s foot that covers all other things. Yes, what will
1
2

Addressee’s son
Kanu Gandhi’s wife

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

445

certainly happen is that we shall not be content any more to carry on
in the old way and we shall be spared the outcry for expanding it. We
have some recent instances of this which I shall not go into here.
It will be false attachment if in our desire to expand the old we
forget the new which is priceless. It will be unbecoming, if obsessed
with the old, we lose hold of the new. If the old activity can be
competently pursued by others they may by all means pursue it.
The question you ask as regards the institution I can answer
only if you show me that it is not merely hypothetical but is based on
facts.
We shall let the Punjab go ahead with the work if it can,
provided we do not have to invest any funds. There can of course be
no question of not wearing khadi.
Women spinners may continue to spin. How far we may commit
funds for this is a practical question. Each case can be dealt with on
the basis of its own merits. We should not invest any capital in silk and
allied activities. If, however, there are funds to spare and it is found
beneficial to have stocks in khadi bhandars then we may have stocks
of silks and woollens. There must be the khadi spirit behind all this
and we should ensure genuineness.
In the case of Kashmir, if the State does not impose upon us
restrictions which we cannot accept, I should accept money from them
under two conditions. All the institutions should be prepared to lose
their funds. Maybe if the Charkha Sangh stakes its all nothing will be
lost. But they must do so on their own responsibility. Whether the
thing has my blessings or not should make no difference. One must
base oneself on the situation as it is.
It is indeed the duty of the Sangh to satisfy the public as well as
the workers. If however there is a higher duty, we must pursue it, too.
After all, khadi and all other work we have done has been informed
only by this view.
From Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

747. LETTER TO SHRIPAD JOSHI
S EVAGRAM ,

March 1, 1945
CHI. SHRIPAD,

What can be done if others become slack. I find that those who
have somebody’s backing are able to carry on. By saying “in a way”
446

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

I merely mean that a Congressman will never go and beg.1
Even though Congressmen may also have taken part in it, it was
not a Congress movement. Speeches and resolutions of the 7th and
8th 2 are a proof of this. I alone could have launched the movement
and I did not in any manner start it. A wrong impression was created,
no doubt. But what of that? See what Maulana Abul Kalam has to say.
Laying down one’s life was not forbidden but violence was.
I have written much about parliamentary work. Bari is here. Let
everyone be his own leader, but only for himself.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4234

748. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
S EVAGRAM ,

March 1, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

I have your letter. My experiment can succeed; it can also fail. It
can fail in the sense that I may not be able wholly to be free from
passion. In satyagraha there is no room for failure causing the least
harm.
If my experiment is that of a satyagrahi, no harm at all can
come to anyone. I am answering in brief. You may write to me again
if you do not get the meaning. I did have experiments with Ba, but
that was not enough. If emission took place then, it would have been
less regrettable morally than any emission occurring now. Emission
was a possibility then. I feel it is not a possibility now. Occasion once
came in my life when I came very near to emission. But I was saved. I
have mentioned this in one of my articles.
This question gives me the impression that you do not
understand the problem fully. It is surprising that you asked the
question without trying first to get the correct information from me.
What does it mean? What kind of trust is this? I do not have much
time. If you want to know, I shall acquaint you with the facts. Then if
questions occur to you that will be legitimate.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4492
1
2

Vide “Note to Shripad Joshi”, 22-2-1945.
Of August 1942.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

447

749. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
March 1, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

Your letter. You should find your answer in my letter. The idea
is this. I deliberately want to become a eunuch mentally. If I succeed
in this then I become one physically also. That alone is true
brahmacharya. I saw an opportunity and seized it.
If it is satyagraha it can never cause physical harm, nor even
moral harm. That is to say, it can only do good. This is what
experience proves. What can happen when a bad person meets a good
person? If my conduct is trusted there can be no harm, whoever may
be my associate. This in any case must be clear. My reference is not to
35 years but 21 years.1 You have either not noticed it or have
forgotten it.
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 5892. Also C.W. 5892

750. LETTER TO DEVI PRASAD
S EVAGRAM ,

March 1, 1945
CHI. DEVIPRASAD 2 ,

I deal with your letter today.
You cannot categorically say either that I would or would not
come on a full moon day. My going there or not going there would
be guided by considerations of duty.
Bread comes first and adornment afterwards. That has always
been my belief. But since you are here, do whatever you conveniently
can. Learn here what true art is.
The art teacher should first take up some work which would
enable him to earn his livelihood. Later on he may paint and teach
painting. Such artists alone will teach true art.
You will remember what I had said about the broom. Sweeping
is a great art. Where to keep the broom, how to handle it,should there
be one broom or different brooms for different jobs, should one stand
erect or bend while sweeping, should one raise dust or sprinkle water
1

The Hindi here is not clear.
An art graduate of Santiniketan. He was later co-editor with Marjorie Sykes of
the journal Nayee Talim.
2

448

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

before sweeping, does one sweep the corners, pay attention to the walls
and the roof—all these questions should occur to an artist. Only then
would he find beauty in sweeping.
There is therefore a place for a true artist in Nayee Talim. I have
already told you who is a true artist. Nanda Babu comes very close to
my ideal, though perhaps he is not the perfect ideal. However, he is so
big a man that it would be highly improper for me to say anything in
criticism of him. Read the article I wrote on my talks with Gurudev.1
Write to me if you wish to ask anything more.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

751. LETTER TO K. N. KATJU
S EVAGRAM ,

March 1, 1945
BHAI KATJU,

I saw your letter about Father’s illness. Your wife has gone and
so will Father, some day if not today. Let us do our duty. Everything
rests on that.
Blessings from

BAPU
DR. K ATJU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

752. LETTER TO TEJWANTI
S EVAGRAM ,

March 1, 1945
CHI. TEJWANTI,

I have your letter. You should have a certificate from there.
When you have that you can come here. You will have to do Ashram
work and devote only the spare time to learning. Here theheat has
started. It may possibly relent in June. Bear in mind that your coming
here will be meaningless if there is a risk of your health being
affected. It is better that you come after due deliberation. Write to me
if you decide to come and start when you have my reply. I have not
1

It is not clear which particular article Gandhiji is referring to.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

449

asked anyone but if you wish I will do so.
Blessings from

BAPU
TEJWANTI
C HARKHA S ANGH
ADAMPUR
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

753. TELEGRAM TO URMILADEVI1
March 2, 1945
URMILADEVI
211, B H INDUSTAN P ARK
R ASHBEHARI AVENUE P OST
C ALCUTTA
FIRST
LET
ME
CAN
COME
WHEN I

SEE
MITRA’S
WRITE.

SCHEME.

THEN

HE

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

754. TELEGRAM TO VACHCHHRAJBHAI DOSHI
March 2, 1945
VACHCHHRAJBHAI DOSHI
P ANCHGANI
WRITING

NEED

NOT

COME.

BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

755. LETTER TO ALLADI K. KRISHNASWAMY IYER
March 2, 1945
DEAR FRIEND,

I enclose copies of a communication received from the Bombay
Government’s departmental officials objecting to the All India
Spinners’ Association carrying on its work under the name “Akhil
1

450

Sister of C. R. Das
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

Bharat Charkha Sangh” on the ground that the English title of the
Association registered under the Charitable Societies’ Act should
alone be used and the translated name makes it an unauthorized body
prohibited by the Companies’ Act from doing business without being
registered as a company under that Act. It seems to me that this is a
silly objection. Kindly go through the papers and please dictate a
reply to be sent to the Government of Bombay on behalf of the
Spinners’ Association.
I was very sorry to learn from Rajagopalachari about the
unfortunate accident which has kept you in bed suffering for the past
many weeks. I hope you will soon be quite well.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
S IR ALLADI K. K RISHNASWAMY IYER
C/ O S HRI A. V AIDYANATH IYER
S ANDAI P ETTAI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

756. NOTE TO KISHNACHANDRA
March 2, 1945
Do not worry about inconvenience to me. You may do the
weaving and look after the children side by side. Spend less time
talking.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4495

757. LETTER TO BALVANT SINHA
March 2, 1945
CHI. B.,

It is good you speak about home. I did remember what I had
said. If I were to be asked again I would give the same answer.
I am trying to return all your letters.
I have certainly entrusted you with work of responsibility. I
value your worth. Why do you worry if it is not as you wish?
I shall give you all the time you ask for to speak about me.
Which would you prefer—8 o’clock in the evening or between 7 and
VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

451

8 in the morning? We shall fix the time after you let me know. Which
of you will be coming? It does not matter to me who comes.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 1954

758. LETTER TO GHULAM HUSAIN HIDAYATULLAH
S EVAGRAM ,

March 3, 1945
DEAR PREMIER,

I have had a copy of your letter to Lala Brij Lal. You have either
misquoted me or hate been misguided yourself by some garbled
report. Here is my full letter 1 (translated) to a Gujarati paper in
Ahmedabad. You will see that in my opinion the ban should first be
removed. The question of revision can arise only then. Please make
the correction yourself.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

Encl. 1
S IR GHULAM HUSAIN HIDAYATULLAH
P RIME MINISTER
GOVERNMENT OF S IND
KARACHI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

759. LETTER TO L. KAMESWARARAO SARMA
S EVAGRAM ,

March 3, 1945
DEAR L. KAMESWARARAO,

I have your good letter. Stick to the resolve you have conveyed
to me. Leave all India alone, you have not even all the Southern
naturopaths.
Dr. Sapru’s committee is not the vehicle you need. Do not be in
1

452

This is not traceable.
THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

a hurry. A little but solid work is more than much but useless.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI
L. K AMESWARARAO S ARMA
P ADUKKOTTAI
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

760. LETTER TO TARACHAND
S EVAGRAM ,

March 3, 1945
DEAR DR. TARACHAND,

I understand and appreciate the principle involved in No. 7 of
your scheme. If full local autonomy is granted to Western Bengal and
East Punjab as proposed in Nos. l and 2 of your scheme, it may
overcome the objections of the Muslim League and obviate the
necessity of dividing Bengal or Punjab.
This part of your scheme should be treated as an essential
condition and not be considered as mere detail.
I do not follow the argument in No. 5. If, however, the people of
the areas concerned are agreeable to dispense with a plebiscite, I
would not insist on it. It is a matter for consideration what, apart from
a plebiscite, would be a satisfactory proof of the people being
agreeable to the proposal.
I presume that the step embodied in No. 4 will be simultaneous
with and an integral part of the whole scheme.
Apart from and independent of these proposals I may add that
if you can induce the League to accept the award of a board, say
consisting of yourself and Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, I would accept it.
You will mark the changes I have made in your draft, which I
enclose herewith.
Yours sincerely,

M. K. GANDHI

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

453

[ ENCLOSURE]
Suggested changes shown in margin.

(a) that Mahatmaji’s terms are
an acceptance
of the claim
for separation
according to a
reasonable interpretation of
the
Muslim
League
resolution of
1940

1

454

My interpretation of Mahatmaji’s letter of 24th
September, 1944, to Mr. Jinnah is as follows:
(a) that Mahatmaji accepts the Muslim claim for
separation as contained in the Muslim League
resolution of 1940. 1
(b) Mahatmaji is agreeable to the appointment of a
commission consisting of representatives of the
Congress and the League immediately for the
delimitation of the boundaries of the separate
sovereign States.
(c) Mahatmaji wants that the sovereign States will
immediately enter into a treaty for the purpose of
(i)safeguarding interests of minorities,
(ii) establishing
a
machinery
for
the
administration of subjects of common
concern.
But Mahatmaji desires that the wishes of the
inhabitants of the areas to be demarcated into
sovereign States should be ascertained by a
plebiscite.
Mahatmaji does not agree with the theory that the
Hindus of the whole of India or the Muslims of the
whole of India constitute two separate nations. In my
(Tarachand’s) opinion Mahatmaji has substantially
accepted the Muslim demand and agreed to the
establishment of two sovereign and independent States
in India. The differences between Mahatmaji and Mr.
Jinnah are:
(1) Mahatmaji wants before separation a plebiscite.
(2) He does not believe in the theory of religious or
communal nationality.

Vide Appendix “Resolution Passed by All-India Muslim League”, 23-3-1940.

THE COLLECED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

(3) He desires that the machinery for administration
of matters of common interest should be embodied
in the treaty of separation.
I suggest that the differences between Mahatmaji
and Mr. Jinnah can be eliminated provided an
agreement is arrived at as follows:
(1) The sovereign and independent States in the
North-West and East and in the rest of India should
be federations. The units of these federations will
be, in the North-West:
(i)

Baluchistan,

(ii)

North-West Frontier Province,

(iii) Western and Central Punjab,
(iv)

South-Eastern Punjab (one or two units)

(v) Sind.
(2) These units will have certain subjects including
culture, education, personal law, etc., under the
control of the governments of the units. The
federal government will have the usual federal and
common subjects under its control.
(3) Similarly there may be units in Bengal, if the
inhabitants of Bengal so desire and the remaining
India will form one federation.
(4) These two federations will by treaty establish a
confederation of independent and sovereign federations for the administration of matters of common interest, e. g., defence, customs, foreign
affairs, communications.

(b) The subjects of
each federation
will be full
nationals and
no discrimination will be
made among
them in the
matter of voting or otherwise on the
ground of race
or creed.

(5) The establishment of the confederation eliminates
the necessity of a plebiscite, which therefore need
not be held.
(6) The subjects of each federation will be the full
nationals and no discrimination will be made
among them on the ground of race or creed.
(7) The establishment of federations in different
regions obviates the need for any large adjustment
of the present boundaries of the provinces.

(8) The provisions about the establishment of
federations and confederations will be embodied
in the treaty of separation.
From a photostat: G.N. 5120

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

455

761. LETTER TO SAROJINI NAIDU
S EVAGRAM ,

March 3, 1945
MY DEAR SINGER,

Herewith is a line1 of magic or no magic for Randheer 2 in the
hope that he will pull up.
But are you well?
Love.
BAPU
S MT. S AROJINI DEVI
HYDERABAD (DN.)
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

762. LETTER TO RANDHEER NAIDU
S EVAGRAM ,

March 3, 1945
MY DEAR RANDHEER,

I see you enter upon a fresh year on 7th. That means one year
less to live and serve. But you must will to live your full time for
service. Do.
Love.
BAPU
From a copy: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

763. LETTER TO B. G. KHER
S EVAGRAM ,

March 3, 1945
BHAI BALASAHEB,

I am sure you will at any rate read the enclosed. If you can go,
please do give that much time to Kathiawar. It will bear fruit. But if
you really cannot go can you suggest some other name?
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 2774
1
2

456

Vide the following item.
Addressee’s son who died on April 30, 1945

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

764. LETTER TO NARANDAS GANDHI
S EVAGRAM , W ARDHA ,

March 3, 1945
CHI. NARANDAS,

I have also forwarded to Balasaheb, with my recommendation,
your letter addressed to me.1 He may not come for a month, in which
case I have requested him to suggest another name. Perhaps Kanaiyo
can be of help there. He is of course writing to him. Let us see what
happens.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a microfilm of the Gujarati: M.M.U./II. Also C.W. 8621. Courtesy:
Narandas Gandhi

765. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
March 3, 1945
CHI. MUNNALAL,

I have gone through all your letters. I did not feel there was
anything in them which Su. should see. If I have done an injustice,
haven’t I washed it off by permitting you to write without any
restraint? The truth is that I have done you no injustice. Your way
wasclear. You should not have said anything. “We are more than even
brother and sister. Why should we involve even you in this?”
I will approve of a catering service. Why should then there be
any need for separate arrangements for the Ashram? Everyone can
feed there. A catering service could mean that one should be served
what one ordered, subject to the normal limitations of the service. The
present kitchen itself may be turned into a catering service. That
would solve the problem and save us all from bother.
There is no such thing as an avatar. If there is, then all of us are
avatars. Aren’t we, whether we know it or not, each a part of His
being? Rama was not the only avatar. Narasimha also was one, and so
were the Fish and the Tortoise. Weren’t the monkeys partial avatars?
The question you have raised ought not to have been raised at all. I do
not see the Ashram as a hospital. But in any case this work serves a
useful purpose. It can be organized as a separate department, with
seprarate quarters and kitchen. Others would then be concerned with it
1

Vide the preceding item.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

457

only when they needed medicine. I thus see no reason for bitterness.
Today I have received letters from Kishorelalbhai and some
others in this connection. I should indeed like some of you to read
them. If you too think like them you should leave me, or let me go. I
am ready for either contingency. I am not in the least afraid of the
charge against me, but I am of you all, for any step you take will
depend on yourself or myself or ourselves. I had already drafted the
public statement I intended to issue, before I received the above
mentioned letters. I had been thinking of it for the last two days, but
could find the time only today.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Gujarati: C.W. 5836. Courtesy: Munnalal G. Shah

766. LETTER TO MUNNALAL G. SHAH
March 3, 1945
You or Sushila should have said it—either to yourselves or
aloud—and then calmed down, because you two and others like you
are and should be more to each other than brother and sister. I
myselfshould have supplied the quotation marks.1 But surely I cannot
attend to all that. The best thing would be for you to come—either at
5.30 or after 3.30—and remove them.
From a photostat of the Gujarati: G.N. 8640

767. LETTER TO KRISHNACHANDRA
March 3, 1945
CHI. KRISHNACHANDRA,

Shall I tell Aryanayakum or write to him on your behalf about
the library?
Be firm in not indulging in idle talk.
You have interpreted “evidence” correctly.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a photostat of the Hindi: G.N. 4494

1

Vide “Letter to Munnalal G. Shah”, 3-3-1945. The quotation marks are,
however, from the source.

458

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

768. LETTER TO GHANSHYAMSINGH
S EVAGRAM ,

March 3, 1945
BHAI GHANSHYAMSINGH,

I have your letter. I have written to the head. I send you a copy
of the letter. There is nothing more that remains to be done, is there?1
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

769. LETTER TO SHANTABEHN
S EVAGRAM ,

March 3, 1945
CHI. SHANTABEHN,

What Yash has sent me is I suppose a copy. It is all right, but
what have I done? Write to the Government about your health. Show
me the letter before you send it.
Blessings from

BAPU
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal

770. LETTER TO VENKATESHWAR RAO
S EVAGRAM ,

March 3, 1945
DEAR FRIEND, 2

Your letter is certainly all right. I hope you will get it. You do
much writing. Let me have your requirement with details. The doctors
will scrutinize it and then place it before the committee. You will get
the help on the same conditions as the others do.
Blessings from

BAPU
VENKATESHWAR R AO
NATUROPATH
GANDHI ASHRAM
KOMAROVOLU , A NDHRA
From a copy of the Hindi: Pyarelal Papers. Courtesy: Pyarelal
1
2

The letter is unsigned.
This is in English.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

459

APPENDICES
APPENDIX I
LETTER FROM K. M. MUNSHI 1
BOMBAY VIEW,
MATHERAN,
October 12, 1944
RESPECTED BAPU,

Received your letter dated the 9th. . . .
I too believe in freedom of speech. But the question before me on the night of
1-8-39 was to quell the dreadful riot that had just begun. It was my duty to take
promptly all the measures that were imperative to bring the situation under control.
And I had (also) to see that some three or four papers that fanned the (communal)
passion did not add fuel to the fire. I did not think I was disregarding the principle of
freedom of speech in keeping a check on it when it was misused. Even today I do Dot
think so.
My Jaipur speech was the result of my study of that problem. You will not find
any contradiction in it if I put it (before you) point by point. . . .
(1) Sanskrit is our most valuable treasure. With its help alone we can make our
languages as powerful as English and French. . . .
(2) The power of our language which can express thought and creative
endeavour belongs in general to the Sanskrit element. And so, if we are going to
evolve in India a medium for expressing our thoughts and literature there is no
alternative except resorting to the use of Sanskrit words. . . . Today I have before me
the problem of the technical terms for law, philosophy and psychology. Where can
we have the Indian medium except from Sanskrit? . . . I do not think I have drifted
away from your stand at Nagpur (and) Indore and which I had accepted.
(3) I do not also see any opposition to the Congress policy in my address. As I
have understood, the Congress aims to make the colloquial Hindustani a common
medium for the whole country. . . . But how can the colloquial Hindustani be the
medium of thought or literature? The moment it attempts to be (any) such thing, it has
got to seek the help of Sanskrit or Perso-Arabic words. . . . I cannot speak in that
language unless I use Sanskrit words. There is no intentional Sanskritization;
nothing else is possible.
(4) If Hindustani is to be the medium in the legislatures or the colleges, there
are bound to be two forms of the language: one will be Sanskritized (and) the other
Persianized. . . .
1

460

Only extracts are reproduced here; vide “Letter to K. M. Munshi”, 9-10-1944.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

(5) One reason why you have not liked my address may be that in one
paragraph the experiment of the ‘Hindustani Samiti’ (carried on) under your guidance
is criticized. What the Samiti is attempting to do is not the propagation of ‘colloquial
Hindustani’ but evolving a new style. Among its characteristics are: (1) abandoning
the tatsama forms of Sanskrit words, (2) incorporating the tatsama forms of Persian
words, (3) introducing an Arabic or a Persian word in the form of an Urdu word even if
a tatsama Sanskrit word has been traditionally accepted, (4) giving preference to
Persian words in cases where both Sanskrit and Persian words are current. . . .
Yours respectfully,
KANU MUNSHI
Pilgrimage to Freedom, pp. 446 9

APPENDIX II
A STATEMENT 1
SEVAGRAM,
October 29, 1944
Talks about the possibility of Gandhiji going on a fast have upset many
friends and co-workers. Their love for him makes them shudder at the very thought of
his undergoing the ordeal of another fast at his age and in his present state of health.
Although he is keeping fairly fit and is putting in a full day’s work his reserve of
energy is low. He is still slightly anaemic and the two intestinal parasites,
hook-worm and amoebae, which are lying latent at present, can get the upper hand at
any moment if his general condition is run down. Moreover, they feel that a fast on
his part at this stage will add to the general demoralization and increase the popular
bitterness against the Government.
Gandhiji is not perturbed by considerations of his age or his frailness. His
stand has always been that if God wants to take work from him He will spare him. If
his work is over, there is no point in prolonging his sojourn in this world. However,
friends have a right to feel that it is not wise to tempt Providence too often.
As for the risk of increase of demoralization and bitterness as a result of the
fast, he does not think it likely. A purely non-violent act cannot result in such a
thing.
Asked as to why he thinks he may have to fast, he said that ever since his
release from prison he had an instinctive feeling that another fast lay in store for
him. Of late that feeling had taken a more concrete form. The organized violence and
slaughter of Truth all over has oppressed him deeply. To take a few illustrations, the
cause of millions dying of starvation according to him is not altogether scarcity of
food. Food is allowed to rot in godowns while people die for the want of it. It is a sad
1

Vide “Statement on Proposed Fast”, 29-10-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

461

tale of mismanagement and corruption. Those who grow food have to go without it.
The Government officials, instead of being their protectors, are acting as their
exploiters. And it is not the Government officials alone who are to blame. Our own
people, middlemen, petty traders and big merchants have not hesitated to make
money at the cost of human life. It is a tragedy. Unofficial and official exploitation
go on side by side. Without the former, the latter can have no locus standi. From top
to bottom the whole system is corrupt. The Government connives at unofficial
corruption. That is the way in which violence works. It organizes all the forces of
evil. As against this non-violence must act by organizing all the forces of goodness.
If the nation had the control of the Government, this terrible bribery and corruption,
which might if at all find its parallel in the bribery and corruption of Lord Clive’s
days, would not take place. A national government having the confidence of the
people can very largely mitigate their sufferings. But there seems to be no chance of
it. He described to what lengths he had gone to woo the Viceroy. But the Government
were blinded by the intoxication of power. The vision of victory, which would be no
victory but merely preparation for another war, had made them indifferent. How was
he to demonstrate the efficacy of non-violence under the circumstances? How could he
relieve the sufferings of the dumb millions? By conducting a mass movement? He had
already showed why it was not to be thought of. He could not lead or bless a mass
civil disobedience movement today. Then what could he do? He had claimed that
non-violence was always more than a match for violence however well organized.
How could he make that claim good? At the beginning of the War, English friends had
written to him asking how individual pacifists could fight spreading wave of violence
and bloodshed. He had suggested fasting as one of the remedies. Some of them had
laughed at the suggestion, but he stuck to it. A time might come for him to test that
remedy in his own case. That was perhaps the only way to wake up the conscience of
mankind.
Untouchability was another manifestation of violence. He had repeated it from
house-tops that if untouchability lived Hinduism must perish. The two could not go
on side by side. Though much progress was made why did it still persist?
Then. there was the question of communal disharmony. It was also a
manifestation of violence. He had striven against it from his early youth.
Why did his non-violence appear to be impotent in the face of these various
manifestations of untruth and violence? Was he an unworthy exponent of nonviolence? Should he not again crucify the flesh in order to become a better
instrument? Knowing the remedy, how could he evade it? That the fast might fail to
bring about the desired result or might end in death should not be a deterrent.
Asked about the nature of the fast, he said he did not know it himself. He was
still groping. He was not aware as to when it would come, if at all. All he could say
was that the call was insistent.
If the fast did come, he hoped that the people would not become panicky or
grief-stricken. He expected them to co-operate with him in clearing the air of

462

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

violence in every shape or form. That was the best way of ending the fast and even of
preventing it.
Gandhi-Sapru Papers. Courtesy; National Library, Calcutta

APPENDIX III
LETTER FROM T. B. SAPRU 1
Personal

October 25, 1944

MY DEAR GANDHIJI,

I have just read in The Hindustan Times of the 24th of October your statement
issued after the enquiry made by Mr. Horniman as to whether you are contemplating
another fast to achieve communal unity. I know I have no place as an adviser in these
matters and I am most reluctant to offer advice to anyone in regard to any matter
which is based on spiritual considerations. I am approaching the whole thing from a
secular point of view. I think it would be a great mistake to undertake a fast at this
time of your life. The consequences might be disastrous. I do not think that your fast
will be helpful in the solution of the communal problem. You may undertake a fast by
way of penance, purification or protest, but the real question is as to what effect it is
going to produce on the minds of those without whose agreement there can be no
communal settlement. I do not think those who are taking a different view will be at
all influenced by your fast. Indeed some of them may uncharitably suggest that you
are putting undue pressure on them. Personally speaking I think that it is very
necessary that you must continue to live. Your failure on the last occasion does not
mean that you will always fail. Your motives are pure and I think your approach to the
whole question is sound, if I may respectfully say so. What you have not been able to
achieve so far, God willing, you may achieve it a few months later. I consider it my
duty to write to you as plainly as I possibly can against the step which is said to be
within your contemplation.
You will forgive me if I have encroached upon your time . . . .
With kindest regards,
Yours sincerely,
MAHATMA M. K. GANDHI
SEVAGRAM
WARDHA, C.P.
Gandhi-Sapru Papers. Courtesy: National Library, Calcutta

1

Vide Letter to T. B. Sapru”, 1-11-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

463

APPENDIX IV
(a) LETTER FROM T. B. SAPRU 1
Personal and Confidential

GYAN BAGH,
HYDERABAD DECCAN ,
November 4, 1944

MY DEAR MAHATMAJI,

Your two letters of the 1st and the 3rd of November were handed over to me
yesterday at the Wardha station by Devdas. I also received your letter through Dr.
Beni Prasad.
I have not issued any statement about an All Parties Conference but have
written to certain friends and am awaiting their replies. The idea seems to me to be
vague and indefinite. We must decide as to who are the persons to be invited and what
will be the agenda. It is quite clear that the gentlemen whom we invite will not come
there in their representative capacity. Your presence at the Conference will be a
source of great strength and you can certainly make a statement telling us in plain
language as to what led to the breakdown of the conversations at Bombay. You say
the Conference may meet to consider the causes of the failure of the talks and to find
whose fault it was which led to the breakdown. I should not advise that Conference to
find whose fault it was, because once we do it will lead to interminable controversy. If
we call such a Conference and hear you I think we may consider what further steps it is
necessary to take to solve the problem. From this point of view the proposed
conference will be an exploratory one and may thus ‘inform and educate public
opinion’.
I am very anxious that you should on no account undertake a fast. I know how
deeply spiritual you are and I also know that in your case the call of religion means
much more than in the case of 99 out of a hundred. You will pardon me if I take a
matter-of-fact and practical view of the thing. I am definitely certain that although it
may bring solace to your heart and you may feel that you have done the penance for
what you consider to be the evils of the present day, your fast will not melt the heart
of your opponents. On the contrary I feel some of them may be uncharitable enough
to attribute to you unworthy motives. Never before in our history was it more
necessary than now that you should live to guide the people of this country on tile
true path of nationalism. My own conviction is and has been for years that
irrespective of what the British Government may or may not do this monster of
communalism should be killed. Whatever your critics may say I honestly believe that
you are the one man in the country who does not think on communal lines and it
would be a disaster for the country if it was deprived at this juncture of your guidance.
1

464

Vide “Letter to T. B. Sapru”, 3-11-1944.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

You are the one man who can withstand opposition, ridicule and even the attribution
of unworthy motives to you. Above all you have the courage to take the right line. I
am saying that in absolute sincerity even though I differ from you and have differed
from you in regard to civil disobedience.
I have told Devdas that according to my information some changes in high
quarters may be expected, but whether that information is true or not, the existing
situation cannot last very long and when the time comes for practical steps to be
taken towards the settlement of national differences I believe your voice will be the
determining factor. I do not want that voice to be silenced. I am, therefore, appealing
to you with all the earnestness I am capable of not to undertake such a fast.
As regards my coming to Wardha if I can get away on the evening of the 7th or
the 8th and arrangements can be made for reservations from Wardha to Itarsi and from
Itarsi to Allahabad I should in response to your message like to break journey at
Wardha for a few hours. . . .
With my profound regards,
Yours sincerely,
MAHATMA M. K. GANDHI
SEVAGRAM
WARDHA, C.P.
Gandhi-Sapru Papers. Courtesy: National Library, Calcutta

(b) A RESOLUTION1
The Standing Committee of the non-party Conference, having considered the
present situation in view of the breakdown of the Gandhi-Jinnah talks on the
communal issue, hereby resolves to appoint a committee which will examine the
whole communal and minorities question from a constitutional and political point of
view, put itself in touch with different parties and their leaders including the
minorities interested in the question and present a solution within two months to the
Standing Committee of the Non Party Conference. The Standing Committee will take
all reasonable steps to get that solution accepted by all parties concerned.
The Standing Committee authorises the Right Hon’ble Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru
to appoint members of the Committee and announce their names in due course.
Gandhi-Sapru Papers. Courtesy: National Library, Calcutta

1
This was sent to T.B. Sapru by Devdas Gandhi under instructions from
Gandhiji. Vide “Letter to T. B. Sapru”, 3-11-1944 and “Letter to Vikram A. Sarabhai”,
27-11-1944.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

465

(c) NAMES SUGGESTED FOR CONCILIATION COMMITTEE1
The Standing Committee of the non-party Conference should meet at Delhi on
the 18th November 1944 and appoint the following committee for the purpose
mentioned hereinafter:
1. Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, Chairman;
2. Sir B. N. Rau;
3. The Metropolitan of Calcutta;
4. Sir Maurice Gwyer;
5. Sir N. Gopalaswami Ayyangar;
6. Mr. Syed Abdulla Brelvi;
7. Sir Mirza Ismail;
8. Mr. Kasturi Srinivasan;
9. Sir S. Radhakrishnan;
10. Mr. J. R. D. Tata (or Sir Homi Modi);
11. Raja Sir Maharaj Singh;
12. Dr. Zakir Husain;
13. Dr. Abdul Huq;
14. Mr. Muniswami Pillai; and
15. Sardar Sant Singh
The purpose of the committee will be as follows:
In view of the breakdown of the Gandhi-Jinnah talks on the communal issue
the committee will examine the whole question from a constitutional and political
point of view, put itself in touch with the parties and their leaders interested in the
question and present a solution within two months and take all reasonable steps to
get that solution accepted by all parties concerned.
WARDHA, 9-11-1944
Gandhi-Sapru Papers. Courtesy: National Library, Calcutta

1

466

Vide “Letter to T. B. Sapru”, 3-11-1944.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX V
LETTER FROM DURLAB SINGH1
LAHORE,
November 12, 1944
RESPECTED BAPUJI,

. . . The Congress had promised in its Lahore Resolution of 1929 that no
constitution would be acceptable to the Congress which does not give the fullest
satisfaction to the Sikhs. You know a large number of Sikhs are perturbed over
Rajaji’s proposals. Supposing Mr. Jinnah had accepted the proposals in full, or in an
amended form, what would have been the position of the Sikhs in that?
Even the Akalis feel very indignant because you did not touch the question of
meeting a Sikh deputation as suggested by Master Tara Singh in his letter. Can you
please make it clear why it was not considered desirable to invite the Sikh leaders
before proceeding to Mr. Jinnah for the talks?
Mr. Jagat Narain Lal’s Resolution clearly states that the Congress would be no
party to the vivisection of the country. Is it not a fact that Rajaji’s proposals run
counter to that resolution? The Sikh public is made to believe that Gandhiji does not
favour the idea of the Sikhs remaining in the Congress because of their belief in the
sword. . . .
Master Tara Singh and other responsible Akali leaders have often declared in
the Press and on the platform that the Sikander-Baldev Singh Pact was enacted with
the consent and blessings of the Congress High Command and Sardar Patel’s special
representative who was present in the Punjab throughout the negotiations and that
the Sardar was kept informed of all the developments. Further, it is said that the Azad
Punjab scheme was introduced with your consent and blessings. The nationalist Sikhs
regard both the schemes as anti-national and opposed to the interests of the country
and the community. Can you kindly guide us in the matter?
In the end I will request you, Bapuji, to give a general assurance to the
nationalist Sikhs that their interests are safe in your hands and that they will not be
sacrificed at any cost. The heart of the Sikh masses is with the Congress and
nationalism and patriotism are their proud heritage. They cannot depart from these
principles, but let them have this satisfaction at least that the Congress will do no
injustice to them and . . . that they will have their proper place in free India.
Praying for your long life,
Yours sincerely,
DURLAB SINGH
The Indian Annual Register, 1944, Vol. II, pp. 221-2
1

Vide “Letter to Durlabh Singh”, 14-11-1944

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

467

APPENDIX VI
RESOLUTION PASSED BY A.I.S.A. 1
[On or before December 3, 1944]
A meeting of the Board of Trustees of the Charkha Sangh was held at Sevagram
on the 1st, 2nd and 3rd December 1944, under the presidentship of Shree Gandhiji and
the following decisions were taken:
The roots of the spinning-wheel lie in the villages and the consummation of
the ideal of the Charkha Sangh is to be completely decentralized among the villages
of India to bring about an all-round improvement of village life. This meeting of the
Board of Trustees of the Charkha Sangh therefore resolves that with a view to this end
the following changes should be made in the policy of the Sangh:
(i) As many qualified workers as are ready and are selected by the Board should
be sent to work in the villages.
(ii) The activities of the existing sale depots and production centres of khadi
should be curtailed.
(iii) Necessary changes should be made in the curricula of the existing khadi
training centres and their scope broadened. New training centres should also be
opened.
(iv) If in any area (not bigger than a district) the workers ask to be made
self-sufficient and autonomous in order to begin work on the new lines laid down by
the Charkha Sangh the Sangh should, if it approves of their plans, withdraw from that
area but continue to give its recognition and moral support so long as the work is
carried on according to its policy.
(v) A Joint Board of the nominees of the Charkha Sangh, Gram Udyog Sangh,
Harijan Sevak Sangh and Goseva Sangh should be constituted to meet from time to
time and issue instructions in terms of the new policy.
The Sangh shall be represented in the Joint Board by its President, its
Secretary and Shri Dhirendra Majmudar, while the other four Sanghs shall have two
nominees each besides Gandhiji.

The Bombay Chronicle, 18-1-1945

1

468

Vide “Resolution Passed by A.I.S.A. Trustees”, 1-12-1944.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX VII
GUIDELINES FOR PROPOSED INTERIM GOVERNMENT1
January 5, 1945
The following were the various steps proposed to be taken in this behalf
as they emerged from their discussion and the elucidations provided by Gandhiji
from time to time:
1. The Congress and the League would agree that they would join in
forming an Interim Government in the Centre (a) consisting of equal numbers of
persons nominated by the Congress and the League in the Central Legislature, (b)
representatives of minorities, and (c) the Commander-in-Chief.
2. While the Government would be formed and would function within the
framework of the existing Government of India Act, it would be clearly
understood between the Congress and the League that any measure not passed by
the House should not be enforced or sought to be enforced by any of the powers
of the Governor-General under the Constitution. This would serve to eliminate in
action the veto of the Governor-General and make the nominees responsible to
the elected Legislature.
3. The European member, if one had to be included, should be the choice
of the Congress and the League.
4.
It should be agreed between the Congress and the League in
advance that if such Interim Government was formed” their first step would be to
release the members of the Working Committee. A firm and clear commitment of
the League in regard to this would be a preliminary proof of its bona fides.
5. Bhulabhai must make sure before committing himself to anything that
the agreement he had in view had the previous approval of Jinnah and the whole
thing should be clarified and reduced to writing so as not to lead to any ambiguity
or misunderstanding afterwards.
6. If such a Government was formed at the Centre, the next step would be
to get the withdrawal of Governor’s rule in the Provinces and to form, as soon as
possible, Provincial Governments on the lines of a coalition.
7. At the proper moment Gandhiji would tell the Working Committee that
Bhulabhai had acted with his approval.
Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase, Vol. I, Book 1, pp. 117-9

1

Vide “Note to Bhulabhai J. Desai”, 5-1-1945.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

469

APPENDIX VIII
LETTER FROM P. C. JOSHI1
BOMBAY,
February 1,1945
DEAR GANDHIJI,

My last letter to you was dated 28th September, 1944. You had promised
in an earlier letter that you will refer the question of our moral bona fides and your
what I may call anti-Communist file to your worthy colleagues. I hope they have
reached their conclusions and reported to you. But I have not heard anything from you
yet.
You perhaps do not know that your name is being used against us in the recent
Congressmen’s Conferences and even otherwise by persons who pretend to know
your mind, etc. I know that most of what they attribute to you could never have been
said by you. But my own lips are sealed till my correspondence with you is concluded
over the questions you asked me and they were very serious questions, doubting our
elementary patriotic and moral bona fides. I hope with the help of your Working
Committee colleagues” you have reached the conclusion that we are not unworthy
children of our great people.
Great things are happening in the world but our country is going to pieces. We
are anxious to write to you on the big political issues but as I wrote to you before” it
will be waste of your time and mine till you are convinced about our intellectual
honesty and moral integrity.
I understand from Dr. Mahmud that you think that you are the aggrieved party.
This is exactly the opposite of what we feel. I” of course, meant no offence but only
expressed my indignation at my Party being slandered and offered to go into the dock
straightaway. I do not know what else I could do. Sjt. Bhulabhai and Mrs. Naidu had
promised to speed up the matter but I have not heard from them at all. Rajaji told me
that he had already told you all that he had to.
May I request you for an answer as soon as you can and to get your colleagues
speed up their report to you.
I could send Mohan to pick up the answer and answer any further questions he
feels himself qualified to tackle. I am going to Bengal for three weeks today. Could
your answer be ready by the time I am back? Mohan will be very busy in my
absenceand will find it very difficult to come there in February” unless you specially
want him to; but any date after 7 March will be best.
With respectful salutations,
Yours sincerely,
P. C. JOSHI
Correspondence between Mahatma Gandhi and P. C. Joshi, pp. 38-9

1

470

Vide “Letter to P. C. Joshi”, 5-2-1945.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI

APPENDIX IX
LETTER FROM T. B. SAPRU 1
January 13, 1945
MY DEAR MAHATMAJI,

I hope you are better now. I have been reading the news about your health in
the newspapers.
I have now much pleasure in sending you herewith a copy of the questionnaire
framed by the committee of which I am the Chairman. I dare say your attention has
already been called to it. I shall be extremely grateful to you if you will favour the
committee with a short memorandum stating your views generally and answering the
questions or such of them as you prefer to answer.
So far there has been a good response to the committee excepting in certain
quarters. Mr. Jinnah has declined to recognize the committee or to meet me as
Chairman of the committee though he has no objection to meeting me in my
individual capacity. Dr. Ambedkar promised support when we first met in November
last at Delhi but has withdrawn it because he has objection to the personnel of the
committee. The attitude of the Sikhs has been very encouraging so far. I am going on
the 16th of January to Lahore to see the Sikh and Hindu leaders and shall try also to
meet such Muslim leaders as have no objection to meeting me.
The work of the committee is being done at great pressure. We have already
collected much material and more will be ready soon. I do not wish to trouble you with
details but I shall be extremely grateful if you will favour me with a short
memorandum. I am also sending you separately the two pamphlets already brought
out, others are in the course of being printed.
With kindest regards and best wishes for your early recovery,
Yours sincerely,
Encl. Questionnaire

MAHATMA M. K. GANDHI
S EVAGRAM , W ARDHA , C. P.
Gandhi-Sapru Papers. Courtesy: National Library, Calcutta

1

Vide “Letter to T. B. Sapru”, 8-2-1945.

VOL.85 : 2 OCTOBER, 1944 - 3 MARCH, 1945

471

